COUNTY OF MORROW, OREGON
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Definitions
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.18   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the county, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Morrow County Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BUSINESS DAY. Any 24-hour day other than a Saturday, Sunday or federal or
state legal holiday.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNTY. Morrow County, Oregon.
      DAY. Calendar day unless otherwise indicated as business day or working
day.
      GOVERNING BODY. The County Board of Commissioners.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this county unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Oregon.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this county shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the County
Board of Commissioners or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this county exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this county for the transaction of all county
business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean at least 24 hours’ notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the County Board of Commissioners shall take effect
as provided in the county charter. If there is no county charter, all
ordinances passed by the County Board of Commissioners shall take effect as
provided by the County Board of Commissioners or applicable state law.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoined and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the County Board of Commissioners shall desire to amend any
existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be
specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired
amendment, substituted in its place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and any amending ordinances are listed following
the text of the code section.
Example: (Ord. 161, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 170, passed 1-2-1979; Ord. 185,
passed 4-1-1990)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (O.R.S. 192.410)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This county shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see O.R.S. 192.314
§ 10.18 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   (A)   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.
   (B)   This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers
shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Violation of any ordinance adopted by the county, unless otherwise stated in
the ordinance itself, shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not
more than $500 for a noncontinuing offense and a fine of not more than $1,000
for a continuing offense.
(Prior Code, § 1.08.010) (Ord. MC-C-5-85, passed - -1985)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
      
31.   COUNTY OFFICIALS
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   COUNTY COURTS
      
34.   PERSONNEL
      
35.   PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING POLICY
      
36.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
37.   PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS FOR MEASURE 7 CLAIMS
CHAPTER 30: BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Section
   
30.01   Board of Commissioners meetings
   
30.02   Non-binding referendum votes
§ 30.01 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS MEETINGS.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners shall meet to conduct business on
the first and third Wednesday of each month, beginning at 9:00 a.m.
   (B)   The public shall be notified of the location of the meetings on the
published agenda of the Board of Commissioners. The public shall be noticed as
required by the State Public Meetings Law (O.R.S. 192.610 through 192.705).
   (C)   When the regularly scheduled meeting falls on a holiday, the meeting
shall be continued until the next regularly scheduled meeting date, unless the
Board of Commissioners elects to hold a special meeting of the County Board of
Commissioners. Special meetings of the County Board of Commissioners may be
called as authorized by the State Public Meetings Law (O.R.S. 192.610 through
192.705).
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits the County Board of Commissioners
from changing the date, time and location of a meeting, if those changes are
allowed under the State Public Meetings Law (O.R.S. 192.610 through 192.705).
(Ord. ORD-2023-2, passed 2-8-2023)
§ 30.02 NON-BINDING REFERENDUM VOTES.
   (A)   At such times as may be directed by the Board of Commissioners, the
County Clerk shall publish notice of non-binding referendum vote to be held
upon such issue as is identified by the County Board of Commissioners in said
directive. Publication and notice shall be made in the same manner as provided
by law for any election balloting. Voting (including, but not limited to,
preparation and distribution of ballots and the counting of the same) shall
also be performed in the same manner as provided by law for a general election
vote.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, non-binding referendum
elections may be held.
(Ord. MC-C-4-89, passed 10-4-1989)
CHAPTER 31: COUNTY OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   County Auditor
§ 31.01 COUNTY AUDITOR.
   (A)   Position created; appointment. There is created the position of County
Auditor, to be filled by appointment of the County Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.010)
   (B)   Qualifications; bond. The County Auditor shall qualify as provided in
O.R.S. 210.120 within 30 days from the time of appointment. Should the County
Board of Commissioners require a bond in addition to the bond requirement under
O.R.S. 210.120, the county shall be liable for payment of the additional cost
of such bond.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.020)
   (C)   Powers and duties. The County Auditor shall perform such duties as may
be described by statute or ordinance. The County Auditor shall receive all
demands, accounts or claims against the county, together with evidence in
support thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.030)
   (D)   Recordkeeping duties.
      (1)   The County Auditor shall maintain records of all claims presented,
together with the evidence and support thereof, and shall keep a record showing
at all times the financial status of the county.
      (2)   The Auditor shall keep such other records as may be required by the
County Board of Commissioners and shall keep them in the manner required by
law.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.040)
   (E)   Payment of orders. The County Treasurer shall pay or endorse “not paid
for want of funds” on all orders for payment delivered by the County Auditor
after audit and approval of the underlying claims.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.050)
    (F)   Reports to the County Board of Commissioners. The County Auditor
shall make monthly reports to the County Board of Commissioners showing the
state of the finances of the county, and the orders for payments submitted
during the month, which report shall be filed. The Auditor shall make an annual
report at the close of the fiscal year, showing the total of all claims allowed
and fiscal transactions during the preceding year. The annual report shall be
submitted within 30 days after the close of the fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.010)
(Ord. MC-A-1-82, passed - -1982)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Planning Commission
   
32.001   Established; members; authority
   
32.002   Organization and officers
   
32.003   Powers and duties
Pioneer Memorial Hospital Board
   
32.015   Appointment; membership
   
32.016   Term of office
   
32.017   Officers
   
32.018   Removal of members
   
32.019   Vacancies
   
32.020   Dissolution and reappointment of Board
   
32.021   Powers and duties
   
32.022   Hospital administrator
   
32.023   Rates and charges
   
32.024   Funding
Morrow County Health Board
   
32.035   Composition of Board
   
32.036   Duties and powers of the Board
   
32.037   Facility or service administrators
   
32.038   Rates and charges
   
32.039   Lease medical facilities
North Morrow Ambulance Service Board
   
32.050   Appointment; membership
   
32.051   Term of office
   
32.052   Officers
   
32.053   Removal of members
   
32.054   Vacancies
   
32.055   Dissolution and reappointment of Board
   
32.056   Powers and duties
   
32.057   Service rates and charges
Interim Board of Directors
   
32.070   Title
   
32.071   Appointment of Interim Board of Directors
   
32.072   Limitations
   
32.073   Time and manner of appointment
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 32.001 ESTABLISHED; MEMBERS; AUTHORITY.
   There is established in the county a Planning Commission of nine members,
under the authority of state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.010) (Ord. passed 4-6-1960; Ord. MC-C-3-85, passed - -1985)
§ 32.002 ORGANIZATION AND OFFICERS.
   As soon as possible after their appointment, the members of the Planning
Commission shall organize by the election of a Chairperson and secretary, and
adopt rules for the transaction of the business of the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.020) (Ord. passed 4-6-1960)
§ 32.003 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall exercise the powers conferred upon it by state
law.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.030) (Ord. passed 4-6-1960; Ord. MC-C-3-85, passed - -1985)
PIONEER MEMORIAL HOSPITAL BOARD
§ 32.015 APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners shall appoint the Pioneer Memorial
Hospital Board (“PMH Board”) which shall consist of five residents of the
county.
   (B)   The original PMH Board shall be those members currently serving in
that capacity.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.010) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.016 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of each member of the PMH Board shall be five years, with
one term to expire annually on December 31. Upon the expiration of each term, a
successor shall be appointed.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.020) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.017 OFFICERS.
   The PMH Board shall select from among its members a President, a Vice
President and a secretary/treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.030) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.018 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   Any member of the PMH Board may be removed for cause. In such cases, a
successor shall immediately be appointed. Failure of a member to attend three
consecutive meetings of the PMH Board, unless such absences are excused, shall
constitute cause for removal from the PMH Board.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.040) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.019 VACANCIES.
   Appointments to fill vacancies on the PMH Board shall be for the unexpired
term of the replaced member.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.050) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.020 DISSOLUTION AND REAPPOINTMENT OF BOARD.
   (A)   At such time as the County Board of Commissioners determines that the
PMH Board is unable to perform the function for which it was created, it may
dissolve the Board and appoint a new PMH Board, which may or may not contain
members from the old Board. Newly appointed members shall assume the unexpired
terms of the old Board members.
   (B)   Before the County Board of Commissioners shall dissolve the Board,
however, it shall provide 30 days’ notice of its intent to do so and shall
provide an opportunity for public hearing regarding the pending dissolution.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.060) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.021 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The PMH Board shall:
   (A)   Appoint an administrator of the hospital, with approval of the County
Board of Commissioners, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the PMH Board;
   (B)   Fix the salaries of the administrator and all other employees, within
the limits of the appropriation made therefor by the County Board of
Commissioners. Such salaries shall be compensation in full for all services
rendered by such employees or administrator;
   (C)   Exercise general management and supervisory authority pertaining to
the operation of the hospital, the hospital offices, grounds and buildings and
the employees. The Board may delegate to the administrator or other employees
this authority, as is required for the most efficient operation of the Pioneer
Memorial Hospital;
   (D)   Make such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the
government of the hospital and related facilities, subject to the approval of
the County Board of Commissioners;
   (E)   Maintain an effective inspection of the hospital and keep itself
informed of the affairs and management thereof;
   (F)   Conduct meetings at least once each month and at such other times as
may be necessary;
   (G)   Hold an annual meeting in January of each year;
   (H)   Keep, in a book provided for that purpose, a proper record of its
proceedings, which shall be open at all times for the inspection of its members
and to the County Board of Commissioners;
   (I)   Approve and pay all just bills and accounts, including salaries and
wages;
   (J)   Make an annual report to the County Board of Commissioners, containing
a detailed audit of the operations of the hospital during the preceding year,
with a separate budget recommendation as to future operation of the hospital
and full and detailed estimates of the appropriations required for the
maintenance of the hospital for the ensuing year;
   (K)   From time to time, furnish to the County Clerk such information as to
the affairs of the hospital as the Board may require;
   (L)   Cause to be deposited with the County Treasurer all moneys in excess
of 20% over the annual operational budget; and
   (M)   Submit monthly financial reports to the County Board of Commissioners
for their inspection.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.070) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.022 HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Powers and duties. The administrator of the Pioneer Memorial Hospital
shall be the chief executive officer of the hospital and shall manage it in
accordance with the directions of the PMH Board, and in accordance with rules
and regulations adopted by it. The administrator shall be responsible for the
internal affairs and discipline of the Pioneer Memorial Hospital. The
administrator may discharge from the hospital any patient who willfully or
habitually violates rules thereof.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.080)
   (B)   Bond. Before entering on the discharge of his or her duties as general
administrator, the administrator shall give a bond in such sum as the PMH Board
determines necessary to secure the faithful performance of the administrator’s
duties.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.090)
(Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.023 RATES AND CHARGES.
   The PMH Board shall fix and establish basic rates for accommodations and
services supplied to patients of the hospital. If, in the judgment of a member
or members of the hospital’s organized medical staff, care and treatment is
appropriate and is ordered for a patient, such person’s ability to pay shall
not be a consideration in denying services.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.100) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.024 FUNDING.
   The County Board of Commissioners shall levy taxes annually upon all taxable
property of the county to produce such sums as in its discretion seem adequate
to provide for the acquisition, construction, equipment, maintenance, operation
and improvement of the hospital, taking into account the revenue received from
the operation of the hospital.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.110) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
MORROW COUNTY HEALTH BOARD
§ 32.035 COMPOSITION OF BOARD.
   (A)   The County Medical Board (Board) shall consist of eight residents of
the county. Those Board members in office as of the date of this subchapter
shall remain until the expiration of their term or until resignation.
   (B)   Upon the expiration or termination of any such original term, a
successor shall be appointed by the County Board of Commissioners, and all
terms following the original terms shall be for a period of four years.
   (C)   Any member of the Board may be removed for cause. In such cases, a
successor shall immediately be appointed. Failure of a member to attend three
consecutive meetings of the Board shall constitute one cause for removal from
the Board unless such absences are excused by the Board and the reasons for the
absence and the excuse are noted in the minutes.
   (D)   At such time as the County Board of Commissioners determines that the
Board is unable to perform the function for which it was created, it may
dissolve the Board and appoint a new Board, which may or may not contain
members from the old Board; newly appointed members shall assume the unexpired
terms of the old Board members. Before the County Board of Commissioners shall
dissolve the Board, however, it shall provide 30 days’ notice of its intent to
do so and shall provide an opportunity for a public hearing regarding the
pending dissolution.
   (E)   Appointments to fill vacancies on the Board shall be for the unexpired
term of the replaced member.
   (F)   The Board shall annually select from among its members a Chairperson,
a Vice Chairperson and a secretary.
   (G)   No member shall serve consecutively in excess of two four-year terms,
together with any lesser term served as an original term pursuant to division
(B) above or as a successor filling an unexpired term.
(Ord. MC-H-2-90, passed 8-15-1990)
§ 32.036 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   The Board shall appoint an administrator or administrators with
authority as set forth in §
32.037(A) over such medical facilities or services as the Board may designate
in the appointment; such administrator(s) shall hold office at the pleasure of
the Board, and the designation of authority over particular facilities or
services may, within the sole discretion of the Board, be modified from time to
time. Alternatively, the Board may contract with a corporation or other entity
to provide management services, including services of an administrator on such
terms and conditions as the parties may agree.
   (B)   The Board shall fix the salaries of county employees subject to its
authority, within the limits of the appropriation made therefor by the County
Board of Commissioners; provided, that the Board may delegate to the
administrator(s) its authority to fix the salaries of other county employees.
Such salaries shall be compensation in full for all services rendered by said
employees.
   (C)   The Board shall have the authority to adopt a personnel policy
applicable to county employees who work at county medical facilities. When
adopted and as from time to time amended, such policies shall supersede Ord.
MC-PP-1-80, as such ordinance may from time to time be amended with respect to
such employees.
   (D)   Except during such times as such facility, premises, equipment or
furnishings may be leased pursuant to §
32.039, the MCM Board shall exercise general management and supervisory
authority pertaining to the operation of county medical facilities and
services, including, but not limited to, Pioneer Memorial Hospital, Pioneer
Memorial Clinic, the North Morrow Medical Clinic, the North Morrow Ambulance
Service, Ione First Response, Lexington First Response and Irrigon First
Response, including the offices, grounds, buildings, property and employees of
the same. The Board shall have the authority, notwithstanding any other county
ordinance or policy to the contrary, to execute all contracts within the scope
of its duties under this subchapter and within budgetary limits, including,
without limitation, settlement of threatened or pending litigation, but
excepting those contracts that involve an interest in real property or have a
term extending beyond one year, unless such contracts include a provision
allowing termination either without penalty or with a penalty to be paid out of
funds set aside from a current or past appropriation, in the event sufficient
funds are not appropriated in subsequent fiscal years. The Board may delegate
to a subcommittee of one or more of its members, or the administrator, or other
employees, so much of the authority granted hereunder as may be convenient for
the efficient operation of county medical facilities and services.
   (E)   The Board shall adopt bylaws setting forth such rules and regulations
as it may deem necessary for the government of county medical facilities and
services, subject to the approval of the County Board of Commissioners. Said
bylaws shall not contravene or contradict the provisions of this subchapter,
county policy or any applicable state, federal or local law.
   (F)   Except with respect to any facility, premises, equipment or
furnishings as may be leased pursuant to §
32.039, the Board shall maintain an effective inspection of county medical
facilities and services and keep itself informed of the affairs and management
thereof.
   (G)   The Board shall conduct meetings at least once each month and at such
other times as may be necessary.
   (H)   The Board shall make an annual report to the County Board of
Commissioners, containing a detailed audit of the operations of county medical
facilities and services during the preceding year, with a separate budget
recommendation as to future operation of county medical facilities and
services, and full and detailed estimates of the appropriations required for
the maintenance of county medical facilities and services for the ensuing year.
   (I)   The Board shall, from time to time, furnish to the County Board of
Commissioners such information as the Board may require regarding the affairs
of county medical facilities and services.
   (J)   The Board shall cause to be deposited in accounts at such financial
institutions as it may designate by resolution all monies received pursuant to
the operation of county medical facilities or services which are subject to the
authority of the Board.
   (K)   The administrator shall submit monthly financial reports to the Board
for its inspection.
   (L)   The Board shall have the authority to do all other things convenient
or necessary to operate county medical facilities or services and shall have
the authority to delegate such of its powers as it shall deem appropriate to
the administrator(s) of such facilities or services, other county employees or
other agents or independent contractors retained to provide services to county
medical facilities.
(Ord. MC-H-2-90, passed 8-15-1990)
§ 32.037 FACILITY OR SERVICE ADMINISTRATORS.
   (A)   The administrator(s) appointed pursuant to §
32.036(A) shall be the chief executive officer(s) of the medical facility(ies)
or service(s) designated in his or her appointment and shall manage them in
accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the Board. The
administrator(s) shall be responsible for the internal affairs of such medical
facility(ies) or service(s).
   (B)   Before entering on the discharge of the duties as administrator, any
administrator appointed by the Board, shall provide a bond in such sum as the
Board determines necessary to secure the faithful performance of the
administrator’s duties. The premium for said bond shall be paid from the County
Medical Fund.
(Ord. MC-H-2-90, passed 8-15-1990)
§ 32.038 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Except at such times as any facility shall be leased under §
32.039, or when the Board shall have delegated such authority to the
administrator, the Board shall fix and establish basic rates and charges for
accommodations and services supplied to the patients of county facilities.
   (B)   If, in the judgment of a member or members of the medical staff of
county facilities, care and treatment is appropriate and is ordered for a
patient, such person’s ability to pay shall not be a consideration in providing
services.
(Ord. MC-H-2-90, passed 8-15-1990)
§ 32.039 LEASE MEDICAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Subject to the approval of the County Board of Commissioners, the
Board shall be empowered to lease any or all medical facilities subject to its
authority, together with the land and any medical equipment and office
furniture to any person or entity, for the purpose of practicing medicine or
providing medical services.
   (B)   Any such lease shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the
Board and to any further requirements of the County Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. MC-H-2-90, passed 8-15-1990)
NORTH MORROW AMBULANCE SERVICE BOARD
§ 32.050 APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   The County Board of Commissioners shall appoint the North Morrow Ambulance
Service (NMAS) Board, which shall consist of five residents of North Morrow
County. The original NMAS Board shall be those members currently serving in
that capacity. In making appointments to the NMAS Board, the County Board of
Commissioners shall, to the extent that there are sufficient persons available,
maintain a Board membership which consists of four members of the Emergency
Medical Technicians Association and one non-EMTA member. Employees of the NMAS
shall not be eligible for membership, except as ex officio members.
(Prior Code, § 2.28.010) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.051 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of each member of the NMAS Board shall be three years,
with one term expiring on June 30, 1986, two terms expiring on June 30, 1983
and two terms expiring on June 30, 1984. Upon the expiration of each term, a
successor shall be appointed.
(Prior Code, § 2.28.020) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.052 OFFICERS.
   The NMAS Board shall select from among its members a President, a Vice
President and a secretary/treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 2.28.030) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.053 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   Any member of the NMAS Board may be removed for cause. In such cases, a
successor shall immediately be appointed. Failure of a member to attend three
consecutive meetings of the NMAS Board, unless such absences are excused, shall
constitute cause for removal from the NMAS Board.
(Prior Code, § 2.28.040) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.054 VACANCIES.
   Appointments to fill vacancies on the NMAS Board shall be for the unexpired
term of the replaced member.
(Prior Code, § 2.28.050) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.055 DISSOLUTION AND REAPPOINTMENT OF BOARD.
   At such time as the County Board of Commissioners determines that the NMAS
Board is unable to perform the function for which it was created, it may
dissolve the Board and appoint a new NMAS Board, which may or may not contain
members from the old Board. Newly appointed members shall assume unexpired
terms of the old Board members. Before the County Board of Commissioners shall
dissolve the Board, however, it shall provide 30 days’ notice of its intent to
do so and shall provide an opportunity for public hearing regarding the pending
dissolution.
(Prior Code, § 2.28.060) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.056 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The NMAS Board shall:
   (A)   Exercise general management and supervisory authority pertaining to
operation of the North Morrow Ambulance Service;
   (B)   Adopt bylaws which, after approval by the County Board of
Commissioners, shall provide necessary rules and regulations for the government
of the North Morrow Ambulance Service;
   (C)   Maintain an effective inspection of the NMAS and keep itself informed
of the affairs and management thereof;
   (D)   Conduct regularly scheduled meetings and other meetings as may be
necessary;
   (E)   Hold an annual meeting in January of each year;
   (F)   Keep, in a book provided for that purpose, a proper record of its
proceedings, which shall be open at all times for the inspection of its members
and to the County Board of Commissioners;
   (G)   Approve and pay all just bills and accounts, including salaries and
wages, in concert with the fiscal system provided for by the County Board of
Commissioners, through the County Auditor and County Treasurer;
   (H)   Make an annual report to the County Board of Commissioners, containing
a detailed audit of the operations of the NMAS during the preceding year, with
a separate budget recommendation as to future operation of the NMAS, and full
and detailed estimates of the appropriations required for the maintenance of
the NMAS for the ensuing year;
   (I)   From time to time, furnish to the County Board of Commissioners such
information as to the affairs of the NMAS as the Board may require; and
   (J)   Submit monthly financial reports to the County Board of Commissioners
for its inspection.
(Prior Code, § 2.28.070) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 32.057 SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES.
   The NMAS Board shall fix and establish rates and charges associated with the
NMAS. If, in the judgment of a member of the NMAS staff, care and treatment or
services are necessary for a patient, such person’s inability to pay shall not
be a consideration in denying services.
(Prior Code, § 2.28.080) (Ord. MC-H-1-83, passed - -1983)
INTERIM BOARD OF DIRECTORS
§ 32.070 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Special District
Interim Board of Directors Ordinance.”
(Ord. MC-C-3-95, passed 3-8-1995)
§ 32.071 APPOINTMENT OF INTERIM BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
   Whenever a special district is proposed to be formed in the county, the
County Board of Commissioners may appoint an Interim Board of Directors to act
by and on behalf of the proposed district prior to regular election of a Board
of Directors; provided, that:
   (A)   The district is proposed to be formed by order of the County Board of
Commissioners, without a tax base;
   (B)   The formation process has proceeded to the point of establishment of
boundaries and declaration by the County Board of Commissioners of its
intention to enter an order creating the district; and
   (C)   The County Board of Commissioners finds that an emergency exists, in
that the lack of existence of an authorized board will result in failure to
meet auxiliary statutory deadlines, such as certification of ballot titles, and
that such failure will thwart the purpose or purposes for which the district is
proposed to be formed, or will result in significant undue hardship for the
county residents who will benefit from formation of the district.
(Ord. MC-C-3-95, passed 3-8-1995)
§ 32.072 LIMITATIONS.
   The authority of any Interim Board appointed by the County Board of
Commissioners shall be limited solely to the performance of those actions
necessary to comply with statutory deadlines for elections or Department of
Revenue requirements. Such Interim Board may certify ballot titles, send
appropriate maps to the Department of Revenue, or take other similar action,
however, such Interim Board shall not be authorized to perform any action which
interferes with the right of the people of the county to vote on the ultimate
issues of district formation or tax levy approval.
(Ord. MC-C-3-95, passed 3-8-1995)
§ 32.073 TIME AND MANNER OF APPOINTMENT.
   If it appears to the County Board of Commissioners that a district
undergoing the formation process will be deprived of its primary purpose by
failure to comply with auxiliary statutory deadlines because it lacks a board
to act for it during the formation process, the County Board of Commissioners
may appoint, by resolution, an Interim Board of Directors. There shall be the
same number of members appointed to the Interim Board as are proposed for the
district undergoing formation. In the event that the district is not formed,
the Interim Board shall immediately dissolve and shall have no further
authority of any kind to act with regard to matters involving the failed
district.
(Ord. MC-C-3-95, passed 3-8-1995)
CHAPTER 33: COUNTY COURTS
Section
   
33.01   Fifth and Sixth Districts consolidated
   
33.02   Location of courts
   
33.03   Traffic Violations Bureau
§ 33.01 FIFTH AND SIXTH DISTRICTS CONSOLIDATED.
   The Fifth District justice court for the county and the Sixth District
justice court for the county are hereby consolidated into one justice court,
which shall be known as the “justice court for the county.”
(Prior Code, § 2.16.010) (Ord. MC-C4, passed - -1981)
§ 33.02 LOCATION OF COURTS.
   The justice of the peace for the justice court for the county shall sit at
the Courthouse Annex in Irrigon, Oregon, for two days per week, and shall sit
at the County Courthouse for two days per week.
(Prior Code, § 2.16.020) (Ord. MC-C4, passed - -1981)
§ 33.03 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   (A)   Established. The justice of the peace for the county shall establish
and maintain a traffic violations bureau in the County Courthouse Annex, which
shall have a clerk available during regular working hours, as established by
the county personnel policy.
(Prior Code, § 2.16.030)
   (B)   Clerk; bond requirements. The clerk of the Violations Bureau shall be
bonded in the same manner as a Deputy County Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 2.16.040)
(Ord. MC-C4, passed - -1981)
CHAPTER 34: PERSONNEL
Section
   
34.01   Title
   
34.02   Purpose
   
34.03   Adoption and amendment
   
34.04   Administration
   
34.05   Applicability
   
34.06   Equal opportunity and affirmative action policy
Editor’s Note:
   Complete personnel rules are on file with Ord. MC-PP-1-80 in the office of
the County Counsel
§ 34.01 TITLE.
   The title of this chapter shall be “The Personnel Ordinance of Morrow
County.”
(Prior Code, § 2.36.010) (Ord. MC-PP-1-80, passed - -1980)
§ 34.02 PURPOSE.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter was adopted to establish an equitable
and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to county
service and to retain the best and most competent persons available; to assure
that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and
fitness; and to provide a reasonable degree of job security for qualified
employees.
(Prior Code, § 2.36.020) (Ord. MC-PP-1-80, passed - -1980)
§ 34.03 ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT.
   Personnel rules shall be adopted and amended by resolution of the County
Board of Commissioners. The rules shall provide means to recruit, select,
develop and maintain an effective and responsive work force and shall include
policies and procedures for employee hiring and advancement, training and
career development, job classification, salary administration, retirement,
fringe benefits, discipline, dismissal and other related activities. All
appointments and promotions shall be made in accordance with the personnel
rules, without regard to sex, race, color, age, religion or political
affiliation and, furthermore, shall be based on merit and fitness.
(Prior Code, § 2.36.030) (Ord. MC-PP-1-80, passed - -1980)
§ 34.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Board shall be responsible for:
   (A)   Administering all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel
rules not specifically reserved to the department heads; and
   (B)   Preparing (or causing to be prepared) of personnel rules and revisions
and amendments to such rules.
(Prior Code, § 2.36.040) (Ord. MC-PP-1-80, passed - -1980)
§ 34.05 APPLICABILITY.
   For negotiated labor agreements, any section, division, sentence, clause or
phrase of these rules that is found to be inconsistent with the expressed terms
of a properly negotiated and ratified collective bargaining agreement between
the county and a duly certified bargaining representative, and any other
provision contained herein, the application of which would be inappropriate
either because of alternate provisions contained in such a collectively
bargained agreement, or arising out of the county’s obligation to bargain over
such items, shall not apply to those employees subject to such collectively
bargained agreement.
(Prior Code, § 2.36.050) (Ord. MC-PP-1-80, passed - -1980)
§ 34.06 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the county to provide equal employment opportunity
to all persons.
   (B)   All county recruitment, hiring, training, promoting and transferring
shall be done without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
political affiliation, age or physical or mental handicaps not constituting
bona fide occupation qualifications, and all personnel policies, procedures and
practices shall be administered accordingly.
   (C)   The county recognizes its moral and legal responsibility to provide
equal employment opportunity, to take affirmative and direct action at all
levels of county government, regarding job classification, salaries, training,
fringe benefits and other personnel policies, and to improve employment and
career opportunities for minority group persons and women according to
affirmative action principles.
   (D)   The county will advertise any job openings that exist in the Personnel
Department at least once in the official county newspaper. Applicants will be
considered on the basis of merit and in accordance with the policies as
outlined above.
(Prior Code, § 2.36.060) (Ord. MC-PP-1-80, passed - -1980)
CHAPTER 35: PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING POLICY
Section
General Provisions
   
35.001   Purpose and interpretation
   
35.002   Definitions
   
35.003   Authority
   
35.004   Preferences
   
35.005   Public notice
   
35.006   Procedure for competitive verbal quotes and proposals
   
35.007   Procedure for informal written solicitation
   
35.008   Procurement methods for professional services and public improvements
   
35.009   Feasibility determinations for service contracts over $250,000
   
35.010   Qualified pools
   
35.011   Disaggregation and division of purchasing
   
35.012   Retroactive approval
Source Selection Methods
   
35.025   Small procurements
   
35.026   Intermediate procurements
   
35.027   Large procurements
Personal Services Contracts
   
35.040   Classification of services as personal services
   
35.041   Requests for qualifications
   
35.042   Direct negotiations
   
35.043   Informal written solicitations
   
35.044   Requests for proposals
Alternative Source Selection Methods
   
35.055   Sole-source procurements
   
35.056   Special procurements
   
35.057   Contracts subject to award at the County Administrator’s discretion
   
35.058   Emergency procurement
   
35.059   Cooperative procurements
Surplus Property
   
35.070   General methods
   
35.071   Disposal of property with minimal value
   
35.072   Personal-use items
   
35.073   Conveyance to purchaser
Protest and Appeal Procedures
   
35.085   Appeal of debarment or pre-qualification decision
   
35.086   Protests and judicial review of special procurements
   
35.087   Protests and judicial review of sole-source procurements
   
35.088   Protests and judicial review of personal services procurements
   
35.089   Protests of cooperative procurements
   
Appendix A: Form template for verbal quotes and proposals
   
Appendix B: Form template for informal written solicitation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.001 PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Purpose of purchasing policy. These rules are adopted by the Board of
Commissioners as the governing body of the county to establish the rules and
procedures for contracts entered into and purchases made by the county. The
county’s policy in adopting these rules is to utilize public contracting and
purchasing practices and methods maximizing the efficient use of county
resources and the purchasing power of county funds by:
      (1)   Promoting impartial and open competition;
      (2)   Using complete solicitation materials containing a clear statement
of contract specifications and requirements; and
      (3)   Taking full advantage of evolving procurement methods fulfilling
the county’s purchasing needs as they emerge within various industries.
   (B)   Interpretation of purchasing policy. Except as specifically provided
in these rules, public contracts and purchases shall be awarded, administered
and governed according to O.R.S. Chapters 279A, 279B and 279C (Public
Contracting Code) and the Attorney General’s model public contract rules (model
rules), as they now exist. Any ambiguities, uncertainties or conflicts found in
these rules shall be resolved by County Counsel in writing.
      (1)   In furtherance of the purposes of the objective set forth in
division (A) above, the county’s intent is these rules be interpreted to
authorize the full use of all contracting and purchasing powers described in
O.R.S. Chapters 279A, 279B and 279C.
      (2)   The model rules adopted under O.R.S. 279A.065 shall apply to the
contracts and purchases of the county to the extent they do not conflict with
these rules and other rules and regulations adopted by the county.
      (3)   In the event of a conflict between any provisions of these rules
and the model rules, the provisions of these rules shall prevail.
   (C)   Specific provisions’ precedence over general provisions. In the event
of a conflict between the provisions of these rules, the more specific
provision shall take precedence over the more general provision.
   (D)   Conflicts with federal statutes and regulations. Except as otherwise
expressly provided in O.R.S. Chapters 279A, 279B or 279C, applicable federal
statutes and regulations govern when federal funds are involved.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTERING AGENCY. The contracting agency that solicited and established
the original contract in a cooperative procurement for goods, services,
personal services, professional services or public improvements.
   AFFECTED PERSON/OFFEROR. A person whose ability to participate in a
procurement is adversely impaired by a county decision.
   AWARD. The decision to enter a contract or purchase order with a specific
offerer.
   BID. A response to an invitation to bid.
   BIDDER. A person who submits a bid in response to an invitation to bid.
   BUSINESS WITH WHICH A COUNTY EMPLOYEE IS ASSOCIATED. Any business in which a
county employee is a director, officer, owner or employee, or any corporation
in which a county employee owns or has owned 10% or more of any class of stock
at any point in the preceding calendar year.
   COUNTY. Morrow County, Oregon.
   COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR. The person appointed by the Board of Commissioners to
the position of County Administrator or his or her written designee.
   CLOSING. The date and time announced in a solicitation document as the
deadline for submitting bids or offers.
   CONTRACT. See PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   CONTRACTING AGENCY. A public body authorized by law to conduct a
procurement.
   CONTRACTOR. The person who enters a contract with the county.
   CONTRACT PRICE. As the context requires, either:
 
      (1)   The maximum payment the county will make under a contract if the
contractor fully performs under the contract, including bonuses, incentives and
contingency amounts;
      (2)   The maximum not-to-exceed payment specified in the contract; or
      (3)   The unit prices set forth in the contract.
   COOPERATIVE PROCUREMENT. A procurement conducted by, or on behalf of, one or
more contracting agencies.
   DAYS. Calendar days.
   EMERGENCY. Involves circumstances that:
      (1)   Could not have been reasonably foreseen;
      (2)   Create a substantial risk of loss, damage or interruption of
services or a substantial threat to property, public health, welfare or safety;
and
      (3)   Require prompt execution of a contract or amendment to remedy the
condition.
   EMERGENCY CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT. A contract for emergency work, minor
alteration ordinary repair or maintenance of public improvements, and any other
construction contract not defined as a public improvement under these rules or
O.R.S. 279A.010.
   FINDINGS. The justification for a conclusion. If the justification relates
to a public improvement contract, findings may be based on information
including, without limitation:
      (1)   Operational, budget and financial data;
      (2)   Public benefits;
      (3)   Value engineering;
      (4)   Specialized expertise;
      (5)   Market conditions;
      (6)   Technical complexity; and
      (7)   Funding sources.
   GOODS AND/OR SERVICES. GOODS are supplies, equipment, materials and personal
property (including intangible and intellectual property rights and licenses).
SERVICES are all other services not designated as personal services under these
rules, but generally comprise non-profession-based services (i.e., services for
office maintenance). The term GOODS AND/OR SERVICES includes combinations of
any of the items identified in the definition for each.
   GRANT. An agreement under which, either:
      (1)   The county (as grantee) receives moneys, property or other
assistance (including, but not limited to, federal assistance characterized as
a grant by federal law or regulation), loans, loan guarantees, credit
enhancements, gifts, bequests, commodities or other assets; the assistance
received by the county is from a grantor for the purpose of supporting or
stimulating a program or activity of the county; and no substantial involvement
by the grantor is anticipated in the program or activity other than involvement
associated with monitoring compliance with grant conditions; or
      (2)   The county (as grantor) provides moneys, property or other
assistance (including, but not limited to, federal assistance characterized as
a grant by federal law or regulation), loans, loan guarantees, credit
enhancements, gifts, bequests, commodities or other assets; the assistance is
given to the recipient for the purpose of supporting or stimulating a program
or activity of the recipient; and no substantial involvement by the county is
anticipated in the program or activity other than involvement associated with
monitoring compliance with grant conditions.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. An employee’s spouse, domestic partner, parent or
in loco parentis, children, siblings, parents-in-law, siblings-in-law,
grandparents, grandchildren, stepparents and stepchildren.
   OFFER. A bid, proposal, quote or other response to a solicitation document.
   OFFEROR. A person who submits an offer.
   OPENING. The date, time and place announced in the solicitation document for
the public opening of written sealed offers.
   ORIGINAL CONTRACT. The initial contract or price agreement solicited and
awarded during a cooperative procurement by an administering agency.
   PURCHASING AGENCY. An agency that procures goods or services, personal
services or public improvements from a contractor based on the original
contract established by an administering agency in a cooperative procurement.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture,
governmental agency, public body, public corporation or other legal or
commercial entity and any other person or entity with legal capacity to
contract.
   PRICE AGREEMENT. A contract for the procurement of goods or services at a
set price which has:
      (1)   No guarantee of a minimum or maximum purchase; or
      (2)   An initial order or minimum purchase combined with a continuing
contractor obligation to provide goods or services with no guarantee of any
minimum or maximum additional purchase.
   PROCUREMENT. The act of purchasing, leasing, renting or otherwise acquiring
goods or services, personal services or professional services. It includes each
function and procedure undertaken or required to be undertaken to enter a
contract, administer a contract and obtain the performance of a contract for
goods or services, personal services or professional services.
   PROCUREMENT FILE. Any of the following files maintained by the county: a
solicitation, contract, price agreement, work order contract, amendment or
contract administration file, separately or collectively. Commensurate with
each type of procurement, each PROCUREMENT FILE must contain:
      (1)   Small procurement (less than $5,000): procurement file not
required;
      (2)   Small procurement ($5,000 to $10,000):
         (a)   A copy of the solicitation document (informal written
solicitation);
         (b)   Documentation of verbal quotes and proposals obtained;
         (c)   Any required findings or statement of justification for the
selection of the contractor and sourcing method;
         (d)   The method used to advertise or notify prospective contractors
of any solicitation; and
         (e)   A copy of each offer that resulted in the award of a contract.
      (3)   Intermediate procurement ($10,000 to $100,000):
         (a)   An executed contract, if awarded;
         (b)   The record of actions used to develop the contract;
         (c)   A copy of the solicitation document;
         (d)   Any required findings or statement of justification for the
selection of the contractor and sourcing method;
         (e)   A list of prospective contractors notified of any solicitation;
         (f)   The method used to advertise or notify prospective contractors
of any solicitation;
         (g)   A copy of each offer that resulted in the award of a contract;
and
         (h)   The method of evaluating offers and proposals, the results of
the evaluation and basis of selection.
      (4)   Large procurement (greater than $100,000):
         (a)   An executed contract, if awarded;
         (b)   The record of actions used to develop the contract;
         (c)   A copy of the solicitation document;
         (d)   Any required findings or statement of justification for the
selection of the contractor and sourcing method;
         (e)   A list of prospective contractors notified of any solicitation;
         (f)   The method used to advertise or notify prospective contractors
of any solicitation;
         (g)   A copy of each offer that resulted in the award of a contract;
         (h)   The method of evaluating offers and proposals, the results of
the evaluation and basis of selection;
         (i)   The record of any negotiation of the statement of work, costs
and results;
         (j)   A record of any material communications regarding the
solicitation by interested contractors; and
         (k)   A copy of the request for special procurement, if any.
   PROPOSAL. A response to a request for proposals.
   PROPOSER. A person that submits a proposal in response to a request for
proposals.
   PROVIDER. As the context requires, a supplier of goods or services, personal
services or professional services.
   PUBLIC CONTRACT. A sale or other disposal, or a purchase, lease, rental or
other acquisition, by the county of personal property, goods or services,
including personal services, professional services, public improvements, public
works, minor alterations or ordinary repair or maintenance necessary to
preserve a public improvement. The term does not include grants.
   PUBLIC CONTRACTING. Procurement activities relating to obtaining, modifying
or administering contracts or price agreements.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. A project for construction, reconstruction or major
renovation on real property, by or for the county. It neither includes projects
for which no funds of the county are directly or indirectly used (except for
participation incidental or related primarily to project design or inspection)
nor emergency work, minor alteration or ordinary repair or maintenance
necessary to preserve a public improvement.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONTRACT. A contract for a public improvement. This does
not include a contract for emergency work, minor alterations or ordinary repair
or maintenance necessary to maintain a public improvement.
   QUALIFIED POOL. A pool of contractors who are prequalified to compete for
the award of certain contracts or to provide certain types of goods or
services.
   RECYCLED PRODUCT. All materials, goods and supplies, not less than 50% of
the total weight of which consists of secondary and post-consumer waste with
not less than 10% of its total weight consisting of post-consumer waste. It
includes any product potentially disposable as solid waste after completing its
life cycle as a consumer item but otherwise is refurbished for reuse without
substantial alteration of the product’s form.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP). A solicitation document used for soliciting
proposals.
   REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS (RFQ). A written document issued by the county
describing services to which potential contractors respond with a description
of their experience and qualifications that results in a list of potential
contractors who are qualified to perform those services, but which is not
intended to create a contract between a potential contractor on the list and
the county.
   REVENUE-GENERATING AGREEMENTS. Contracts or agreements for revenue-
generating services are typically awarded to the offerer proposing the most
advantageous or highest monetary return to the county.
   SCOPE. The range and attributes of the goods or services described in a
procurement document.
   SERVICES. See GOODS AND/OR SERVICES. The following specific definitions
apply to the following types of services.
      (1)   PERSONAL SERVICES. Services, other than professional services,
requiring specialized skill, knowledge and resources in the application of
technical or scientific expertise or in the exercise of professional, artistic
or management discretion or judgment.
         (a)   Qualifications and performance history, expertise and creativity
and the ability to exercise sound professional judgment are typically the
primary considerations when selecting a personal services contractor, with
price being secondary.
         (b)   PERSONAL SERVICES contracts include, but are not limited to, the
following classes of contracts:
            1.   Contracts for services performed in a professional capacity,
including, but not limited to, services of an accountant, attorney, auditor,
court reporter, information technology consultant, land use and planning
consultant, physician or broadcaster;
            2.   Contracts for professional or expert witnesses or consultants
to provide services or testimony relating to existing or potential litigation
or legal matters in which the county is or may become interested;
            3.   Contracts for services as an artist in the performing or fine
arts, including any person identified as a photographer, film maker, actor,
director, painter, weaver or sculptor;
            4.   Contracts for services that are specialized, creative or
research-oriented; and/or
            5.   Contracts for services as a consultant.
      (2)   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Architectural, engineering, photogrammetric
mapping, transportation planning and land surveying (A&E) or related services
or any combination of these services, provided by a consultant.
         (a)   A&E SERVICES. Professional services performed by an architect,
engineer, photogrammetrist, transportation planner or land surveyor and
includes architectural, engineering, photogrammetric, transportation planning
or land surveying services, separately or any combination thereof, as
appropriate within the context of a section of these rules.
         (b)   RELATED SERVICES. Personal services, other than A&E services,
related to the administration, design, engineering or oversight of public
improvement projects or components thereof, including, but not limited to:
            1.   Landscape architectural services;
            2.   Facilities planning services;
            3.   Energy planning services;
            4.   Space planning services;
            5.   Environmental impact studies;
            6.   Hazardous substances or hazardous waste or toxic substances
testing services;
            7.   Wetland delineation studies;
            8.   Wetland mitigation services;
            9.   Native American studies;
            10.   Historical research services;
            11.   Endangered species studies;
            12.   Rare plant studies;
            13.   Biological services;
            14.   Archaeological services;
            15.   Cost estimating services;
            16.   Appraising services;
            17.   Material testing services;
            18.   Mechanical system balancing services;
            19.   Commissioning services;
            20.   Project management services; and
            21.   Construction management services and owner’s representatives’
service.
   SIGNED or SIGNATURE. Any mark, word or symbol attached to or logically
associated with a document and executed or adopted by a person with the
authority and intent to be bound.
   SOLICITATION. As the context requires, either:
      (1)   A request for the purpose of soliciting offers, including an
invitation for bid, a request for proposals, a quote request, a request for
qualifications or other similar documents;
      (2)   The process of notifying prospective offerers of a request for
offers; and/or
      (3)   The solicitation document.
   WORK. The furnishing of all materials, equipment, labor and incidentals
necessary to successfully complete any individual item in a contract and
successful completion of all duties and obligations imposed by the contract.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Conventional paper documents, whether handwritten,
typewritten or printed, in contrast to spoken words, including electronic
transmissions or facsimile documents when required by applicable law or
permitted by a solicitation document or contract.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.003 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Board of Commissioners as Local Contract Review Board. The Board of
Commissioners is designated as the Local Contract Review Board of the county
and has all the rights, powers and authority necessary to carry out the
provisions of these rules, the Public Contracting Code and/or the model rules.
   (B)   Application of Attorney General’s model rules of procedure. Pursuant
to O.R.S. 279A.065(6), the county has elected to establish its own policy for
public contracting and purchasing. Except as provided herein, the model rules
do not apply to the county.
   (C)   Inapplicability of rules. These rules do not apply to:
      (1)   All contracts or agreements to which the Public Contracting Code
does not apply;
      (2)   Contracts, intergovernmental and interstate agreements entered
pursuant to O.R.S. Chapter 190;
      (3)   Grants;
      (4)   Acquisitions or disposals of real property or interests in real
property, including permits and lease, license, easement, franchise and other
agreements for the temporary use of county-owned property and encroachments
upon county-regulated public rights-of-way;
      (5)   Procurements from a state corrections enterprise program;
      (6)   Contracts, agreements or other documents entered, issued or
established in connection with:
         (a)   The incurring of debt, including any associated contracts,
agreements or other documents, regardless of whether the obligations they
establish are general, special or limited;
         (b)   The making of program loans and similar extensions or advance of
funds, aid or assistance by the county to a public or private person for the
purpose of carrying out, promoting or sustaining activities or programs
authorized by law other than for the construction of public works or public
improvements;
         (c)   The investment of funds by the county as authorized by law; and
         (d)   Banking, money management or other predominantly financial
transactions that, by their character, cannot practically be established under
the competitive contractor selection procedures, based upon the findings of the
County Administrator.
      (7)   Contracts for employee benefit plans;
      (8)   Contracts with newspapers and other publications for the placement
of advertisements or public notices;
      (9)   Contracts for items where the price is regulated and available from
a single source or limited number of sources;
      (10)   Insurance contracts;
      (11)   Revenue-generating agreements; and
      (12)   Federal agreements where applicable federal statutes and
regulations govern when federal funds are involved and the federal statutes or
regulations conflict with any provision of the State Public Contracting Code or
these rules, or require additional conditions in public contracts not
authorized by the State Public Contracting Code or these rules.
   (D)   Authority of County Administrator. For contracts and purchases covered
by these rules, and when sufficient budgetary resources are either available in
the current fiscal year budget for the proposed expenditure or become available
after specific Board of Commissioners authorization, the County Administrator
is authorized to:
      (1)   Award and execute contracts and amendments without specific
authorization by the Board of Commissioners whenever the contract amount is
$150,000 or less. Prior to award and execution, the County Administrator shall
verify compliance with this policy and all applicable procurement rules and
laws;
      (2)   Execute contracts and amendments with specific authorization by the
Board of Commissioners whenever the contract or amendment amount exceeds
$150,000;
      (3)   As the purchasing agent for the county, the County Administrator is
specifically authorized to:
         (a)   Purchase goods, services and/or property without specific
authorization by the Board of Commissioners whenever the amount is $150,000 or
less; and
         (b)   Purchase goods, services and/or property with specific
authorization by the Board of Commissioners whenever the amount exceeds
$150,000.
      (4)   Approve in writing all purchases of any goods or services valued
between $15,000 and $150,000 requested by county department directors, elected
officials and department heads. Prior to approving purchases, the County
Administrator shall verify compliance with this policy and all applicable
procurement rules and laws.
      (5)   Delegate in writing the contract award authority described in
division (D)(1) above, signature authority described in division (D)(2) above
and the purchasing powers described in division (D)(3) above; and
      (6)   Adopt forms, procedures, computer software and administrative rules
for all county purchases regardless of the amount and:
         (a)   When adopting the forms, procedures, computer software or
administrative rules, the County Administrator shall establish practices and
policies that:
            1.   Do not encourage favoritism or substantially diminish
competition; and
            2.   Allow the county to take advantage of the cost-saving benefits
of alternative contracting methods and practices.
         (b)   The county shall use these forms, procedures, computer software
or administrative rules unless they conflict with these rules.
   (E)   Authority of directors and elected officials.
      (1)   For contracts and purchases covered by these rules, county
department directors and elected officials are authorized with the same
signature authority described in division (D)(2) above and purchasing powers
described in division (D)(3) above to the extent the contract price is $15,000
or less.
      (2)   Directors and elected officials shall also review and approve or
reject, in writing, procurement or contracting requests from department heads
and other employees that they directly supervise or manage to the extent the
contract price is $15,000 or less.
   (F)   Authority of department heads.
      (1)   For contracts and purchases covered by these rules, department
heads are authorized with the same signature authority described in division
(D)(2) above and purchasing powers described in division (D)(3) above to the
extent the contract price is $5,000 or less.
      (2)   Department heads shall also review and approve or reject, in
writing, procurement or contracting requests from other employees that they
directly supervise or manage to the extent the contract price is $5,000 or
less.
   (G)   Authority of all other county employees. For contracts and purchases
covered by these rules, all other county employees are authorized with the same
signature authority described in division (D)(2) above and purchasing powers
described in division (D)(3) above to the extent the contract price is $2,500
or less.
   (H)   Approval authority workflow. For all contracts and purchases covered
by these rules, to the extent that a contract or purchase exceeds an employee’s
approval authority, that employee shall submit a written request for review and
authorization to their direct supervisor.
   (I)   Favorable terms. Contracts and purchases shall be negotiated on the
most favorable terms to the county in accordance with these rules, other
adopted ordinances and state and federal laws, policies and procedures.
   (J)   Unauthorized contracts or purchases. Public contracts entered into, or
purchases made as authorized herein shall be voidable at the sole discretion of
the Board of Commissioners.
      (1)   The Board of Commissioners may take appropriate action in response
to execution of contracts or purchases made contrary to this provision.
      (2)   Such actions include, but are not limited to, providing educational
guidance, imposing disciplinary measures and holding individuals personally
liable for such contracts or purchases.
   (K)   Purchasing from county employees or employees’ immediate family
prohibited. No contract shall be knowingly entered with or purchase knowingly
made from any county employee or employee’s immediate family member, or any
business with which the employee is associated, unless:
      (1)   The contract or purchase is expressly authorized and approved by
the County Administrator after receiving guidance from County Counsel; or
      (2)   The need for the contract or purchase occurs during a state of
emergency, and the County Administrator finds in writing the acquisition from
the employee, employee’s immediate family member or business with which the
employee is associated is the most expeditious means to eliminate the threat to
public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.004 PREFERENCES.
   (A)   Mandatory tie breaker preference. If offers are identical in price,
fitness, availability and quality, and the county desires to award the
contract, the preferences provided in O.R.S. 279A.120 shall be applied prior to
the contract award.
   (B)   Reciprocal preference. Reciprocal preferences must be given when
evaluating bids, if applicable under O.R.S. 279A.120.
   (C)   Preference for recycled materials and supplies. Preferences for
recycled goods shall be given when comparing goods, if applicable under O.R.S.
279A.125. The County Administrator may adopt alternative standards to determine
if goods are manufactured from recycled materials.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.005 PUBLIC NOTICE.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided by these rules or required by
applicable law, any notice required to be published by these rules may be
published using any method the County Administrator deems appropriate,
including, but not limited to, mailing notice to persons that have requested
notice in writing, placing notice on the county’s website or publishing an
advertisement in statewide trade or local publications. With specific respect
to public improvement contracts, the Local Contract Review Board hereby
determines electronic advertisements are likely to be cost-effective and
authorizes electronic advertisements for all pubic improvement contracts having
an estimated contract price of $125,000 or less pursuant to O.R.S. 279C.360.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.006 PROCEDURE FOR COMPETITIVE VERBAL QUOTES AND PROPOSALS.
   Where allowed by these rules and authorized by the County Administrator,
solicitations by competitive verbal quotes and proposals shall be based on a
description of the quantity of goods or services to be provided and may be
solicited and received by means including phone, facsimile or email.
   (A)   The county shall make a good faith effort to contact at least three
potential providers.
   (B)   If three potential providers are not reasonably available, fewer will
suffice; provided, that the reasons three potential providers are not
reasonably available is documented as part of the procurement file.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.007 PROCEDURE FOR INFORMAL WRITTEN SOLICITATION.
   Where allowed by these rules, informal written solicitations shall be made
by a solicitation document sent by means including mail, facsimile or email to
not less than three prospective providers.
   (A)   The solicitation document shall request competitive price quotes or
competitive proposals and include:
      (1)   The date, time and place price quotes or proposals are due;
      (2)   A description or quantity of the good or service required;
      (3)   Any statement of period for which price quotes or proposals must
remain firm, irrevocable, valid or binding on the offerer. If no time is stated
in the solicitation document, the period shall be 30 days;
      (4)   Any required contract terms or conditions; and
      (5)   Any required bid form or proposed format.
   (B)   Price quotes or proposals shall be received by the County
Administrator, department director, elected official or department head at the
date, time and place established in the solicitation document.
      (1)   The county shall keep a written record of the sources of the quotes
or proposals.
      (2)   If three quotes or proposals are not reasonably available, fewer
shall suffice, but the County Administrator, department director, elected
official or department head shall make a written record of the effort made to
obtain quotes or proposals as part of the procurement file.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.008 PROCUREMENT METHODS FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   Subject only to any conflicting provision of these rules as determined by
the County Counsel, the county shall apply the Public Contracting Code and the
model rules when procuring professional services and public improvements and
processing protests thereof.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.009 FEASIBILITY DETERMINATIONS FOR SERVICE CONTRACTS OVER $250,000.
   (A)   Prior to beginning a procurement or entering into a service contract
(other than contracts for professional services or those services to which
O.R.S. Chapter 279B does not apply) when the estimated contract price exceeds
$250,000, the County Administrator shall demonstrate either:
      (1)   A written cost analysis developed pursuant to O.R.S. 279B.033 and
finding the county would incur less cost in conducting the procurement than in
performing the services with the county’s own personnel and resources; or
      (2)   A written determination developed pursuant to O.R.S. 279B.036 and
finding performing the services with the county’s own personnel would not be
feasible, and the findings may include, for example, the existence of special
circumstances or county personnel lack specialized capabilities, experience or
technical or other expertise necessary to perform the services when compared to
a potential contractor’s capabilities, experience or expertise in the same or a
similar field.
   (B)   The cost comparison analysis and feasibility determinations, along
with their supporting records, are public records subject to disclosure
pursuant to the State Public Records Law. The County Administrator’s decision
described in this section is exempt from O.R.S. Chapter 279B’s judicial review
process and its review is instead limited to writ of review by the state
circuit court for the county, pursuant to O.R.S. Chapter 34.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.010 QUALIFIED POOLS.
   The county may solicit a pool of contractors who are prequalified to compete
for the award of certain contracts or to provide certain types of goods or
services.
   (A)   General. To create a qualified pool, the County Administrator,
department director, elected official or department head may invite prospective
contractors to submit their qualifications to the county for inclusion as
participants in a pool of contractors qualified to provide certain types of
goods, services or projects, including personal services, professional services
and public improvements.
   (B)   Public notice. The invitation to participate in a qualified pool shall
be publicly noticed. If qualification will be for a term exceeding two years or
allowing open entry on a continuous basis, the invitation to participate in the
pool must be noticed at least once every two years and shall be posted on the
county’s website.
   (C)   Solicitation content. Requests for participation in a qualified pool
shall describe the scope of goods, services or projects for which the pool will
be maintained and the minimum qualifications for participation in the pool,
which may include qualifications relating to financial stability, contracts
with manufacturers or distributors, insurance, licensure, education, training,
experience and demonstrated skills of key personnel (including familiarity with
the county or the proposed project), access to equipment and other relevant
qualifications important to the contracting needs of the county.
   (D)   Contract.
      (1)   The operation of each qualified pool may be governed by the
provisions of a pool contract to which the county and all pool participants are
parties. The contract shall contain all terms required by the county, including
terms relating to price, performance, business registration or licensure,
continuing education, insurance and requirements for the submission of evidence
of continuing qualification on an annual or other periodic basis.
      (2)   The qualified pool contract shall describe the selection procedures
the county may use to issue contract job orders. The selection procedures shall
be objective and open to all pool participants and afford all participants the
opportunity to compete for or receive job awards. Unless expressly provided in
the contract, participation in a qualified pool will not entitle a participant
to the award of any county contract.
   (E)   Use of qualified pools. Subject to the provisions of these rules
concerning contract sourcing methods, the county shall award all contracts for
goods or services of the type for which a qualified pool is created from among
the pool’s participants unless the County Administrator determines the best
interests of the county in the particular instance would be best served with an
alternative procurement method, in which case the pool participants shall be
notified and invited to submit competitive offers.
   (F)   Amendment and termination. The County Administrator or Board of
Commissioners may discontinue a qualified pool at any time or may change the
requirements for eligibility as a pool participant at any time by delivering
written notice to all pool participants.
   (G)   Protest of failure to qualify. The County Administrator shall notify
any applicant who fails to qualify for pool participation it may appeal a
qualified pool decision to the Board of Commissioners pursuant to §
35.085.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.011 DISAGGREGATION AND DIVISION OF PURCHASING.
   (A)   Purchases, procurements and/or awards must not fragment, disaggregate
or otherwise divide awards for the purpose of keeping the value below a defined
procurement threshold.
   (B)   The County Administrator may take appropriate action in response to
execution of contracts or purchases made contrary to this provision. Such
actions include, but are not limited to, providing educational guidance,
imposing disciplinary measures and holding individuals personally liable for
such contracts or purchases.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.012 RETROACTIVE APPROVAL.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, RETROACTIVE APPROVAL OF A CONTRACT
means award or execution of a contract where work was commenced without final
award or execution.
   (B)   The County Administrator may make retroactive approval of a contract
only if the responsible employee submits a copy of the proposed contract to the
County Administrator along with a written request for contract retroactive
approval containing:
      (1)   An explanation of the reason work was commenced before the contract
was finally awarded or executed;
      (2)   A description of steps taken to prevent similar occurrences in the
future;
      (3)   Evidence that, but for the failure to finally award or execute the
contract, the employee substantially complied with all other steps required to
properly select a contractor and negotiate the contract; and
      (4)   A proposed form of contract.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
SOURCE SELECTION METHODS
§ 35.025 SMALL PROCUREMENTS.
   Contracts for or purchases of goods or services with a contract price of
$5,000 or less are small procurements.
   (A)   Purchases $5,000 or less. The county may use any procurement method
the County Administrator deems practical or convenient, including direct
negotiation or award, for small procurements of goods or services with a
contract price of $5,000 or less.
   (B)   Purchases between $5,000 and $10,000. The county may use competitive
verbal quotes or proposals and informal written solicitations (pursuant to the
procedures listed in §§ 35.006 and 35.007, respectively) for small procurements
of goods or services with a contract price between $5,000 and $10,000.
   (C)   Negotiations. The county may negotiate with an offeror to clarify
competitive verbal quotes or proposals or informal written proposals or to make
modifications making the quote or proposal acceptable or more advantageous to
the county.
   (D)   Award. If a contract is awarded, the award shall be made to the
offeror whose verbal quote or proposal the County Administrator, department
director, elected official or department head determines will best serve the
interests of the county, taking into account price as well as any other
relevant considerations, including, but not limited to, experience, expertise,
product functionality, suitability for a particular purpose, delivery and
contractor responsibility.
   (E)   Amendments. Small procurement contracts may be amended if the
cumulative amendments do not increase the total contract price to more than 25%
of the original contract price.
   (F)   Public notice. No public notice of small procurements is required.
   (G)   Procurement file. For purchases of $5,000 or less, no procurement file
is required to be maintained. For purchases between $5,000 and $10,000,
documentation, as outlined in the definition for procurement files in §
35.002, shall be collected and provided to and maintained by the Finance
Department.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.026 INTERMEDIATE PROCUREMENTS.
   Contracts for goods or services with a contract price greater than $10,000
but less than or equal to $100,000 are intermediate procurements.
   (A)   Solicitation. Intermediate procurements shall be by informal written
solicitation pursuant to the procedures listed in §
35.007.
   (B)   Negotiations. The County Administrator may negotiate with an offerer
to clarify an informal written solicitation or to make modifications making the
quote, proposal or solicitation acceptable or more advantageous to the county.
   (C)   Award. If a contract is awarded, the award shall be made to the
offerer whose informal written solicitation the County Administrator determines
will best serve the interests of the county, taking into account price or any
other relevant considerations, including, but not limited to, experience,
expertise, product functionality, suitability for a particular purpose,
delivery and contractor responsibility.
   (D)   Amendments. Intermediate procurement contracts may be amended if the
cumulative amendments do not increase the total contract price by more than 25%
of the original contract price.
   (E)   Public notice. No public notice of intermediate procurements is
required.
   (F)   Procurement file.
      (1)   Documentation, as defined in §
35.002, shall collected and provided to the Finance Department for review prior
to contract or purchase execution.
      (2)   Once the contract or purchase is executed, the complete procurement
file shall be provided to and maintained by the Finance Department.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.027 LARGE PROCUREMENTS.
   Contracts for goods or services with a contract price exceeding $100,000 are
large procurements.
   (A)   Large procurements shall be by competitive sealed bidding pursuant to
O.R.S. 279B.055 or competitive sealed proposals pursuant to O.R.S. 279B.060.
   (B)   When using either competitive sealed bidding or competitive sealed
proposals, the county shall follow the applicable procedures set out in the
model rules.
   (C)   The county shall apply the applicable procedure set out in the model
rules for processing protests of large procurements.
   (D)   Documentation, as defined in §
35.002, shall be collected and provided to the Finance Department for review
prior to contract or purchase execution. Once the contract or purchase is
executed, the complete procurement file shall be provided to and maintained by
the Finance Department.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTS
§ 35.040 CLASSIFICATION OF SERVICES AS PERSONAL SERVICES.
   (A)   In addition to the classes of personal services contracts identified
in the definition of personal services contracts, the County Administrator may
classify additional specific types of services as personal services.
   (B)   In determining whether a service is a personal service, the County
Administrator shall consider:
      (1)   Whether the work requires specialized skills, knowledge and
resources in the application of technical or scientific expertise, or the
exercise of professional, artistic or management discretion or judgment;
      (2)   Whether the county intends to rely on the contractor’s specialized
skills, knowledge and expertise to accomplish the work;
      (3)   Whether selecting a contractor primarily based on qualifications,
rather than price, would most likely meet the county’s needs and result in
obtaining satisfactory contract performance and optimal value; and
      (4)   A service shall not be classified as personal services for the
purposes of these rules if:
         (a)   The work has traditionally been performed by contractors
selected primarily based on price; or
         (b)   The services do not require specialized skills, knowledge and
resources in the application of highly technical or scientific expertise, or
the exercise of professional, artistic or management discretion or judgment.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.041 REQUESTS FOR QUALIFICATIONS.
   At the County Administrator’s discretion, a request for qualifications may
be used to determine whether competition exists to perform the needed personal
services or to establish a non-binding list of qualified contractors for
individual negotiation, informal written solicitations or requests for
proposals.
   (A)   A request for qualifications shall describe the personal services
sought, the qualifications the contractor must have to be considered, and the
evaluation factors and their relative importance. A request for qualifications
may require information, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The contractor’s particular capability to perform the required
personal services;
      (2)   The number of experienced personnel available to perform the
required personal services;
      (3)   The specific qualifications and experience of personnel;
      (4)   A list of similar personal services the contractor has completed;
      (5)   References concerning past performance; and
      (6)   Any other information necessary or convenient to evaluate the
contractor’s qualifications.
   (B)   A voluntary or mandatory qualifications pre-submission meeting may be
held for all interested contractors to discuss the proposed personal services.
The request for qualifications shall include the date, time and location of the
meeting.
   (C)   At the county’s discretion, as described in the request for
qualifications, unless the responses to a request for qualifications reasonably
establish competition does not exist, the request for qualifications is
canceled or all responses to the request for qualifications are rejected, the
county shall either:
      (1)   Notice all respondents who meet the qualifications set forth in the
request for qualifications of any required personal services and provide them
an opportunity to submit a proposal in response to the request for proposals;
or
      (2)   Notice all respondents who meet the qualifications set forth in the
request for qualifications of their relative ranking after the county evaluates
their qualifications, in which case the county will select at least the two
top-scoring respondents as exclusively eligible to receive and submit responses
to the request for proposals.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.042 DIRECT NEGOTIATIONS.
   (A)   Personal services. Personal services may be procured through direct
negotiations if:
      (1)   The contract price does not exceed $150,000 (without including
amendments) and the work is within a budgetary appropriation or approved by the
Board of Commissioners;
 
      (2)   The confidential personal services (including special counsel) or
professional or expert witnesses or consultants are necessary to assist with
pending or threatened litigation or other legal matters in which the county may
have an interest; or
      (3)   The nature of the personal service is not project-driven but
requires an ongoing, long-term relationship of knowledge and trust.
   (B)   Amendments. Personal services contracts procured by direct negotiation
pursuant to this section may be amended; provided, that the amendment relates
to the scope of the original contract and the cumulative amount of the
amendments does not increase the total contract price by more than 25% over the
original contract price, or the amendment is necessary to complete the work
being performed and it would be unreasonable or impracticable to seek another
provider within the time frames needed to complete the work.
   (C)   Public notice. No public notice of personal services contracts
procured by direct negotiations is required.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.043 INFORMAL WRITTEN SOLICITATIONS.
   An informal written solicitation process may be used for personal services
when the contract price is less than $150,000.
   (A)   An informal written solicitation shall solicit proposals from at least
three qualified providers. If the County Administrator determines three
qualified providers are not reasonably available, fewer shall suffice if the
reasons three providers are not reasonably available are documented in the
procurement file.
   (B)   The solicitation document shall include:
      (1)   The date, time and place proposals are due;
      (2)   A description of personal services sought or the project to be
undertaken;
      (3)   Any statement of the time period for which proposals must remain
firm, irrevocable, valid and binding on the offerer. If no time is stated in
the solicitation document, the period shall be 30 days;
      (4)   Any required contract terms or conditions; and
      (5)   Any required bid form or proposal format.
   (C)   Selection and ranking of proposals may be based on the following
criteria:
      (1)   Particular capability to perform the personal services required;
      (2)   Experienced staff available to perform the personal services
required, including the proposer’s recent, current or projected workloads;
      (3)   Performance history;
      (4)   Approach and philosophy used in providing personal services;
      (5)   Fees or costs;
      (6)   Geographic proximity to the project or the area where the services
are to be performed; or
      (7)   Such other factors deemed appropriate by the County Administrator,
including a desire to ensure an equitable distribution of work among highly
qualified contractors.
   (D)   The County Administrator shall maintain written documentation of the
solicitation, including solicitation attempts, responses and provider names and
addresses in the procurement file.
   (E)   Personal services contracts procured by informal written solicitations
pursuant to this section may be amended if the amendment relates to the scope
of the original contract and the cumulative amount of the amendments does not
increase the total contract price by more than 25% over the original contract
price, or the amendment is necessary to complete the work being performed and
it would be unreasonable or impracticable to seek another provider within the
time frames needed to complete the work.
   (F)   No public notice of personal services contracts procured by informal
written solicitations pursuant to this section is required.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.044 REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS.
   A request for proposals shall be used to procure personal services when the
contract price exceeds $150,000 or the County Administrator determines the
complexity of the project requires a formal competitive process to determine
whether a particular proposal is most advantageous to the county.
   (A)   Request for proposal. The request for proposal shall include:
      (1)   Notice of any pre-offer conference, including:
         (a)   The time, date and location;
         (b)   Whether attendance at the pre-offer conference is mandatory or
voluntary; and
         (c)   A provision statements made by representatives of the county at
the pre-offer conference are not binding unless confirmed by written addendum.
      (2)   The form and instructions for submission of proposals, including
the location where proposals must be submitted, the date and time by which
proposals must be received and any other special information (e.g., whether
proposals may be submitted by electronic means);
      (3)   The name and title of the person designated for the receipt of
proposals and the person designated as the contact person for the procurement,
if different;
      (4)   A date, time and place pre-qualification applications (if any) must
be filed and the classes of work (if any) for which proposers must be pre-
qualified;
      (5)   A statement the county may cancel the procurement or reject any or
all proposals;
      (6)   The date, time and place of opening;
      (7)   The office where the request for proposals may be reviewed;
      (8)   A description of the personal services to be procured;
      (9)   The evaluation criteria;
      (10)   The anticipated schedule, deadlines, evaluation process and
protest process;
      (11)   The form and amount of any proposal security deemed reasonable and
prudent by the County Administrator to protect the county’s interests;
      (12)   A description of the manner in which proposals will be evaluated,
including the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors used to
rate the proposals;
      (13)   If more than one tier of competitive evaluation will be used, a
description of the process under which the proposals will be evaluated in the
subsequent tiers;
      (14)   If contracts will be awarded to more than one personal services
contractor, an identification of the manner in which the county will determine
the number of contracts to be awarded or a statement indicating the manner will
be left to the county’s discretion at time of award;
      (15)   If contracts will be awarded to more than one personal services
contractor, an identification of the criteria to be used to choose from the
multiple contracts when acquiring personal services;
      (16)   All required contract terms and conditions, including the
statutorily required provisions in O.R.S. 279B.220, 279B.230 and 279B.235; and
      (17)   Any terms and conditions authorized for negotiation.
   (B)   Public notice. The County Administrator shall provide public notice of
a request for proposals for personal services.
      (1)   Public notice shall be given not less than 21 days prior to closing
for the request for proposals unless the County Administrator determines a
shorter interval is in the public’s interest or will not substantially impact
competition.
      (2)   The County Administrator shall document the specific reasons for
any shorter public notice period in the procurement file.
   (C)   Amendments. Personal services contracts procured by requests for
proposals pursuant to this section may be amended if the amendment relates to
the scope of the original contract and the cumulative amount of the amendments
does not increase the total contract price by more than 25% over the original
contract price, or the amendment is necessary to complete the work being
performed and it would be unreasonable or impracticable to seek another
provider within the time frames needed to complete the work.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
ALTERNATIVE SOURCE SELECTION METHODS
§ 35.055 SOLE-SOURCE PROCUREMENTS.
   A contract may be awarded as a sole-source procurement without competition
pursuant to this section.
   (A)   Determination of sole-source. Before a sole-source contract may be
awarded, the Board of Commissioners shall make written findings (which shall be
maintained as part of the procurement file) the goods or services, personal
services or professional services are available from only one source based on
one or more of the following criteria:
      (1)   The efficient use of existing goods or services, personal services
or professional services requires the acquisition of compatible goods or
services, personal services or professional services available from only one
source;
      (2)   The goods or services, personal services or professional services
are available from only one source and required for the exchange of software or
data with other public or private agencies;
      (3)   The goods or services, personal services or professional services
are available from only one source and are needed for use in a pilot or an
experimental project; or
      (4)   Other facts or circumstances exist supporting the conclusion the
goods or services, personal services or professional services are available
from only one source.
   (B)   Negotiations. To the extent reasonably practical, contract terms
advantageous to the county shall be negotiated with the sole-source provider.
   (C)   Notice. The county shall post notice of any determination the sole-
source selection method will be used on the county’s website not less than ten
days prior to the date a sole-source contract will be awarded. The notice shall
describe the goods or services, personal services or professional services to
be procured, identify the prospective contractor and include the date and time
when and place where protests of the use of a sole-source selection method must
be filed.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.056 SPECIAL PROCUREMENTS.
   In its capacity as the Local Contract Review Board, the Board of
Commissioners, upon its own initiative or upon request of the County
Administrator, may create special selection, evaluation and award procedures
for, or may exempt from competition, the award of a specific contract or class
of contracts as provided in this section.
   (A)   Basis for approval. The approval of a special solicitation method or
exemption from competition must be based upon a record before the Board of
Commissioners containing:
      (1)   The nature of the contract or class of contracts for which the
special solicitation or exemption is requested;
      (2)   The estimated contract price or cost of the project (if relevant);
      (3)   Findings to support the substantial cost savings, enhancement in
quality or performance, or other public benefit anticipated by the proposed
selection method or exemption from competitive solicitation;
      (4)   Findings to support the reason approval of the request would be
unlikely to encourage favoritism or diminish competition for the public
contract or class of public contracts, or would otherwise substantially promote
the public interest in a manner not practicably realized by complying with the
solicitation requirements otherwise applicable under these rules;
      (5)   A description of the proposed alternative contracting methods to be
employed; and
      (6)   The estimated date when it would be necessary to let the contract
(s).
   (B)   Special selection method. In making a determination regarding a
special selection method, the Board of Commissioners may consider the type,
cost, amount of the contract or class of contracts, number of persons available
to make offers and such other factors as it may deem appropriate.
   (C)   Hearing. The county shall approve the special solicitation or
exemption after a public hearing before the Board of Commissioners.
      (1)   At the public hearing, the county shall offer an opportunity for
any interested party to appear and present comment.
      (2)   The Board of Commissioners shall consider the findings and may
approve the exemption as proposed or as modified by the Board of Commissioners
after providing an opportunity for public comment.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.057 CONTRACTS SUBJECT TO AWARD AT THE COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR’S DISCRETION.
   The following classes of contracts may be awarded in any manner the County
Administrator deems appropriate to the county’s needs, including by direct
appointment or purchase. Except where otherwise provided, the County
Administrator shall make a record of the method of award.
   (A)   Amendments. Contract amendments shall not be considered to be separate
contracts if made in accordance with these rules.
   (B)   Copyrighted materials and library materials. Contracts for the
acquisition of materials entitled to copyright, including, but not limited to,
works of art and design, literature and music, or materials even if not
entitled to copyright if purchased for use as library lending materials.
   (C)   Personal property repair. Contracts for personal property repair or
overhauling; provided, that the service or parts required are unknown and the
cost cannot be determined without extensive preliminary dismantling or testing.
   (D)   Government-regulated items. Contracts for the purchase of items for
which prices or selection of suppliers are regulated by a governmental
authority.
   (E)   Non-owned property. Contracts or arrangements for the sale or other
disposal of abandoned property or other personal property not owned by the
county.
   (F)   Specialty goods for resale. Contracts for the purchase of specialty
goods by the county for resale to consumers.
   (G)   Sponsorship agreements. Sponsorship agreements, under which the county
receives a gift or donation in exchange for recognition of the donor.
   (H)   Renewals. Contracts renewed in accordance with their terms are not
considered to be newly issued contracts and are not subject to competitive
procurement procedures.
   (I)   Temporary extensions or renewals. Contracts for a single period of one
year or less for the temporary extension or renewal of an expiring and non-
renewable (or recently expired) contract, other than a contract for public
improvements.
   (J)   Used property. The County Administrator may contract for the purchase
of used property by negotiation if such property is suitable for the county’s
needs and can be purchased for a lower cost than substantially similar new
property.
      (1)   For this purpose, the cost of used property shall be based upon the
life-cycle cost of the property over the period for which the property will be
used by the county.
      (2)   The County Administrator shall record the findings supporting the
purchase.
   (K)   Utilities. Contracts for the purchase of steam, power, heat, water and
other utilities.
   (L)   Conference/meeting room contracts. Contracts entered for meeting room
rental, hotel rooms, food and beverage and incidental costs related to
conferences and county-sponsored workshops and trainings.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.058 EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT.
   When the County Administrator determines the county’s immediate execution of
a contract is necessary in response to an emergency, the County Administrator
may execute an emergency contract without competitive selection and award or
Board of Commissioners approval as provided in this section and consistent with
O.R.S. 279B.080.
   (A)   Emergency competition. Where time permits, the County Administrator
shall attempt to use competitive price and quality evaluation before selecting
an emergency contractor; otherwise, the County Administrator may proceed with a
direct appointment without competition.
   (B)   Emergency reporting. As soon as possible in light of the emergency
circumstances, the County Administrator shall notify the Board of Commissioners
and County Counsel in writing of the nature of and facts and circumstances
surrounding the emergency, the method used for the selection of the particular
contractor and the reasons why the selection method was deemed in the best
interest of the county and public.
   (C)   Emergency construction contracts. For emergency construction contracts
(as defined in division (A) above), the County Administrator:
      (1)   Shall ensure reasonably appropriate competition and set a
reasonable solicitation schedule under the emergency circumstances; and
      (2)   If the emergency construction services are a matter of extreme
necessity, may:
         (a)   Proceed with a written or verbal request for quotes or make a
direct appointment without competition; and
         (b)   Waive the requirement for all or a portion of any payment or
performance bond if the time delay needed to obtain the required security
interest could result in injury or substantial property damage; provided,
however, that the County Administrator may not waive the separate public works
bond requirement for the benefit of the State Bureau of Labor and Industries in
enforcing prevailing wage rate and overtime payment requirements consistent
with O.R.S. 279C.836.
   (D)   Emergency signature authority and purchasing power.
      (1)   For all emergency procurements, the County Administrator is
specifically authorized to award contracts and amendments without specific
authorization by the Board of Commissioners whenever the contract price is less
than $500,000.
      (2)   If the emergency procurement is a matter of extreme necessity and
time does not reasonably permit convening the Board of Commissioners, the
County Administrator is specifically authorized to award contracts and
amendments having any contract price without specific authorization by the
Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.059 COOPERATIVE PROCUREMENTS.
   Cooperative procurements may be made without competitive solicitation as
provided in the Public Contracting Code.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
SURPLUS PROPERTY
§ 35.070 GENERAL METHODS.
   Surplus personal property may be disposed of by any of the following methods
upon a determination by the County Administrator the method of disposal is in
the best interest of the county. Factors potentially considered by the County
Administrator include costs of sale, administrative costs and public benefits
to the county:
   (A)   Intergovernmental transfer. Without competition, by transfer or sale
to another government department or public agency;
   (B)   Auction. By publicly noticed auction to the highest bidder;
   (C)   Bids. By publicly noticed invitation to bid;
   (D)   Liquidation sale. By liquidation sale using a commercially recognized
third party liquidator selected in accordance with these rules for the award of
personal services contracts;
   (E)   Fixed-price sale. The County Administrator may establish a selling
price based upon an independent appraisal or published schedule of values
generally accepted by the insurance industry, schedule and publicly notice a
sale date and sell to the first buyer meeting the sales terms;
   (F)   Trade-in. By trade-in, in conjunction with acquisition of other price-
based items under a competitive solicitation. The solicitation shall require
the offer to state the total value assigned to the surplus property to be
traded; and
   (G)   Donation. By donation to any organization operating within or
providing a service to state residents, which is recognized by the Internal
Revenue Service as an organization described in I.R.C. § 501(c)(3), as amended.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.071 DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY WITH MINIMAL VALUE.
   Surplus personal property which has a value of less than $500, or for which
the costs of sale are likely to exceed sale proceeds, may be disposed of by any
means determined to be cost-effective, including by disposal as waste. The
employee making the disposal shall make a record of the value of the item and
the manner of disposal.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.072 PERSONAL-USE ITEMS.
   An item (or indivisible set) of specialized and personal use with a current
value of less than $100 may be sold to the employee or retired or terminated
employee for whose use it was purchased. These items may be sold for fair
market value without bid and by a process deemed most efficient by the County
Administrator.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.073 CONVEYANCE TO PURCHASER.
   Upon the consummation of a sale of surplus personal property, the county
shall make, execute and deliver a bill of sale or similar instrument signed on
behalf of the county conveying the property in question to the purchaser and
delivering possession, or the right to take possession, of the property to the
purchaser.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
PROTEST AND APPEAL PROCEDURES
§ 35.085 APPEAL OF DEBARMENT OR PRE-QUALIFICATION DECISION.
   (A)   Debarment and disqualification. The County Administrator, department
director, elected official or department head responsible for a solicitation
may debar prospective offerers pursuant to O.R.S. 279A.110 or after providing
notice and the opportunity for a hearing pursuant to O.R.S. 279B.130.
Notwithstanding the limitation in O.R.S. 279B.130(1)(b) on debarment terms, the
county may determine a previously debarred offerer is not responsible prior to
award. The county may attribute the improper conduct of any person having a
contract with a prospective offerer to the prospective offerer for debarment
purposes if the impropriety occurred in connection with the person’s duty for
or on behalf of, or with the knowledge, approval or acquiescence of, the
prospective offerer. The County Administrator, department director, elected
official or department head may disqualify or deny pre-qualification to any
person pursuant to O.R.S. 279C.440 and other state or federal law.
   (B)   Right to hearing. Any person who has been debarred from competing for
the county’s contracts or for whom pre-qualification has been denied, revoked
or revised may appeal the county’s decision to the Board of Commissioners as
provided in this section.
   (C)   Filing of appeal. The person shall file a written notice of appeal
with the County Administrator within five business days after the prospective
contractor’s receipt of notice of the determination of debarment or denial of
pre-qualification.
   (D)   Notification of Board of Commissioners. The County Administrator shall
notify the Board of Commissioners of the notice of appeal immediately upon the
county’s receipt.
   (E)   Hearing. The procedure for appeal from a debarment or denial,
revocation or revision of pre-qualification shall be as follows:
      (1)   Promptly upon receipt of notice of appeal, the county shall notify
the appellant of the date, time and place of the hearing;
      (2)   The Board of Commissioners shall conduct the hearing and decide the
appeal within 30 days after receiving notice of the appeal from the County
Administrator; and
      (3)   At the hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall reconsider
(without regard to the underlying decision giving rise to the appeal) the
notice of debarment, or the notice of denial, revocation or revision of pre-
qualification, the standards of responsibility upon which the decision on pre-
qualification was based, or the reasons listed for debarment, and any evidence
provided by the parties.
   (F)   Decision. The Board of Commissioners shall set forth in writing the
reasons for the decision.
   (G)   Costs. The Board of Commissioners may allocate its costs for the
hearing between the appellant and the county.
      (1)   The allocation shall be based upon facts found by the Board of
Commissioners and stated in the Board of Commissioners’ decision that, in the
Board of Commissioners’ opinion, warrant such allocation of costs.
      (2)   If the Board of Commissioners does not allocate costs, the costs
shall be paid by the appellant if the decision is upheld or by the county if
the decision is overturned.
   (H)   Judicial review. The decision of the Board of Commissioners may be
reviewed only upon a petition filed in the state circuit court for the county
within 15 days after the date of the Board of Commissioners’ decision. The
appeal must be filed in accordance with all applicable state law and trial
court procedures.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.086 PROTESTS AND JUDICIAL REVIEW OF SPECIAL PROCUREMENTS.
   An affected person may protest the request for approval of a special
procurement as provided in this section.
   (A)   Delivery and late protests. An affected person shall deliver a written
protest to the County Administrator within seven days after the first date of
public notice of a proposed special procurement, unless a different period is
provided in the public notice.
      (1)   The written protest shall include a fee in an amount established in
a schedule adopted by the County Administrator to cover the costs of processing
the protest.
      (2)   A protest submitted after the timeframe established under this
division (A) is untimely and shall not be considered.
   (B)   Content of protest. The written protest shall include:
      (1)   Identification of the requested special procurement;
      (2)   A detailed statement of the legal and factual grounds for the
protest;
      (3)   Evidence or documentation supporting the grounds on which the
protest is based;
      (4)   A description of the resulting harm to the affected person; and
      (5)   The relief requested.
   (C)   Additional information. The County Administrator may allow any person
to respond to the protest in any manner the County Administrator deems
appropriate by giving such persons written notice of the time and manner
whereby any response shall be delivered.
   (D)   County response. The County Administrator shall issue a written
disposition of the protest in a timely manner.
      (1)   If the County Administrator upholds the protest in whole or in
part, the County Administrator may, in the County Administrator’s sole
discretion, implement the protest in the approval of the special procurement,
deny the request for approval of the special procurement or revoke any approval
of the special procurement.
      (2)   If the County Administrator upholds the protest in whole or in
part, the county shall refund the fee required to be delivered with the
protest.
   (E)   Judicial review. An affected person may not seek judicial review of a
denial of a request for a special procurement.
      (1)   Before seeking judicial review of the approval of a special
procurement, an affected person shall exhaust all administrative remedies.
      (2)   Judicial review shall be in accordance with O.R.S. 279B.400.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.087 PROTESTS AND JUDICIAL REVIEW OF SOLE-SOURCE PROCUREMENTS.
   An affected person may protest the determination goods or services, or a
class of goods or services are available from only one source as provided in
this section.
   (A)   Delivery and late protests. An affected person shall deliver a written
protest to the County Administrator within seven days after the first date of
public notice of a proposed sole-source procurement is placed on the county’s
website, unless a different period is provided in the public notice.
      (1)   The written protest shall include a fee in an amount established in
a schedule adopted by the Board of Commissioners to cover the costs of
processing the protest.
      (2)   A protest submitted after the timeframe established under this
division (A) is untimely and shall not be considered.
   (B)   Content of protest. The written protest shall include:
      (1)   A detailed statement of the legal and factual grounds for the
protest;
      (2)   Evidence or documentation supporting the grounds on which the
protest is based;
      (3)   A description of the resulting harm to the affected person; and
      (4)   The relief requested.
   (C)   Additional information. The County Administrator may allow any person
to respond to the protest in any manner the County Administrator deems
appropriate by giving such person written notice of the time and manner whereby
any response shall be delivered.
   (D)   County Administrator response. The County Administrator shall issue a
written disposition of the protest in a timely manner.
      (1)   If the County Administrator upholds the protest in whole or in
part, the proposed sole-source contract shall not be awarded.
      (2)   If the County Administrator upholds the protest in whole or in
part, the county shall refund the fee required to be delivered with the
protest.
   (E)   Judicial review. An affected person may not seek judicial review of an
election not to make a sole-source procurement.
      (1)   Before seeking judicial review of the approval of a sole-source
procurement, an affected person shall exhaust all administrative remedies.
      (2)   Judicial review shall be in accordance with O.R.S. 279B.400.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.088 PROTESTS AND JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PERSONAL SERVICES PROCUREMENTS.
   An affected person may protest the procurement of a personal services
contract as provided in this section.
   (A)   Delivery. Unless otherwise specified in the solicitation document, the
protest shall be in writing and delivered to the County Administrator.
      (1)   The written protest shall include a fee in an amount established in
a schedule adopted by the Board of Commissioners to cover the costs of
processing the protest.
      (2)   Protests of the procurement of a specific contract as a personal
services contract shall be made prior to closing.
      (3)   Protests to the award or an intent to award a personal services
contract shall be made within seven days after issuance of the intent to award
or, if no notice of intent to award is given, within 48 hours after award.
      (4)   Protests submitted after the timeframe established under this
division (A) are untimely and shall not be considered.
   (B)   Contents of protest. The written protest shall specify all legal or
factual grounds for the protest as follows:
      (1)   A person may protest:
         (a)   The solicitation itself on the grounds the contract is not a
personal services contract or was otherwise in violation of these rules or
applicable law; or
         (b)   The award or intent to award on the grounds:
            1.   All proposals ranked higher than the affected persons are
nonresponsive;
            2.   The county failed to conduct the evaluation of proposals in
accordance with the criteria or processes described in the solicitation
document;
            3.   The county abused its discretion in rejecting the affected
person’s proposal as nonresponsive; or
            4.   The evaluation of proposals or the subsequent determination of
award is otherwise in violation of these rules or applicable law.
      (2)   The protest shall identify and include:
         (a)   The specific provision of these rules or applicable law alleged
to have been violated;
         (b)   All evidence or supporting documentation supporting its grounds;
         (c)   A description of the resulting harm to the affected person; and
         (d)   The relief requested.
   (C)   Additional information. The County Administrator may allow any person
to respond to the protest in any manner the County Administrator deems
appropriate by giving such person written notice of the time and manner whereby
any response shall be delivered.
   (D)   County Administrator response. The County Administrator shall issue a
written disposition of the protest in a timely manner.
      (1)   If the County Administrator upholds the protest in whole or in
part, the proposed personal services contract procurement shall be cancelled or
the contract shall not be awarded, as the case may be.
      (2)   If the County Administrator upholds the protest in whole or in
part, the county shall refund the fee required to be delivered with the
protest.
   (E)   Judicial review. Before seeking judicial review, an affected person
shall exhaust all administrative remedies. Judicial review shall be in
accordance with O.R.S. 279B.420.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
§ 35.089 PROTESTS OF COOPERATIVE PROCUREMENTS.
   Protests of a cooperative procurement process, contents of a solicitation
document or award may be filed with the county only if the county is the
administering agency and under the applicable procedure described herein.
(Ord. ORD-2023-5, passed 7-19-2023)
APPENDIX A: FORM TEMPLATE FOR VERBAL QUOTES AND PROPOSALS
   Morrow County
   Competitive Verbal Quotes & Proposals
Use this form to document requests for price quotes. Submit completed form to
the Finance Department along with purchase confirmation.
PREPARED BY:                                     DATE PREPARED:
                                    
DEPARTMENT:                                     DATE QUOTES DUE:
                                
PHONE NO:                                          TIME QUOTES DUE:
                                    
VENDOR 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VENDOR 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VENDOR 3
Name                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Name                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Name                                                      
Address                                                                                                                                                                             �Address                                                                                                                                                                             �Address                                                                                                                                                                                 
Phone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Phone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Phone                                                     
Fax                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fax                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fax                                                        
Contact                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Contact                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Contact                                                  
Fob                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fob                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fob                                                        
Terms                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Terms                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Terms                                                    
Delivery                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Delivery                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Delivery                                                 
Comments/specifications:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                          Vendor 1         Vendor 2         Vendor 3
Item Description Quantity Unit Price Total Unit Price Total Unit Price Total
                                     Price            Price            Price
                          Vendor 1         Vendor 2         Vendor 3
Item Description Quantity Unit Price Total Unit Price Total Unit Price Total
                                     Price            Price            Price
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
Totals
 
APPENDIX B: FORM TEMPLATE FOR INFORMAL WRITTEN SOLICITATION
 
   REQUEST FOR QUOTATION
   ***THIS IS NOT AN ORDER***
Return To:                   by (time) on (date) via mail or fax (xxx)xxx-xxxx
Description:
                                                                                      
Requested Availability Date of Product:
                                               
Contact:                   (xxx)xxx-xxxx
   Any reference to brand names is meant as descriptive not restrictive.
   Alternate bids will be considered on products, which meet or exceed products
indicated on quote.
   Vendor is to mark clearly alternate proposals.
“OR EQUAL”: Any brand name listed in the specifications as “or equal” or “or
equivalent” shall establish the minimum requirements for quality, utility,
durability, function, purpose, etc. Other product brands may be offered that
are equal to or better than the product brand name. Bidder may show cost
differences, alternates and options in the space provided in the quote. This
clause is not meant to be restrictive, but to set the minimum standard. COUNTY
SHALL DETERMINE, IN ITS SOLE DISCRETION, WHETHER A PRODUCT OFFERED IS “EQUAL.”
When the designation is “or equal” or “equivalent,” the county shall make its
decision after Bid Closing.
Vendor Name                   Federal ID No:                   
Address:                   Phone:                  
City, State, Zip:                   Fax:                   
   All Pricing Must Be Held Firm For 30 Days
 
DESCRIPTION QUANTITY PRICE PER UNIT TOTAL
 
                                  
 
 
 
CHAPTER 36: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Administrative Fees
   
36.01   Title
   
36.02   Fees for county services
   
36.03   Basis for amount of fees
   
36.04   Fee establishment procedure
   
36.05   Severability
Fee Schedule for Court-Appointed Attorneys
   
36.20   Title
   
36.21   Hourly rate designated
   
36.22   Travel expenses
   
36.23   Fee schedule; maximum compensation
Senior Center Revenue Sharing
   
36.35   Title
   
36.36   Declaration of concern
   
36.37   Public purpose
   
36.38   Construction; disbursement of funds
   
36.39   Funding limitations
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
§ 36.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Morrow County Fee Schedule
Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 3.04.010) (Ord. MC-C-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 36.02 FEES FOR COUNTY SERVICES.
   The County Board of Commissioners is empowered to establish fees for
services performed in the ordinary course of business by county employees,
subject to the limitations set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.020) (Ord. MC-C-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 36.03 BASIS FOR AMOUNT OF FEES.
   In establishing fees to be assessed, the Board shall confer with appropriate
county employees. Fees shall be reasonably calculated to recover no more than
the actual cost to the county for the particular service performed.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.030) (Ord. MC-C-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 36.04 FEE ESTABLISHMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners shall, by order, establish a
schedule of fees which shall be reviewed and, if necessary, revised on or about
August 1 of each succeeding year.
   (B)   In addition to the annual revision provided for in division (A) above,
the Board may from time to time add or delete fees from the fee schedule.
   (C)   In no event shall any fee be increased until one year has passed from
the establishment or most recent increase of that particular fee, whichever
occurred later.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.040) (Ord. MC-C-1-83, passed - -1983)
§ 36.05 SEVERABILITY.
   In the event that any fee established or revised in accordance with this
chapter is found to be contrary to law, or is otherwise made to be invalid, the
remaining fees shall continue to be in effect.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.050) (Ord. MC-C-1-83, passed - -1983)
FEE SCHEDULE FOR COURT-APPOINTED ATTORNEYS
§ 36.20 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Court-Appointed Fee
Schedule Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 3.08.010) (Ord. MC-C-3-84, passed - -1984)
§ 36.21 HOURLY RATE DESIGNATED.
   Compensation for attorneys appointed to represent parties in the county
justice court and the county juvenile court shall be at the rate of $30 per
hour. Exceptions to this hourly rate shall be made only upon the prior written
order of the County Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.020) (Ord. MC-C-3-84, passed - -1984)
§ 36.22 TRAVEL EXPENSES.
   Travel expenses for court-appointed attorneys shall be reimbursed only in
the following manner: $22.50 per hour shall be allowed for travel time, with
payment of $0.19 per mile of travel. Any additional travel expense shall
require the prior written approval of the County Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.030) (Ord. MC-C-3-84, passed - -1984)
§ 36.23 FEE SCHEDULE; MAXIMUM COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The following schedule is adopted as the maximum amount of time which
may be billed for misdemeanors in justice court, or for matters in juvenile
court:
      (1)   Cases terminating in adjudications (trials or juvenile hearings):
five hours;
      (2)   Cases terminating by means other than trial or adjudication in
juvenile court: two hours;
      (3)   Cases involving two or more charges arising out of the same act and
transaction:
         (a)   Terminating by trial: seven and one-half hours; and
         (b)   Terminating by other means: three hours.
      (4)   In addition to the hourly rate, for each full day in trial, maximum
time allowed: five and one-half hours; and
      (5)   Probation revocation hearings: two hours.
   (B)   No expenditure of attorney time in excess of the above schedules will
be compensated without the prior approval of the County Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.040) (Ord. MC-C-3-84, passed - -1984)
SENIOR CENTER REVENUE SHARING
§ 36.35 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Senior Center/
Revenue Sharing Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 2.32.010) (Ord. MC-C-4-83, passed - -1983; Ord. MC-C-2-85,
passed - -1985)
§ 36.36 DECLARATION OF CONCERN.
   The county has previously declared that the subject of adequate facilities
for senior citizens, in general, is a matter of county concern. This subchapter
reaffirms that statement of county concern, and more specifically, that the
construction and implementation of a center for senior citizens in Heppner is
deemed to be a matter of county concern.
(Prior Code, § 2.32.020) (Ord. MC-C-4-83, passed - -1983; Ord. MC-C-2-85,
passed - -1985)
§ 36.37 PUBLIC PURPOSE.
   It is further ordained that provision of federal revenue sharing money to
the Senior Citizens Center Board of Directors, Inc. of Heppner, Oregon, a
private, nonprofit corporation, to aid in their construction of a senior
citizen center would be a public purpose. It is deemed to be a public purpose
by virtue of the fact that construction of the center will benefit the public
health, safety, general welfare, security, prosperity and contentment of all
the citizens of the county.
(Prior Code, § 2.32.030) (Ord. MC-C-4-83, passed - -1983; Ord. MC-C-2-85,
passed - -1985)
§ 36.38 CONSTRUCTION; DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   Because construction of a senior citizen center has been found to be a
matter of county concern, and because providing money to such effort would aid
a public purpose, the County Board of Commissioners is authorized to disburse
money to the Senior Citizens Center Board of Directors, Inc. of Heppner,
Oregon, for construction of a center, subject to the limitations found in §
36.39.
(Prior Code, § 2.32.040) (Ord. MC-C-4-83, passed - -1983; Ord. MC-C-2-85,
passed - -1985)
§ 36.39 FUNDING LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Any moneys disbursed under §
36.38 shall be provided by resolution, from uncommitted federal revenue sharing
resources. In consideration for disbursement of moneys, the county shall obtain
the grantee’s written agreement to use all money provided for construction of
the senior citizen center and for no other purpose. The county shall also
obtain grantee’s agreement to abide by federal revenue sharing expenditure
guidelines, including, but not limited to, full compliance with the Davis-Bacon
minimum wage law. The grantee shall also be required to agree that operation of
the senior citizen center shall be consistent with federal and state civil
rights laws.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to confer upon the county
operational jurisdiction over the senior center. The written agreement between
the county and the Senior Citizens Center Board of Directors, Inc. of Heppner,
Oregon, shall reflect that the latter is acting independently, and that the
county’s sole involvement is to provide funding.
(Prior Code, § 2.32.050) (Ord. MC-C-4-83, passed - -1983; Ord. MC-C-2-85,
passed - -1985)
CHAPTER 37: PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS FOR
MEASURE 7 CLAIMS
Section
   
37.01   Purpose
   
37.02   Definitions
   
37.03   Exhaustion of administrative remedies
   
37.04   Application requirements
   
37.05   Application submittal
   
37.06   Administrative review
   
37.07   Board of Commissioners determination
   
37.08   Review standards
   
37.09   Evidence
   
37.10   Miscellaneous provisions
   
37.11   Judicial review
§ 37.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Provide procedures for the submittal, processing and adjudicating
applications for compensation submitted pursuant to Article I, § 18 of the
state Constitution (Ballot Measure 7);
      (2)   Promote the timely, orderly and efficient consideration of such
claims;
      (3)   Ensure that sufficient information is available to the county to
thoroughly review such claims and make a decision that addresses the interests
of the property owner under Ballot Measure 7 and the interests of the public in
protecting limited public financial resources; and
      (4)   Establish an adequate record for judicial review of any decision
made hereunder.
   (B)   This chapter is not intended in any way to expand the rights or
remedies available to property owners under Ballot Measure 7 or any other law.
Neither shall it be construed so as to contravene the express terms of Ballot
Measure 7. This chapter in no way amends, repeals, exempts or implements the
county’s Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, statewide
planning goals or any other land use statute, rule, regulation or policy.
(Ord. MC-C-3-00, passed 12-6-2000)
§ 37.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADOPTED. The date a regulation is enacted or passed by the County Board of
Commissioners.
   APPLIED. The date of a county administrative action or final county quasi-
judicial decision that gives effect to a regulation concerning a specific
property.
   APPRAISAL. An appraisal approved by an appraiser licensed or certified by
the Appraiser Certification and Licensure Board or the state or an appraiser
registered under state law.
   EXEMPT REGULATION. A regulation that:
      (1)   Is a historically and commonly recognized nuisance law (Article I,
§ 18(b) of the state Constitution);
      (2)   Implements a requirement of federal law, including the Endangered
Species Act, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531 et seq., Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq., Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.,
Telecommunications Act (amending various sections of Titles 15, 18 and 47, Pub.
L. 104-104, Sec. 1(a), Feb. 8, 1996, 110 Stat. 56), Wild and Scenic Waterways
Act, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 1271-1287, National Environmental Policy Act, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 4321(a) et seq., Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
and Liability Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq., Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., and Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act of 1978, being 30 U.S.C. Ch. 25, §§ 1201 et seq., to the
minimum extent required; or
      (3)   Prohibits selling pornography, performing nude dancing, selling
alcoholic beverages or other controlled substances or operating a casino or
gaming parlor (Article I, § 18(c) of the state Constitution).
   FIRST ENFORCED. The date of an administrative action to enforce a
regulation.
   IMPOSED. The date a regulation is adopted, first enforced or applied to a
real property.
   PROPERTY. Any real property and any structure built or sited on the
property, aggregate or other removable minerals and any forest product or other
crop grown on the property.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The legal owner(s) of record as shown in the deed records of
the county, including the purchaser(s) under a duly recorded land sales
contract.
   REDUCTION IN VALUE. The difference in the fair market value of the property
before and after the application of the regulation and shall include the net
cost to the land owner of an affirmative obligation to protect, provide or
preserve wildlife habitat, natural areas, wetlands, ecosystems, scenery, open
space, historical, archaeological or cultural resources or low income housing.
   REGULATION. A county ordinance or other enforceable legislative enactment of
the county.
   RESTRICTS THE USE. A regulation that restricts the type of use of private
real property, but does not include a regulation that effects either the extent
or location of a use, a land division, subdivision or a regulation that governs
development standards or construction.
(Ord. MC-C-3-00, passed 12-6-2000)
§ 37.03 EXHAUSTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.
   No application for compensation pursuant to Ballot Measure 7 shall be filed
until the property owner has exhausted all remedies of applications for
planning/zoning changes, permits, variances and/or modifications.
(Ord. MC-C-3-00, passed 12-6-2000)
§ 37.04 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An application for compensation pursuant to Ballot Measure 7 shall be
filed with the County Planning Department.
   (B)   At a minimum, an application for compensation shall include the
following:
      (1)   The signature of all owners of the property. One owner or other
person shall be designated as the claimant who shall serve as contact for the
application for purposes of all correspondence and notices;
      (2)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners;
      (3)   A current assessor’s map or survey clearly delineating the entire
property that is the subject of the claim, together with the street address and
assessor’s map and lot reference;
      (4)   A preliminary title report for the subject property disclosing all
interests and encumbrances of record. The report shall have been issued no more
than 30 days prior to filing the application;
      (5)   A copy of the documents whereby the owner(s) claim ownership of the
property;
      (6)   A complete list of all other interests or encumbrances, including,
but not limited to, leases and encroachments, of which the property owners are
aware or have reason to believe may exist;
      (7)   A specific and detailed reference to each and every regulation that
the owner(s) assert restricts the use of the property and has the affect of
reducing the value of the property. Regulations shall be identified by
ordinance number or with similar specificity. Each regulation cited shall be
accompanied by a statement addressing whether such regulation is mandated by
state or federal statute, rule, regulation, goal, guideline or other law;
      (8)   A specific and detailed explanation as to how and why each and
every section of the regulation restricts the use of the property and impacts
the value of the property;
      (9)   A complete list of all compensation claims, development or permit
applications previously filed with any regulatory body relating to the property
and any enforcement actions taken by any governmental body as regards the
property;
      (10)   Copies of all appraisals, market studies, economic feasibility
studies, development schemes, environmental assessments or similar studies
relating to the property;
      (11)   All other documents that the property owner intends to rely upon
in support of the claim;
      (12)   Appraisals meeting the standards set forth in this chapter;
      (13)   A process fee of $300; and
      (14)   A sworn statement that the information submitted is true and
complete to the best knowledge and belief of the claimant.
   (C)   All claimant’s appraisals shall comply with the following:
      (1)   For claims under $10,000, the appraisal shall be prepared by a
state certified general appraiser. For claims of $10,000 or more, the appraisal
shall be prepared by and in accordance with the standards of, an MAI or SRWA
appraiser;
      (2)   Set forth the appraisal assignment, including a complete list of
all regulation evaluated;
      (3)   Include a description of the area and a detailed description of the
subject property;
      (4)   A statement of the highest and best use of the property assuming
applicability of the regulation(s) and a corresponding valuation of the
property;
      (5)   A statement of the highest and best use of the property prior to
the regulation and a corresponding valuation of the property;
      (6)   Set forth the date of appraisal and an explanation as to how it was
reached; and
      (7)   Provide a detailed explanation of the facts, methodology and
analysis used to reach the appraiser’s opinion as to the reduction in fair
market value caused solely by the application of the regulation(s) and as
otherwise provided under Ballot Measure 7. To the extent practicable, the
opinion of reduction in fair market value shall be apportioned among each
regulation such that the county may separately consider the alleged impact on
fair market value of each regulation.
(Ord. MC-C-3-00, passed 12-6-2000)
§ 37.05 APPLICATION SUBMITTAL.
   (A)   The application shall be considered filed on the business day that it
is physically received in the County Planning Department.
   (B)   Within ten days of filing, the Planning Department shall issue a
notice to the claimant stating what, if any, items must be submitted to meet
the requirements of §
37.03. The claimant shall have 20 days to submit the required information.
   (C)   The application shall be reviewed notwithstanding whether the claimant
has submitted the required information. The county, however, shall be entitled
to exclude from the record and not consider any information not submitted as
provided for in §§
37.03 and
37.04.
(Ord. MC-C-3-00, passed 12-6-2000)
§ 37.06 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   (A)   The Planning Department shall conduct an informal review of the
application and make a recommendation as to whether to deny the claim, grant
the claim in whole or in part and, if granted, what remedy should be provided.
   (B)   The Planning Department shall be entitled to obtain an appraisal or
rely on such other information deemed relevant and appropriate, including
requesting additional information from the claimant. The claimant shall have an
obligation to provide all requested information within five business days. The
claimant shall not be entitled to place into the record any information
requested but not provided. All information relied on shall be placed in the
record and shall be available for review by the claimant except for material
privileged or otherwise exempt from disclosure as provided by law.
   (C)   The Planning Department shall provide the claimant with a copy of the
recommendation and notice of a bearing before the County Board of Commissioners
at least ten days prior to the hearing.
(Ord. MC-C-3-00, passed 12-6-2000)
§ 37.07 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS DETERMINATION.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners shall conduct a hearing on the claim
as follows.
      (1)   The applicant shall have such time as the County Board of
Commissioners deems appropriate, but not less than 30 minutes, to present
evidence and argument in support of the claim.
      (2)   The Planning Department or other representative shall have the same
amount of time to present evidence and argument as to why the claim should be
denied.
      (3)   The County Board of Commissioners may, but is not required to, hear
testimony from other interested persons.
      (4)   The applicant shall have such time as the County Board of
Commissioners provides, but no less than five minutes, to rebut.
      (5)   The County Board of Commissioners shall adopt written findings and
conclusions setting forth its determination as to the validity of the claim and
the appropriate remedy, if any.
   (B)   The applicant and the opposing party may request that the County Board
of Commissioners admit new evidence. The County Board of Commissioners shall
have sole discretion as to whether to admit evidence, however, material
required to be submitted as part of the application, or that the Planning
Department should have obtained at the time of making its recommendation shall
not be admitted unless the County Board of Commissioners finds that
extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the moving party prevented
earlier submittal. The County Board of Commissioners may condition the receipt
of new information from the applicant on the applicant stipulating to an
extension of time for consideration of the materials and a waiver of the 90-day
provisions of Ballot Measure 7.
   (C)   Either party may require that the appraiser or other person relied
upon by the other party attend the hearing with all relevant materials and be
available for questioning from the County Board of Commissioners or cross-
examination by providing at least five days’ prior written notice to the party.
If the person is not made available, the County Board of Commissioners may
strike from the record any information provided by the person at any stage
herein.
   (D)   All testimony shall be under oath. The rules of evidence shall not
apply, but the County Board of Commissioners may consider the reliability and
credibility of the evidence as it deems appropriate. The County Board of
Commissioners may exclude repetitious, irrelevant, unduly prejudicial or
immaterial evidence.
(Ord. MC-C-3-00, passed 12-6-2000)
§ 37.08 REVIEW STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Planning Department and the County Board of Commissioners shall
consider the following in adjudicating a claim:
      (1)   Whether the regulation(s) at issue was adopted, first enforced or
applied after the current owner(s) became the owner(s);
      (2)   What regulations were in place prior to the time determined to
govern the claim;
      (3)   What regulations, if any; are determined to restrict the use of the
property and have the effect of reducing the value of the property as provided
in Measure 7;
      (4)   What regulations presented, if any, do not restrict the use of the
property;
      (5)   The impacts of any of the exceptions set forth in Ballot Measure 7;
      (6)   The availability of public financial resources to pay the claim in
consideration of competing priorities in the public interest;
      (7)   The impact of removing, not enforcing or otherwise permitting the
use on other properties and the public interest; and
      (8)   Consideration of other factors as are determined to be in the
interest of the property owner and the public in adjudicating the claim.
   (B)   The decision of the County Board of Commissioners shall be deemed
final upon execution of a written order. The order shall be mailed to the
claimant within two business days following execution. In the event that the
order provides for compensation, it shall be deemed tendered on the date of
execution of the order.
   (C)   Unless the applicant obtains extensions as provided for herein,
failure of the County Board of Commissioners to make a decision on the claim
within 180 days of receipt of the application shall be deemed a denial. If the
County Board of Commissioners grants the claim and provides for compensation as
the remedy, the applicant shall be entitled to reasonable costs and attorneys’
fees if compensation is not paid within 90 days of receipt of the application.
The applicant shall have 14 days after the decision to submit a detailed
statement which shall be reviewed and, if approved, paid within 30 days of
receipt of the statement by the county.
(Ord. MC-C-3-00, passed 12-6-2000)
§ 37.09 EVIDENCE.
   The burden of proof of any material element of the claim shall be on the
applicant(s) for all matters required to be shown that the applicant is
entitled to compensation and shall be upon the county to show that the
regulation(s) are exempt from the obligation for compensation.
(Ord. MC-C-3-00, passed 12-6-2000)
§ 37.10 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners may continue its hearing to a date
and time certain without providing further notice.
   (B)   The applicant(s) shall be entitled to one 30-day continuance at any
time in the review process provided that the request is presented in writing
and accompanied by a commensurate waiver of the 90-day Ballot Measure 7
deadline containing the signatures of all the property owners.
   (C)   The applicant(s) shall be entitled to request additional continuances
on the same terms as set forth above. Continuances shall not be unreasonably
denied.
(Ord. MC-C-3-00, passed 12-6-2000)
§ 37.11 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   (A)   Review of a decision of the County Board of Commissioners shall be
solely by writ of review pursuant to O.R.S. Chapter 34 (1999 Replacement Part).
   (B)   The prevailing party on review shall be entitled to reasonable
attorneys’ fees and costs as determined by the court.
   (C)   Failure of the applicant to exhaust the remedy provided for herein
shall be a bar to judicial review.
(Ord. MC-C-3-00, passed 12-6-2000)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
   
50.01   Title
   
50.02   Definitions
   
50.03   Zoning permits
   
50.04   Violations
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Morrow County Utilities Ordinance” and
may be so cited and pleaded.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.010) (Ord. MC U-1, passed - -1979)
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. A structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
   COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The members of the County Board of
Commissioners for Morrow County, Oregon.
   SERVICE. Providing or attaching to any newly constructed building or newly
placed mobile home or prefabricated building the initial line, hookup or
metering device to provide electricity.
   UTILITY. Any public or private corporation or company which supplies the
public or a group of individuals with electrical permits.
   ZONING PERMIT. A zoning permit issued subject to the regulations as
described in the County Zoning Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.020) (Ord. MC U-1, passed - -1979)
§ 50.03 ZONING PERMITS.
   (A)   Prerequisite to providing services. No utility shall provide any
service to any newly constructed building or newly placed mobile home or
prefabricated building outside the limits of any incorporated city in the
county until such utility has been furnished with a copy of the zoning permit
which has been issued for such newly constructed building or newly placed
mobile home or prefabricated building.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.030)
   (B)   Copies furnished. When a zoning permit is issued pursuant to the
County Zoning Ordinance, the issuer shall furnish to the successful applicant
copies in an amount sufficient for such applicant to provide the utility with a
copy.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.040)
(Ord. MC U-1, passed - -1979)
§ 50.04 VIOLATIONS.
   The procedure on violation of this chapter shall be that procedure set out
in the County Zoning Ordinance; such remedies shall not exclude any other
remedies in this chapter or otherwise provided.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.050) (Ord. MC U-1, passed - -1979)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Each violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in O.R.S.
Chapter 215 and the County Zoning Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.060) (Ord. MC U-1, passed - -1979)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
Solid Waste Management Plan
   
51.01   Plan adopted
Solid Waste Management Ordinance
   
51.15   Title
   
51.16   Definitions
   
51.17   Purpose and policy
   
51.18   County responsibilities
   
51.19   Public responsibilities
   
51.20   Solid Waste Advisory Committee (SWAC)
   
51.21   Franchising of solid waste collection
   
51.22   Licensing for recycling
   
51.23   Licensing of solid waste disposal
   
51.24   Fees
   
51.25   Oversight and enforcement
Toxic Waste
   
51.40   Title
   
51.41   Definitions
   
51.42   Prohibitions
   
51.43   Administration and enforcement
   
51.44   Jurisdiction
 
   
51.99   Penalty
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN
§ 51.01 PLAN ADOPTED.
   The County Board of Commissioners adopts the County Solid Waste Management
Plan and any amendments thereto.
(Ord. MC-03-06, passed 4-19-2006)
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
§ 51.15 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Solid Waste Management Ordinance” and
shall be so cited and pleaded.
(Ord. MC-03-06, passed 4-19-2006)
§ 51.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words and
phrases not defined shall have the meaning commonly and ordinarily understood,
as determined by the Planning Director, Public Works Director, County Counsel
or the County Board of Commissioners.
   ACUTE HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any hazardous waste subject to stringent quantity
standards for accumulation and generation.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The department or entity which has been appointed by the
County Board of Commissioners to have the responsibility to administer the
county’s solid waste programs and agenda items.
   AFFECTED PERSON. A person or entity involved in the solid waste collection
service process, including, but not limited to, a recycling collection service,
disposal site permittee or owner, city, county and metropolitan service
district.
   AGRICULTURAL COMPOSTING. Composting as an agricultural operation (as defined
in O.R.S. 467.120(2)(a)) conducted on lands employed for farm use (as defined
in O.R.S. 215.203). AGRICULTURAL COMPOSTING OPERATIONS may include supplemental
feedstocks to aid in composting feedstocks generated on the farm.
   AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Residues from agricultural products generated by the
raising or harvesting of such products on farms or ranches.
   AGRONOMIC APPLICATION RATE. The term used to describe the rate of biosolids
application that matches nitrogen requirements for a specific crop on an annual
basis.
   BATTERY. One or more cells, each consisting of a positive electrode, a
negative electrode and an electrolyte.
      (1)   ALKALINE MANGANESE BATTERY. A battery consisting of manganese
dioxide positive electrode material, zinc negative electrode material and an
alkaline electrolyte.
      (2)   NICKEL CADMIUM BATTERY. A battery consisting of nickel positive
electrode material and cadmium negative electrode material.
      (3)   SMALL LEAD BATTERY. A battery consisting of positive and negative
electrode materials which are lead or compounds thereof, used in non-vehicular
applications and weighing less than 25 pounds.
   BIOLOGICAL WASTE. Blood and blood products, excretions, exudates,
secretions, suctionings and other body fluids that cannot be directly discarded
into a municipal sewer system, and waste materials saturated with blood or body
fluids, but does not include diapers soiled with urine or feces.
   BIOSOLIDS. Solids derived from primary, secondary or advanced treatment of
domestic wastewater which have been treated through one or more controlled
processes that significantly reduce pathogens and reduce volatile solids or
chemically stabilize solids to the extent that they do not attract vectors.
   BONEYARD. The storage of inoperable vehicles and equipment used as a part
and piece replacement resource for maintaining currently operating vehicles and
equipment.
   CHEMICAL AGENTS. As used in O.R.S. 465.550 and 465.555:
      (1)   Blister agents, such as mustard gas;
      (2)   Nerve agents, such as Sarin and VX;
      (3)   Residues from demilitarization, treatment and testing of blister
agents; and
      (4)   Residues from demilitarization, treatment and testing of nerve
agents.
   CLEAN FILL. Material consisting of soil, rock, concrete, brick, building
block, tile or asphalt paving, which do not contain contaminants which could
adversely impact the waters of the state or public health. This term does not
include putrescible wastes, construction and demolition wastes and industrial
solid wastes.
   CLOSURE PERMIT. A document issued by the Department of Environmental Quality
bearing the signature of the Director of Environmental Quality or his or her
authorized representative which by its conditions authorizes the permittee to
complete active operations and requires the permittee to properly close a land
disposal site and maintain and monitor the site after closure for a period of
time specified by the Department of Environmental Quality.
   COLLECTION SERVICE. A service that provides for collection of solid waste or
recyclable material or both, but does not include that part of a business
operated under a certificate issued under O.R.S. 822.110.
   COLLECTION SERVICE OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Does not include a place to
which persons not residing on or occupying the property may deliver source
separated recyclable material.
   COLLECTION VEHICLE or TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE. Any vehicle used to collect or
transport waste or solid waste.
   COLLECTOR. The person who provides collection service.
   COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste generated by stores, offices, including
manufacturing and industry offices, restaurants, warehouses, schools, colleges,
universities, hospitals and other non-manufacturing entities, but does not
include solid waste from manufacturing activities. Solid waste from business,
manufacturing or processing activities in residential dwellings is also not
included.
   COMMITTEE. A local citizens advisory committee established under O.R.S.
459.320 and called the Solid Waste Advisory Committee (SWAC) which has duties
that include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Reviewing with the regional disposal site permittee, the regional
disposal site, including, but not limited to, siting, operation, closure and
long-term monitoring of the regional disposal site; and
      (2)   Providing a forum for citizen comments, questions and concerns
about the regional disposal site and promoting a dialogue between the community
in which the regional disposal site is located and the owner or operator of the
regional disposal site.
   COMPOST. The controlled biological decomposition of organic material (which
could be source separated from the municipal solid waste stream) or the product
resulting from such a process.
   COMPOSTING. The managed process of controlled biological decomposition of
organic or mixed solid waste. COMPOSTING may include amendments beneficial to
the composting process.
   COMPOSTING FACILITY. A site or facility which utilizes organic solid waste
or mixed solid waste to produce a useful product through a managed process of
controlled biological decomposition.
   CONDITIONALLY EXEMPT GENERATOR. A generator who generates 220 pounds or less
of hazardous waste per month and two and two-tenths pounds or less of acutely
hazardous waste per month.
   CONDITIONALLY EXEMPT SMALL QUANTITY GENERATOR. A person who generates a
hazardous waste but is conditionally exempt from certain regulations because
the waste is generated in quantities below the threshold adopted by the
Environmental Quality Commission pursuant to O.R.S. 466.020.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE. Solid waste resulting from the
construction, repair or demolition of buildings, roads and other structures and
debris from the clearing of land, but does not include clean fill when
separated from other construction and demolition wastes and used as fill
materials or otherwise land disposed. CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE
typically consists of materials, including concrete, bricks, bituminous
concrete, asphalt paving, untreated or chemically treated wood, glass, masonry,
roofing, siding, plaster, soils, rock, stumps, boulders, brush and other
similar material. This term does not include industrial solid waste and
municipal solid waste generated in residential or commercial activities
associated with construction and demolition activities.
   COUNTY, COUNTY COURT or BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The Morrow County Board of
Commissioners.
   COVER MATERIAL. Soil or other suitable material approved by the Department
of Environmental Quality that is placed over the top and side slopes of solid
wastes in a landfill.
   DEMILITARIZATION RESIDUE. Any solid waste generated by demilitarization
processes and activities defined in O.A.R. 340-100-0010(2)(h),(i), except for:
      (1)   Waste streams generated from processes or activities prior to the
introduction of nerve or blister agent in to the treatment unit; and
      (2)   Waste streams generated from maintenance or operation of non-agent
contaminated process utility systems.
   DEPARTMENT. The Morrow County Planning Department.
   DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY (DEQ). The state regulatory agency
responsible for protecting the quality of the state’s environment.
   DEPOT. The Umatilla Army Depot.
   DIGESTED SEWAGE SLUDGE. The concentrated sewage sludge that has decomposed
under controlled conditions of pH, temperature and mixing in a digester tank.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Morrow County Planning Department.
   DISPOSE or DISPOSAL. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of any waste into or on any land or water so that the waste
or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air
or discharged into any waters of the state.
   DISPOSAL SITE. Land and facilities used for the disposal, handling or
transfer of, or energy recovery, material recovery and recycling from solid
wastes, including, but not limited to, dumps, landfills, sludge lagoons, sludge
treatment facilities, disposal sites for septic tank pumping or cesspool
cleaning service, transfer stations, energy recovery facilities, incinerators
for solid waste delivered by the public or by a collection service, composting
plants and land and facilities previously used for solid waste disposal at a
land disposal site; but the term does not include a facility authorized by a
permit issued under O.R.S. 466.005 through 466.385 to store, treat or dispose
of both hazardous waste and solid waste; a facility subject to the permit
requirements of O.R.S. 468B.050; a site that is used by the owner or person in
control of the premises to dispose of soil, rock, concrete or other similar
non-decomposable material, unless the site is used by the public either
directly or through a collection service; or a site operated by a wrecker
issued a certificate under O.R.S. 822.110.
   DOMESTIC SOLID WASTE. Includes, but is not limited to, residential,
commercial and institutional wastes generated within this state. DOMESTIC SOLID
WASTE does not include:
      (1)   Sewage sludge or septic tank and cesspool pumpings;
      (2)   Building demolition or construction wastes and land clearing
debris, if delivered to a disposal site that is limited to those purposes;
      (3)   Source separated recyclable material or material recovered at the
disposal site;
      (4)   Waste going to an industrial waste facility;
      (5)   Waste received at an ash monofill from an energy recovery facility;
or
      (6)   Other material excluded by the Environmental Quality Commission in
order to support the policies of O.R.S. 459.015.
   ENERGY RECOVERY. Recovery in which all or a part of the solid waste
materials are processed to use the heat content or other forms of energy of or
from the material.
   FINANCIAL ASSURANCE. A plan for setting aside financial resources or
otherwise assuring that adequate funds are available to properly close and to
maintain and monitor a land disposal site after the site is closed according to
the requirements of a permit issued by the Department of Environmental Quality
and/or the county.
   FRANCHISE. A certificate, contract or license issued by the county
authorizing a person to provide solid waste management services, including, but
not limited to, collection, storage, transportation, operation of a transfer
station or regional disposal site and disposal at a sanitary landfill or
resource recovery facility or site.
      (1)   NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE. A franchise whereby more than one
franchised solid waste collector may serve a particular zone or region.
      (2)   JOINT FRANCHISE. A franchise for a joint service with another
collector who can provide supplemental service.
      (3)   EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE. An exclusive franchise for a particular zone
or area.
      (4)   TEMPORARY FRANCHISE. A franchise valid for a stated period
entitling a collector to serve a defined service area or customers for that
period.
   FULLY REGULATED GENERATOR. A generator who generates two and two-tenths
pounds or more, or stores more than 2,200 pounds of hazardous waste, as defined
by 40 C.F.R. part 261 in one calendar month; or generates more than or stores
at any one time more than two and two-tenths pounds of acute hazardous waste.
   GENERATOR. A person who last uses a material and makes it available for
disposal or recycling. It may also mean a person who, by virtue of ownership,
management or control, is responsible for causing or allowing to be caused the
creation of hazardous waste.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance or material that, by reason of its toxic,
caustic, corrosive, abrasive or otherwise injurious properties, may be
detrimental or deleterious to the health of any person handling or otherwise
coming into contact with such material or substance.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Discarded, useless or unwanted materials or residues and
other wastes that are defined as hazardous waste pursuant to O.R.S. Chapter
466.
   HOME COMPOSTING. Composting operated and controlled by the owner or person
in control of a single family dwelling unit and used to dispose of food waste
and yard debris.
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any discarded, useless or unwanted chemical,
material, substance or product that is or may be hazardous or toxic to the
public or the environment and is commonly used in or around households and is
generated by the household. HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE may include, but is not
limited to, some cleaners, solvents, pesticides and automotive and paint
products.
   ILLEGAL DUMP. A site where solid waste has been disposed of in a manner that
creates a public nuisance, health hazard, air or water pollution or other
environmental problem and is not permitted under O.A.R. 340, Divisions 93
through 97.
   IMMEDIATE SERVICE AREA. The county boundary.
   INCINERATOR. Any device used for the reduction of combustible solid wastes
by burning under conditions of controlled airflow and temperature.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any liquid, gaseous, radioactive or solid waste substance
or a combination thereof resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing,
trade or business or from the development or recovery of any natural resources.
Such waste may include, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the
following processes: electric power generation; fertilizer/agricultural
chemicals; food and related products/by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and
steel manufacturing; leather and leather products; nonferrous metals
manufacturing/foundries; organic chemicals; plastics and resins manufacturing;
pulp and paper industry; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone,
glass, clay and concrete products; textile manufacturing; transportation
equipment; water treatment; and timber products manufacturing.
   INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial
processes that is not a hazardous waste regulated under O.R.S. Chapters 465 and
466 or under Subtitle C of the federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6921 et seq. Such waste may include, but is not limited to,
waste resulting from the following processes: electric power generation;
fertilizer/agricultural chemicals; food and related products/by-products;
inorganic chemicals; iron and steel manufacturing; leather and leather
products; nonferrous metals manufacturing/foundries; organic chemicals;
plastics and resins manufacturing; pulp and paper industry; rubber and
miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay and concrete products;
textile manufacturing; transportation equipment; water treatment; and timber
products manufacturing. This term does not include construction/demolition
waste; municipal solid waste from manufacturing or industrial facilities such
as office or lunch room waste; or packaging material for products delivered to
the generator.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE LANDFILL. A landfill that receives only a specific type or
combination of industrial waste.
   INFECTIOUS WASTE.
      (1)   BIOLOGICAL WASTE. Includes blood and blood products, excretions,
exudates, secretions, suctionings and other body fluids that cannot be directly
discarded into a municipal sewer system and waste materials saturated with
blood or body fluids, but does not include diapers soiled with urine or feces.
      (2)   CULTURES AND STOCKS. Includes etiologic agents and associated
biologicals, including specimen cultures and dishes and devices used to
transfer, inoculate and mix cultures, wastes from production of biologicals and
serums and discarded live and attenuated vaccines. CULTURES does not include
throat and urine cultures.
      (3)   PATHOLOGICAL WASTE. Includes biopsy materials and all human
tissues, anatomical parts that emanate from surgery, obstetrical procedures,
autopsy and laboratory procedures and animal carcasses exposed to pathogens in
research and the bedding and other waste from such animals. PATHOLOGICAL WASTE
does not include teeth or formaldehyde or other preservative agents.
      (4)   SHARPS. Includes needles, IV tubing with needles attached, scalpel
blades, lancets, glass tubes that could be broken during handling and syringes
that have been removed from their original sterile containers.
   JUNK. Undesirable broken, discarded or accumulated objects, including, but
not limited to, appliances, building supplies, furniture, vehicles or parts of
vehicles, whether or not stored or for sale which create conditions which are
unsightly, unhealthy and/or unsafe.
   JUNK VEHICLE. Any rusted, wrecked, damaged, dismantled or partially
dismantled, inoperative or abandoned motor vehicle in such a condition that it
is economically infeasible to restore the vehicle to an operating condition.
   LANDFILL. A facility for the disposal of solid waste involving the placement
of solid waste on or beneath the land surface.
   LICENSE. A contract and/or agreement entered into by the County Board of
Commissioners to provide service pursuant to this subchapter and implementing
ordinances.
   LOW-RISK DISPOSAL SITE. A disposal site which, based upon its size, site
location and waste characteristics, the Department of Environmental Quality
determines to be unlikely to adversely impact the waters of the state or public
health.
   MATERIAL RECOVERY. Any process of obtaining from solid waste, by pre-
segregation or otherwise, materials which still have useful physical or
chemical properties and can be reused, recycled or composted for some purpose.
   MATERIAL RECOVERY FACILITY. A solid waste management facility that separates
materials for the purposes of recycling from an incoming mixed solid waste
stream by using manual and/or mechanical methods, or a facility at which
previously separated recyclables are collected.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Solid waste that is generated as a result of patient
diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human beings or animals.
   MONOFILL. A landfill or landfill cell into which only one type of waste may
be placed.
   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE LANDFILL. A discrete area of land or an excavation
that receives domestic solid waste and that is not a land application unit,
surface impoundment, injection well or waste pile, as those terms are defined
in 40 C.F.R. part 257. It may also receive other types of wastes such as
nonhazardous sludge, hazardous waste from conditionally exempt small quantity
generators, construction and demolition waste and industrial solid waste.
   ON-ROUTE or ON-SITE COLLECTION. Pick up of source separated recyclable
material from the generator at the place of generation.
   OPPORTUNITY TO RECYCLE. The city, county or metropolitan service district
responsible for solid waste management:
      (1)   (a)   Provides a place for collecting source separated recyclable
material located either at a disposal site or at another location more
convenient to the population being served and, if a city has a population of
4,000 or more, collection at least once a month of source separated recyclable
material from collection service customers within the city’s urban growth
boundary or, where applicable, within the urban growth boundary established by
a metropolitan service district; or
         (b)   Provides an alternative method which complies with rules of the
Environmental Quality Commission.
      (2)   Complies with the rates and program elements required under O.R.S.
459A.010.
   PUTRESCIBLE WASTE. Solid waste containing organic material that can be
rapidly decomposed by microorganisms, and which may give rise to foul smelling,
offensive products during such decomposition or which is capable of attracting
or providing food for birds and potential disease vectors such as rodents and
flies.
   RECOVERY RATE. The rate of recyclable material recovered from the amount of
solid waste disposed within the county. It is calculated by dividing the total
amount of material recovered by the total amount of solid waste generated.
   RECYCLE. The process of transforming solid waste materials into new products
in such a manner that the original products may lose their identity.
   RECYCLED MATERIAL. A material that would otherwise be destined for solid
waste disposal, having completed its intended end use or product life cycle.
RECYCLED MATERIAL does not include materials and by-products generated from,
and commonly reused within, an original manufacturing and fabrication process.
   REGIONAL DISPOSAL SITE. A disposal site that receives, or a proposed
disposal site that is designed to receive more than 75,000 tons of solid waste
a year from outside the immediate service area in which the disposal site is
located.
   RELOAD FACILITY. A facility or site that accepts and reloads containerized
solid waste materials for transport in the same container to another location.
   RESOURCE RECOVERY. The process of obtaining useful material or energy from
solid waste and includes energy recovery, material recovery and recycling.
   REUSE. The return of a commodity into the economic stream for use in the
same kind of application as before without change in its identity.
   SELF HAULER. One who transports personal household generated solid waste or
garden or yard trimmings from his or her personal residence to a permitted
disposal site.
   SMALL-QUANTITY GENERATOR. A generator that generates less than 220 pounds of
hazardous waste or two and two-tenths pounds of acutely hazardous waste per
month; or stores less than 2,200 pounds of hazardous waste or two and two-
tenths pounds of acutely hazardous waste, on site at any one time.
   SOLID WASTE. All useless or discarded putrescible and non-putrescible
materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes,
paper and cardboard, sewage sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpings or other
sludge, useless or discarded commercial, industrial, demolition and
construction materials, discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof,
discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid and
semi-solid materials, dead animals and infectious waste. The term does not
include:
      (1)   Hazardous waste, as defined in O.R.S. Chapter 466; or
      (2)   Materials used for fertilizer, soil conditioning, humus restoration
or for other productive purposes or which are salvageable for these purposes
and are used on land in agricultural operations and the growing or harvesting
of crops and the raising of fowls or animals; provided, that the materials are
used at or below agronomic application rates.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL. The ultimate disposition of solid waste that cannot be
salvaged or recycled.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT. A planned program providing for the prevention or
reduction of solid waste; management of the storage, collection,
transportation, treatment, utilization, processing and final disposal of solid
waste; recycling, reuse and material or energy recovery from solid waste; and
facilities necessary or convenient to such activities.
   STORAGE. The temporary containment of solid waste in a manner that does not
constitute treatment or disposal of such waste.
   TOXIC SUBSTANCE or TOXICS. Any combination of pollutants, including disease-
carrying agents, that, after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation
or assimilation into any organism, can cause death or disease, mutations,
deformities or malfunctions in such organisms or their offspring, and that
adversely affect the environment. TOXIC SUBSTANCE does not include a substance
used as a pesticide or herbicide in routine commercial agricultural
applications.
   TRANSFER STATION. A fixed or mobile facility other than a collection vehicle
where solid waste is deposited temporarily after being removed from the site of
generation but before being transported to a final disposal location.
   TRANSPORT. The movement of solid waste that has been accepted for
transportation by a common or contract carrier. The term TRANSPORT includes any
stoppage in transit that is temporary, incidental to the transportation
movement, and at the ordinary operating convenience of a common or contract
carrier, and any such stoppage is considered as a continuity of movement and
not as storage.
   TREATMENT or TREATMENT FACILITY. Any method, technique or process designed
to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of any
solid waste. It includes, but is not limited to, soil remediation facilities.
   VECTOR. Any insect, rodent or other animal capable of transmitting, directly
or indirectly, infectious diseases to humans or from one person or animal to
another.
   WASTE PREVENTION. To reduce the amount of solid waste generated or resources
used, without increasing toxicity, in the design, manufacture, purchase or use
of products or packaging. WASTE PREVENTION does not include reuse, recycling or
composting.
   WASTE REDUCTION. All waste management methods, such as source reduction,
recycling and composting, which result in a reduction of waste going to
landfill or other disposal facilities. WASTE REDUCTION may include either on-
site or off-site treatment where such treatment can be shown to confer a higher
degree of protection of the public health, safety and the environment than
other technically and economically practicable waste reduction alternatives and
proportionally changes the total volume, quantity or toxicity of a particular
waste.
   WASTESHED. An area of the state having a common solid waste disposal system
or designated by the Environmental Quality Commission as an appropriate area of
the state within which to develop a common recycling program. For the purposes
of this subchapter, the WASTESHED is the county.
   WASTE TIRE. A tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended
purpose because of wear, damage or defect.
   WOOD WASTE. Chemically untreated wood pieces or particles generated from
processes commonly used in the timber products industry. Such materials
include, but are not limited to, sawdust, chips, shavings, stumps, bark, hog-
fuel and log sort yard waste, but do not include wood pieces or particles
containing or treated with chemical additives, glue resin or chemical
preservatives.
   WOOD WASTE LANDFILL. A landfill that receives primarily wood waste.
   YARD WASTE OR DEBRIS. Vegetative and woody material generated from
residential property or from commercial landscaping activities. YARD WASTE OR
DEBRIS includes grass clippings, leaves, hedge trimmings and similar vegetative
waste, but does not include stumps or similar bulky wood materials.
(Ord. MC-03-06, passed 4-19-2006)
§ 51.17 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   To protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the county, and
to meet the goals of the Solid Waste Management Plan, it is declared to be the
policy of the county to regulate solid waste management by:
   (A)   Following the priorities on managing solid waste provided in O.R.S.
459.015(2);
   (B)   Providing for the safe and sanitary accumulation, storage, collection,
transportation and disposal of solid waste;
   (C)   Providing the opportunity to recycle as part of the overall solid
waste plan;
   (D)   Providing for public input in solid waste management and recycling
through the Solid Waste Advisory Committee; and
   (E)   Prohibiting accumulation of waste or solid waste on private property
in such manner as to create a public nuisance, a hazard to health or a
condition of unsightliness and to provide for the abatement of such conditions
where found.
(Ord. MC-03-06, passed 4-19-2006)
§ 51.18 COUNTY RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Administrator, under the supervision of the County Board of
Commissioners, shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of
the County Solid Waste Management Ordinance. In order to carry out the goals
and duties imposed by the County Solid Waste Management Plan and Ordinance, the
Solid Waste Advisory Committee, through the Administrator or the
Administrator’s authorized designee, shall have the discretion to expend funds
for any and all solid waste management activities within an approved budget.
(Ord. MC-03-06, passed 4-19-2006)
§ 51.19 PUBLIC RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Public responsibility requires the citizens of the county comply with §
51.17(B) and (E).
   (A)   Transportation of solid waste. No person shall transport or self-haul,
as defined in §
51.16, solid waste on a public road unless such waste or solid waste is covered
and secured. For the purpose of this division (A), COVERED AND SECURED
includes:
      (1)   Loads which are totally contained within an enclosed vehicle or
container;
      (2)   Loads of solid waste contained in garbage cans with tightly fitting
lids, tied plastic solid waste disposal bags or similar totally enclosed
individual containers that are completely contained within the walls of a
vehicle or container, such that no solid waste can reasonably be expected to
escape during hauling;
      (3)   Loads of brush, building materials and similar bulky materials
which are secured in or on the hauling vehicle or completely contained within
the walls of a vehicle or container, such that none can reasonably be expected
to escape during hauling; or
      (4)   Loads consisting entirely of rock, concrete, asphalt paving, stumps
and similar materials that are completely contained within the walls of a
vehicle or container, such that none can reasonably be expected to escape
during hauling.
   (B)   Accumulation, littering and disturbance of solid waste prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall accumulate or store wastes in violation of the
County Nuisance Ordinance or in violation of regulations of the state littering
provisions (O.R.S. 164.775 through 164.805).
      (2)   No unauthorized person shall remove the lid from any solid waste
container or collect, disturb or scatter solid waste stored in the container or
deposit solid waste into the container.
   (C)   Responsibility for proper disposal of hazardous waste. The owner,
operator or occupant of any premise, business, establishment or industry shall
be responsible for the satisfactory and legal disposal of all hazardous solid
waste generated or accumulated by them on the property. All hazardous solid
wastes shall be disposed of at an appropriate solid waste disposal site
licensed to receive such waste or in a manner consistent with Department of
Environmental Quality regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump,
deposit, bury or allow the dumping, depositing or burying of any hazardous
solid waste onto or under the surface of the ground or into the waters of the
state, except at a state permitted solid or hazardous waste disposal site.
   (D)   Open burning.
      (1)   Woody debris, brush, leaves, grass, tumbleweeds, wood and cuttings
from trees, lawns, shrubs and gardens (excepting paper, cardboard or wood
containers in commercial quantities) may be burned on private property only if
the method of burning is approved by the local fire department and is done in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Department of
Environmental Quality. Agricultural open burning is allowed pursuant to state
air pollution laws (O.R.S. 468A.020) and the requirements and prohibitions of
local jurisdictions and the State Fire Marshal.
      (2)   Open burning of any waste materials, including on agricultural
lands, that normally emit dense smoke, noxious odors or that create a public
nuisance is prohibited. These materials include, but are not limited to,
household garbage, plastics, wire, insulation, auto bodies, asphalt, waste
petroleum products, rubber products, animal remains and animal or vegetable
wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or service of food.
(Ord. MC-03-06, passed 4-19-2006) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.20 SOLID WASTE ADVISORY COMMITTEE (SWAC).
   There shall be a Solid Waste Advisory Committee (SWAC). The purpose of the
SWAC shall be to help discharge and manage the county’s solid waste management
agenda duties.
   (A)   Duties. The duties of the Solid Waste Advisory Committee shall be to:
      (1)   Provide a forum for citizen comments, questions and concerns about
solid waste topics as deemed appropriate and necessary by the County Board of
Commissioners;
      (2)   Provide leadership for the development, funding and implementation
of the county’s solid waste programs, including meeting state mandated
recycling goals;
      (3)   Create an annual report for the County Board of Commissioners
documenting implementation of the Solid Waste Management Plan and any necessary
regulations or amendments to the Solid Waste Ordinance. The annual report shall
also summarize local citizens’ concerns about solid waste;
      (4)   In consultation with responsible public officials and interested
persons, periodically review the Solid Waste Management Plan and provide
recommendations for modification to the County Board of Commissioners;
      (5)   Develop and recommend to the County Board of Commissioners
standards for the location of recycling and/or collection sites in order to
provide service to under-served areas. These standards will include, but not be
limited to, protection of adjacent and nearby residents; and
      (6)   Recommend to the County Board of Commissioners solid waste
collection rates and the adjustment of these rates, based upon information
submitted by the county’s solid waste collection franchisees.
   (B)   Membership.
      (1)   The Solid Waste Advisory Committee membership shall consist of
seven persons appointed by the County Board of Commissioners. The Board may
appoint or approve designation of alternates to serve in the absence of persons
appointed to the Committee. The Committee shall select one member as Chair and
another as Vice Chair. Four members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business. The Committee shall meet at least four times
each year. The Committee members shall serve a term of four years, each term
commencing on July 1 of each renewal year. Committee membership terms shall be
established so that the terms of membership do not expire at one time.
Administrative support shall be provided by the Administrator or designee. The
Committee membership shall include the following positions.
Position Representation Term to Renew in Year:
Position       Representation                            Term to Renew in Year:
Position One   Representative of Finley Buttes Landfill  2005
Position Two   Representative residing near or adjacent  2005
               to Finley Buttes Landfill
               Representative of owners of real property
Position Three near or adjacent to Finley Buttes         2006
               Landfill
Position Four  Representative of the Port of Morrow or   2006
               an incorporated city in the county
Position Five  Representative of the franchised solid    2007
               waste collectors serving the county
Position Six   Person representing the county at large   2007
Position Seven Person representing the county at large   2008
 
      (2)   The following persons may be appointed by the Board as ex officio
members to participate in proceedings of the Committee, but not to vote: the
County Public Works Director; the County Planning Director; and a
representative of the County Board of Commissioners. Regularly invited guests
should include, but not be limited to, a designee of the Department of
Environmental Quality, cities and rural fire protection districts. In order for
guests or ex-officio members to become fully participating members of the Solid
Waste Advisory Committee, this subchapter must be amended to allow a larger
membership.
(Ord. MC-03-06, passed 4-19-2006)
§ 51.21 FRANCHISING OF SOLID WASTE COLLECTION.
   No person shall solicit for service customers or provide solid waste
collection service for compensation in the county without first acquiring a
franchise as required by this subchapter unless specifically exempted as listed
in this section. This franchise requirement does not apply within the limits of
an incorporated city, except as may be provided through an agreement between
the city and the county.
   (A)   Exemptions to requirement for solid waste collection franchise. The
following persons or practices are exempt from the requirements of this
section:
      (1)   A private charitable organization which regularly engages in the
collection and reuse of repairable or cleanable discards, such as the Salvation
Army, St. Vincent DePaul, Goodwill and similar organizations;
      (2)   A religious, charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization,
which is not organized for solid waste management purposes, and which is using
the activity for fund raising, such as scouts and churches, and which collects,
reuses or recycles totally source separated materials or operates a collection
center for totally source separated materials;
      (3)   The collection, transportation or redemption of returnable beverage
containers under the “Bottle Bill” (O.R.S. Chapter 459A);
      (4)   A producer who transports and disposes of waste created as an
incidental part of the regular operation of a licensed business, such as an
auto wrecking business, a janitorial service, a gardening or landscaping
service and a septic tank pumping or sludge collection or disposal service;
      (5)   A person who deals in the practice or business of totally source
separated solid wastes and selling these materials for fair market value and
when the activity has been licensed under this subchapter with a recycling
license under §
51.22; and
      (6)   A self-hauler, as defined in §
51.16, hauling solid waste and/or recyclables to a permitted solid waste
disposal site.
   (B)   Application for a collection franchise.
      (1)   Application for a collection franchise shall be made on forms
provided by the Administrator. In addition to information required on the
forms, the Administrator may require the filing of any additional information
deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this subchapter. The forms shall
provide for the application for a new collection franchise, a transfer or an
expansion of the collection area.
      (2)   An applicant for a collection franchise or for a collection
franchise transfer shall demonstrate the following to the satisfaction of the
Board:
         (a)   The need for the collection service in the area applied for;
         (b)   Has a majority of the service accounts in the service area for
which they have applied, as evidenced by a list of customers served;
         (c)   The applicant has available collection vehicles, equipment,
land, facilities, personnel and sufficient financial resources to provide the
proposed service and to meet the standards established by O.R.S. Chapter 459
and applicable administrative rules. If the applicant proposes to serve an area
which is wholly or in part under franchise to another person/organization, or
to replace such person/organization upon expiration of the existing franchise,
the applicant shall have available on the beginning date of the proposed
franchise term collection vehicles, containers and other equipment equal to
that presently used in servicing the area;
         (d)   The applicant has sufficient experience to ensure compliance
with this subchapter. If the applicant does not have sufficient experience to
the satisfaction of the Board, the Board may require the applicant to submit a
corporate surety bond, issued by a person or company authorized to do business
in the state, in the amount of not less than $20,000, guaranteeing full and
faithful performance by the applicant of the duties and obligations of a
franchisee under the provisions of this subchapter and applicable federal,
state and local laws and rules or regulations and holding the county harmless
from liability;
         (e)   The applicant shall submit a certification acceptable to the
County Board of Commissioners of public liability insurance with a 30-day
notice of cancellation clause, covering the business’s operations and including
coverage of each vehicle operated by the applicant. The insurance coverage
shall be in the amounts equal to, or over the amounts established as the
minimum requirements by the State Tort Claims Act, being O.R.S. 30.260 et seq.,
now in force or as modified by future legislative action. The insurance shall
indemnify and hold the county harmless against any liability or damage to
persons or property arising from the franchisee’s business operation; and
         (f)   When requesting a transfer of franchise, the applicant must
submit, as part of the application, a letter from the current franchisee
requesting the transfer.
   (C)   Existing collection providers. Persons providing collection service on
the effective date of this subchapter, whether or not that service has been
already provided pursuant to a franchise or order, and who are not exempt under
this subchapter shall file an application for an appropriate franchise together
with any required information within 60 days after the effective date of this
subchapter. Upon filing the application, such person shall continue to provide
existing service until a final determination on the application is made by the
County Board of Commissioners or a circuit court on appeal.
   (D)   Application review.
      (1)   Applications shall be reviewed by the Administrator who shall make
such investigation as the Administrator deems appropriate and who may request
assistance of other persons as necessary.
      (2)   Upon receipt of an application, the Administrator shall give notice
to the holder of or applicant of another franchise for any part of the service
area under consideration, or whose existing or proposed service area would
likely be affected by the franchise application under consideration.
      (3)   Unless the time is extended by the Board for good cause, the
Administrator shall make a recommendation on the franchise to the Board within
30 days after the application and any required supplemental information have
been received.
      (4)   The Board:
         (a)   May require additional investigation to be made or information
to be submitted;
         (b)   May, after providing written notice to interested persons, call
an informational public hearing to allow interested persons to testify orally
or in writing;
         (c)   Shall, upon the basis of the application and any evidence or
testimony submitted, and the Administrator’s recommendation, make a finding on
the qualifications of the applicant and also on whether additional area should
be included; additional services should be provided; additional equipment,
facilities, land or personnel should be provided; and whether additional
conditions should be imposed; and
         (d)   Shall, upon the basis of its findings, grant, deny, modify or
attach appropriate conditions to the application within 30 days from the date
of receipt of the recommendation from the Administrator.
      (5)   Upon receipt of the order granting the franchise, the applicant
shall enter into a written franchise agreement with the county which requires
compliance with this subchapter, any applicable provisions of O.R.S. Chapter
459 and any rules promulgated thereunder. The agreement shall provide for the
franchisee or the county to, upon mutual agreement, negotiate amendments or
modifications of the agreement.
      (6)   If the Board makes a final order rejecting all or part of the
application for a franchise, the applicant may not submit another application
containing all or a portion of the same service area for a period of six months
unless this provision is waived by the Board upon a finding that the public
interest requires reconsideration within a shorter period of time.
   (E)   Responsibilities of franchisees.
      (1)   Service. Franchisees shall furnish adequate and reliable service as
authorized and required by the franchise and this subchapter, O.R.S. Chapters
459 and 459A and all other applicable laws, rules or regulations and at rates
established by the Board.
      (2)   Recycling. The franchisee shall work with the county to help
implement and meet the state reuse and recycling requirements as outlined in
the franchise agreement.
      (3)   Discontinuation of service. Except as provided in division (E)(6)
below, no franchisee shall voluntarily discontinue service to any of their
service area until the franchisee has:
         (a)   Given 90-day written notice to affected customers in the service
area;
         (b)   Given 90-day written notice to the Administrator; and
         (c)   Obtained approval of the Board.
      (4)   Complaints and records.
         (a)   The franchisee shall respond in a timely manner to any written
complaints regarding service.
         (b)   The franchisee shall keep accurate books and records which shall
be available during regular business hours for inspection and review by a
qualified person designated by the Administrator. Records shall be generated
and maintained according to general accounting practices.
      (5)   Reporting. The franchisee shall file, at a minimum, an annual
franchise report to the County Board of Commissioners for the preceding year as
stipulated in the franchise agreement. Additionally, the franchisee shall
submit a recycling report to the Administrator.
      (6)   Exceptions. This subchapter shall not apply to termination of
collection service due to:
         (a)   Damage, destruction or failure of equipment due to an act of
God;
         (b)   Adverse weather which makes service impossible;
         (c)   Change, restriction or termination of service when required by
any public agency, public body or court having jurisdiction;
         (d)   Customer refusal to pay for service in accordance with
franchisee’s established rates;
         (e)   Transfer of franchises pursuant to this subchapter;
         (f)   A finding by the Administrator that service at the particular
location would jeopardize the safety of the driver of a collection vehicle or
of the motoring public, that the customer has not provided reasonable access to
the pickup point for the solid waste containers or recyclable materials without
hazard or risk to the person providing service, or that weather conditions
prevent service to the particular customer;
         (g)   Noncompliance with any rule or regulation as outlined in the
franchise; and
         (h)   Road closures.
   (F)   Rate standards.
      (1)   Upon recommendation by the SWAC, the County Board of Commissioners
shall be responsible for the determination of rates or the establishment of
rates, the adjustment of existing rates and the adjustment of existing rate
differentials by zone. This determination shall be based upon information
submitted by the franchisee and shall be determined at a public hearing.
      (2)   When a franchisee wishes to adjust existing rates, a written
request, with justification, shall be made to the Administrator. Before any
rate is adjusted, the Administrator shall conduct an investigation and make a
recommendation to the Solid Waste Advisory Committee (SWAC) at a regularly
scheduled SWAC meeting, who will then make a recommendation to the County Board
of Commissioners. The County Board of Commissioners shall consider the matter
at a regularly scheduled public hearing. The County Board of Commissioners
shall then issue an order, setting forth its findings and the appropriate rates
and their effective date.
      (3)   In consideration of rate adjustment, the SWAC and County Board of
Commissioners shall give consideration to, but not be limited to, the
following:
         (a)   Current and projected revenues;
         (b)   Current and projected operating expenses;
         (c)   Acquisition and replacement of equipment;
         (d)   Professional and consultant services;
         (e)   Construction and maintenance costs;
         (f)   Research, training and development;
         (g)   Special services;
         (h)   Recycling costs;
         (i)   Reasonable operating margin; and
         (j)   Other matters as deemed relevant by the Board.
      (4)   Where no rate has been established for a particular type of
service, the County Board of Commissioners may establish an interim rate,
pursuant to the factors listed above, and included therein shall be a time
limit on the interim rate not to exceed 60 days until a final determination is
made by the County Board of Commissioners.
    (G)   Renewal of franchise. The franchise shall begin at the adoption of
the order and shall be considered as a continuing five-year franchise. That is,
beginning January 1 of each year, the franchise will be considered renewed for
an additional five-year term, unless at least 90 days prior to January 1 of any
year either party shall notify the other party in writing of intent to
terminate further renewals of this franchise. The Board may later reinstate
continuing renewals upon mutual agreement with the franchisee. Nothing in this
section restricts the Board from suspending, modifying or revoking the
franchise for cause as outlined in succeeding sections of this subchapter.
   (H)   Interruption of service. Whenever the Board finds that a franchisee’s
interruption of service could result in creation of a health hazard or a public
or private nuisance, the Board shall have the right to, in an emergency order,
issue a franchise to a qualified solid waste collector to provide service so
long as the immediate danger to the public health, or public or private
nuisance continues.
   (I)   Enforcement and corrective action. The following actions may be taken.
      (1)   Investigation. The Administrator, upon reasonable cause, may make
an investigation to determine if there has been a violation of this subchapter
by the franchisee.
      (2)   Notice of violation. If, in the judgment of the Administrator,
based upon his or her investigation, there is sufficient evidence to conclude
there has been a violation, the Administrator shall notify the franchisee, in
writing, of the violation and require the franchisee to take steps to correct
the violation and to follow the requirements set forth in the notice. The
Administrator shall send a copy of the notice to the Board.
      (3)   Response. The franchisee shall provide a written response to the
notice within ten calendar days of receipt. The response shall indicate whether
the franchisee agrees that there has been a violation and whether, when and how
corrective action will be taken. If it appears that the franchisee is unable to
or refuses to correct the violation, the Administrator shall make a
recommendation to the Board concerning appropriate action. The Administrator
may recommend that the franchise be suspended, modified or revoked or that it
not be renewed, or that any conditions the Administrator deems appropriate be
imposed.
   (J)   Suspension, modification, revocation or refusal to renew franchise.
Upon recommendation of the Administrator or on the Board’s own motion, the
Board may suspend, modify, revoke or refuse to renew a franchise upon a finding
that the franchisee has:
      (1)   Willfully violated this subchapter or O.R.S. Chapter 459, the
franchise or rules or regulations promulgated thereunder;
      (2)   Made a material misrepresentation in any written documents required
to be submitted by the franchisee;
      (3)   Willfully refused to provide service required by this subchapter or
the franchise, or to take any corrective action required under this subchapter
after written notification and a reasonable opportunity to do so; or
      (4)   Misrepresented the gross receipts from the franchise service area
if such reports are required to be submitted by this subchapter or by order of
the Board.
   (K)   Effective date; emergency order. If the Board, by order, suspends,
modifies, revokes or refuses to renew a franchise, the action shall not become
effective until 30 days after the date of the order unless the Board finds that
the order should take effect earlier to prevent a serious and immediate danger
to the public health or a public nuisance. The Board may, in an emergency
order, issue a franchise to a qualified solid waste collector to provide
service so long as the immediate danger to the public health or public nuisance
continues.
   (L)   Public hearing. The affected franchisee may request a public hearing
before the Board by filing a written request for such hearing with the Board
within 30 days after the date of the order. Upon filing the request, the Board
shall set a time and place for a public hearing. Unless the Board finds it
necessary to prevent a serious and immediate danger to the public health or a
public nuisance, the Board’s action shall not take effect until after the
public hearing and final order. The franchisee, other interested persons,
affected public agencies or bodies may submit oral or written evidence to the
Board relevant to the Board’s order.
   (M)   Final order. The Board shall, following the public hearing and within
30 days thereafter, affirm, amend or rescind its prior order based upon the
evidence contained in the record of the public hearing. The Board shall make
written findings of fact based upon such evidence. Subject to circuit court
review, pursuant to O.R.S. 34.010 et seq., the determination of the County
Board of Commissioners shall be final.
(Ord. MC-03-06, passed 4-19-2006)
§ 51.22 LICENSING FOR RECYCLING.
   No person shall collect solid waste or source separated recyclable material
with the intent to recycle as a for-profit business within the unincorporated
county without first obtaining a recycling license under this subchapter. No
license shall be issued to recyclers who intend to charge a fee for receiving
materials meant to be recycled.
   (A)   Exemptions. The county will exempt the following persons from the
recycling license requirement so long as that person reports recycled material
toward meeting the state mandated recycling goals when recycling reporting is
applicable to a particular activity:
      (1)   A persons who sells their own source separated recyclable material
generated from their residence or business, excluding those source separated
recyclable materials generated by their tenant(s);
      (2)   Persons who are authorized by franchise or under this subchapter to
collect recyclables;
      (3)   Persons who transport recyclable materials from outside the county
or through the county;
      (4)   Persons who collect, dispose of or recycle, rendered animal
products, forest products or industrial residues (not to include principal
recyclable materials as determined by the Department of Environmental Quality)
or materials used for productive purposes in agricultural operations;
      (5)   Persons licensed by the state and engaged in conducting business as
an auto wrecker or dismantler;
      (6)   Any retail outlet that collects waste oil from the public at no
fee;
      (7)   A private charitable organization which regularly engages in the
collection and reuse of repairable or cleanable discards, such as the Salvation
Army, St. Vincent DePaul, Goodwill and similar organizations;
      (8)   A religious, charitable, benevolent or fraternal organization,
which is not organized for solid waste management purposes, and which is using
the activity for fund raising, such as scouts and churches, and which collects,
reuses or recycles totally source separate materials or operates a collection
center for totally source separated materials; and
      (9)   The collection, transportation or redemption of returnable beverage
containers under the “Bottle Bill” (O.R.S. Chapter 459A).
   (B)   Application. Application for a recycling license shall be made on
forms provided by the Administrator for County Board of Commissioners approval.
In addition to information required on the forms, the Administrator may require
the filing of any additional information deemed necessary to ensure compliance
with this subchapter.
   (C)   Applicant requirements. Each applicant shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the County Board of Commissioners that:
      (1)   The applicant has obtained land use approval for the recycling site
or facility. The land use approval shall utilize the County Zoning Ordinance
and applicable criteria;
      (2)   The applicant has the knowledge, ability and training necessary to
safely manage hazardous materials and emergency response, if applicable;
      (3)   The applicant is able to document end-use markets or provide
evidence that the recyclable material can and will be periodically moved off
the facility property to markets; and
      (4)   The applicant has appropriate financial assurance to ensure proper
closing and/or cleanup of the facility consistent with state environmental
requirements.
   (D)   License requirements.
      (1)   Each license shall be dated as of the first day of the month in
which it is issued or the month when it was required to have been obtained, and
it shall expire one year from that date. The license will be considered
automatically renewed each year unless at least 60 days prior to the normal
expiration date of the license either party shall notify the other party in
writing of intent to terminate further renewals of this license.
      (2)   The recycling license will be the controlling document wherein the
County Board of Commissioners specifies the terms and conditions and financial
assurances necessary for the recycling activity. The license shall hold the
condition that the licensee not place a charge on receiving materials meant to
be recycled.
   (E)   Financial assurance.
      (1)   The amount of financial assurance required by the County Board of
Commissioners shall be negotiated on a case-by-case basis to be calculated
based on the following considerations:
         (a)   The potential cost of removal and disposal or sale of materials
in the case of the premises being abandoned or the operator becoming insolvent;
         (b)   Site cleanup as a result of gradual contamination; and
         (c)   Cleanup of sudden and accidental events.
      (2)   The assurance may be in the form of insurance, letter of credit,
performance or surety bond, cashier’s check or a certificate of deposit drawn
on an established state bank. The county may set up a fund to be contributed to
by recycling licensees from which recycling mitigation expenses incurred by the
above events could be paid for.
   (F)   Recordkeeping.
      (1)   Each person required to be licensed under this subchapter shall
furnish to the Administrator, on such forms as the licensee shall provide,
information including the manner in which recyclables are being collected or
received and the amounts of such materials received. Such report shall be
furnished at times designated by the Administrator but at least on an annual
basis. The report may coincide with reporting requirements of the Department of
Environmental Quality.
      (2)   Failure to furnish such information as required by the
Administrator shall be grounds for refusal to issue another recycling license
upon expiration of the current license period.
(Ord. MC-03-06, passed 4-19-2006)
§ 51.23 LICENSING OF SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL.
   In order to provide for the protection and preservation of land uses which
might be adversely impacted by solid waste disposal and to ensure that solid
waste disposal sites and facilities, including composting facilities, will not
constitute nuisances to other land uses, no solid waste disposal site shall be
established, maintained, substantially altered, expanded or improved until the
person operating such site has obtained an State Department of Environmental
Quality permit, land use approval and a solid waste contract/agreement from the
county. This requirement does not apply within the limits of an incorporated
city, except as may be provided through an agreement between the city and the
county.
   (A)   Conditions for exemptions to requirement for solid waste disposal
license. All solid waste disposal sites listed hereunder may be exempted from
approval as required by this subchapter, after administrative review prior to
an allowance as an exception:
      (1)   Any disposal site not required to have an State Department of
Environmental Quality or State Department of Agriculture permit;
      (2)   A landfill which is used by the owner or person in control of the
premises to dispose of clean fill materials;
      (3)   A portion of land or a facility specifically possessing a waste
water discharge permit pursuant to O.R.S. Chapter 468 and in compliance with
all State Environmental Quality Commission regulations on solid waste
management;
      (4)   Land on which solid wastes are used, at agronomic rates, for
fertilizer or for other productive purposes in agricultural operations, not
including composting facilities; and
      (5)   County owned and operated facilities.
   (B)   Application. Application for a disposal site license shall be made on
forms provided by the Administrator. In addition to information required on the
forms, the Administrator may require the filing of any additional information
it deems necessary to ensure compliance with this subchapter. The forms shall
provide for the application for a new disposal license or a transfer of
license.
   (C)   Requirements.
      (1)   An applicant for a disposal site license shall submit a valid
Department of Environmental Quality permit for the site or facility, or a
duplicate of the information submitted to the Department of Environmental
Quality for a disposal site under O.R.S. Chapter 459 and applicable rules.
      (2)   An applicant shall seek and obtain a land use permit for the
disposal site or facility. The land use permit shall utilize the County Zoning
Ordinance and applicable criteria.
      (3)   Each applicant for a disposal site license shall supply a plan for
rehabilitation and use of the disposal site after disposal has been terminated,
and such use shall be a use permitted within the land use zone in which such
land is located.
      (4)   The applicant shall have available land, equipment, management,
facilities and personnel to meet the standards established by O.R.S. Chapter
459 and applicable rules, and have insurance equal to that required for a
collection franchise, as described in §
51.21.
      (5)   The applicant for a disposal site license shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Board that the applicant will provide a place for the
deposit of recyclable material, if applicable.
      (6)   The applicant shall have sufficient experience to ensure compliance
with O.R.S. Chapter 459 and this subchapter. If the applicant does not have
sufficient experience, the Board may either deny the application or require the
applicant to submit a corporate surety bond which guarantees full and faithful
performance by the applicant of the duties and obligations of a license holder
under this subchapter and guarantees compliance with all applicable laws, and
which holds the county harmless.
      (7)   If the application is for a transfer of a disposal site contract,
the applicant must submit, as part of the application, a letter from the
current holder requesting the transfer.
   (D)   Existing disposal site license holders. Persons holding valid
Department of Environmental Quality disposal site or valid State Department of
Agriculture permits for disposal sites in the county on the effective date of
this subchapter, and who are without a county contract or order for a disposal
site, and who have not been exempted under this subchapter, shall file an
application for a disposal site license within 60 days after the effective date
of this subchapter. Upon filing the application, such person shall continue to
provide existing service until a final determination on the application is made
by the County Board of Commissioners.
   (E)   Application review.
      (1)   Applications shall be reviewed by the Administrator, which shall
make such investigation as he or she deems appropriate. The Administrator shall
give written notice of any application to affected license holders and
adjoining property owners. Upon the basis of the disposal site application,
evidence submitted and results of any investigation, the Administrator shall
make a finding and recommendation on the qualifications of the applicant,
whether additional service, land, equipment or facilities should be provided
and what conditions of service should be imposed, including whether the site
should be opened to the public and under what conditions, whether or not
certain types of wastes, solid wastes or hazardous wastes should be excluded
from the site or what types of wastes should be required to be accepted at the
site and whether the site complies with all rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to this subchapter and O.R.S. Chapter 459.
      (2)   Unless the time is extended by the Board for good cause, the
Administrator shall make a recommendation on the disposal site application to
the Board within 30 days after the application and any required supplemental
information have been received.
      (3)   The Board shall conduct a public hearing to consider an application
within 30 days of the Administrator’s recommendation. Notice shall be served on
the applicant, adjoining property owners and any affected right holder, and
shall be published once in the newspapers generally circulated within the
county, not more than 20 or fewer than seven days, preceding the hearing. The
County Board of Commissioners:
         (a)   May require additional investigation to be made or information
to be submitted;
         (b)   Shall, upon the basis of the application, any evidence or
testimony submitted, and the Administrator’s recommendation, make a finding on
the qualifications of the applicant on whether additional area should be
included; additional services should be provided; additional equipment,
facilities, land or personnel should be provided; and whether conditions should
be imposed on disposal or recycling; and
         (c)   Shall, upon the basis of its findings, grant, deny, modify or
attach appropriate conditions deemed necessary to carry out the purposes and
policy of this subchapter to the applicant within 30 days from the date of
receipt of the recommendation from the Administrator. The determination of the
Board after conclusion of the public hearing shall be final. If the Board’s
order rejects all or part of the application, the applicant may not submit
another application for the same disposal site for a period of six months,
unless the Board finds that the public interest requires reconsideration within
a shorter period of time.
      (4)   After the applicant has received an order granting a license for
the solid waste disposal site, the applicant shall enter into a written
contract and agreement with the county which requires compliance with this
subchapter and any applicable provisions of O.R.S. Chapters 459 and 459A. The
agreement will be the controlling document wherein the County Board of
Commissioners and the applicant agree upon the license review periods, (if
any), terms and conditions, fees, additional fees, closure fees and dedicated
fees which are required as a condition of the license for a disposal site.
   (F)   Responsibilities of license holders.
      (1)   Holders shall furnish all service authorized and required by the
license, the Department of Environmental Quality, this subchapter and the
agreement, at rates established by the Board for the term of the license.
      (2)   A holder shall, where applicable, provide, maintain and use
adequate equipment to handle and dispose of or resource recover solid waste;
handle collected solid wastes in a good and capable manner; transport all
liquids in a water-tight, drip-proof container; and provide equipment that
meets all applicable laws, codes, regulations and standards.
      (3)   A disposal site license holder shall not discontinue required
service without 90 days’ written notice to the Board and to any collection
franchise or license holders having use of the site. Board approval shall be
obtained before such discontinuance unless the discontinuance is due to the
decision of administrative, legislative and judicial agencies having
jurisdiction.
      (4)   A holder shall make the fee payments as provided promptly as they
become due.
      (5)   The holder of a solid waste disposal license shall maintain a
current and valid permit from the State Department of Environmental Quality or
the State Department of Agriculture.
   (G)   Transfer of pledge for a disposal license.
      (1)   A license shall not be sold, transferred or assigned to another
person without prior written approval of the Board which shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
      (2)   A person desiring a license transfer shall submit an application to
the Administrator on forms provided by the Administrator. The Administrator
shall review the application and forward a recommendation to the County Board
of Commissioners. The Board shall then hold a public hearing and vote to
approve or deny the request.
      (3)   The term of the transferred license shall continue for the same
period as the original license.
(Ord. MC-03-06, passed 4-19-2006)
§ 51.24 FEES.
   Fees and revenue collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be expended for
solid waste management related activities. These fees and revenues shall
include, but not be limited to, revenue generated from any licensed solid waste
site or facility such as the franchised solid waste collectors, recycling
licensees, transfer facilities, landfills and other disposal sites. The budget
from the monies shall include and establish amounts to be reserved for solid
waste management activities, including, but not limited to: solid waste
education; protecting the environment; providing financial stability; meeting
contractual obligations; providing for future solid waste facilities; and
addressing changes in legal requirements. The budget recommendations prepared
by the Administrator shall be reviewed and be subject to approval through the
county’s annual budget process pursuant to the State Local Budget Law, being
O.R.S. 294.305 et seq., and applicable county policies.
   (A)   Application fees. An application required by this subchapter shall be
accompanied by a filing fee in the amount as set forth by the County Board of
Commissioners in the County Fee Ordinance. Said fees may be amended by County
Board of Commissioners order after conducting a hearing thereon.
      (1)   All fees shall be due and payable at the time the application or
appeal is submitted. No application or appeal shall be accepted without the
proper fee being paid.
      (2)   If it is determined by the Administrator at the time of application
or at any time during the application process, that staff time and departmental
costs to process a specific application will be significantly greater than that
of other typical applications, the Administrator may require an applicant to
enter into a memorandum of agreement with the county which would establish a
fee based upon actual staff time and departmental costs. If an applicant
refuses to enter into a memorandum of agreement or there is failure to
negotiate an acceptable fee, the applicant may appeal the Administrator’s
decision to the County Board of Commissioners for resolution. If the applicant
and the county fail to reach an agreement, the application will not be
processed.
   (B)   Collection franchise fees. Collection franchise fees shall be paid to
the county on a regular basis as required by the franchise agreement,
accompanied by a sworn and verified statement as to the gross receipts for the
previous calendar year. The Board may conduct an audit of the franchisee’s
books to determine the accuracy of the franchisee’s statement of gross
receipts.
   (C)   Recycling license fees. A recycling license holder shall pay an annual
fee based on the County Fee Ordinance. The Board may waive this fee in order to
promote reuse or recycling.
   (D)   Disposal site license fees. A disposal site license holder shall pay
regular fees based on tippage or other individual requirements of each license,
as ordered by the Board and stipulated in the agreement. Fees the County Board
of Commissioners may consider include, but are not limited to, dedicated road
fees, tippage fees or surcharges.
   (E)   Finley Buttes Regional Landfill Closure Fund. The Closure Fund,
established in § 10 of the agreement between the county and Tidewater Barge
Lines and guaranteed under the transfer of Finley Buttes Landfill Company to
Waste Connections, Inc. allows, under § 10.5 of said agreement, that when the
Closure Fund exceeds $1,000,000, the excess funds shall be utilized
exclusively, in accordance with DEQ administrative rules, to reduce solid waste
disposal rates of persons within the county or to enhance solid waste disposal
facilities within the county.
   (F)   Transfer station fees.
      (1)   The county operated transfer stations shall charge a fee for the
deposit of solid waste at a county transfer station based on the County Fee
Ordinance. Additionally, the caretakers of the transfer station shall impose a
penalty, also based on the County Fee Ordinance, upon each load or deposit
which is brought to the transfer station and which is not covered and secured
so as to prevent leakage, spillage or loss during transport.
      (2)   All moneys collected at a county operated transfer station shall be
deposited to the appropriate solid waste transfer station line items in the
County General Fund.
(Ord. MC-03-06, passed 4-19-2006)
§ 51.25 OVERSIGHT AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Administrator, under the supervision of the County Board of
Commissioners, shall be responsible for the oversight and enforcement of the
County Solid Waste Management Ordinance.
   (A)   Parties bound. The term of a collection franchise, recycling or
disposal license shall be binding upon the franchisee or licensee, its heirs,
executors, administrators, successors and assigns.
   (B)   Acceptance.
      (1)   Any franchise granted under this subchapter shall be inoperative
unless the franchisee files with the county the executed franchise agreement
within 60 days of the Board approval of the franchise.
      (2)   The franchise agreement shall constitute an irrevocable contract
between the county and the franchisee, subject to termination only as provided
under this subchapter or in the franchise agreement.
   (C)   Severability and appeals.
      (1)   If any section, division, sentence, clause or portion of this
subchapter is for any reason held invalid or declared unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, that portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and the holding shall not affect the
constitutionality of the remaining portion hereof.
      (2)   Any appeal of an action by the County Board of Commissioners shall
be made pursuant to O.R.S. 34.010 through 34.100, writs of review and shall be
filed with the County Circuit Court.
   (D)   Enforcement.
      (1)   The owner, title holder, contract seller or contract buyer of the
land upon which a violation is occurring is equally responsible for the
violation of this subchapter, as is the possessor of the land, user of the land
or the person which is taking the action, conduct or omission which constitutes
a violation of this subchapter.
      (2)   A franchise or license holder shall at all times be subject to
applicable laws of the state. A violation of state law, if found by the Board
to be substantial and material to the policy of this subchapter, may be deemed
by the Board to be a breach of the franchise or license.
      (3)   If a holder breaches any of the terms or payments required under
the terms of this subchapter and such default continues for a period of ten
calendar days after receipt of written notification sent by certified mail by
the Administrator, then the county may revoke the franchise or license and the
holder shall cease any solid waste service.
      (4)   The Board reserves the right to make further regulations as deemed
necessary to protect the welfare of the public.
   (E)   Amendments and adoption. When it is determined by the County Board of
Commissioners, whether or not as a result of a recommendation by the SWAC, that
this subchapter shall be amended, the amendment and adoption process will
follow the process outlined in Chapter 9 of the County Solid Waste Management
Plan.
(Ord. MC-03-06, passed 4-19-2006) Penalty, see §
51.99
TOXIC WASTE
§ 51.40 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Toxic Waste
Ordinance.”
(Ord. MC-C-1-97, passed 3-5-1997)
§ 51.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, municipal
entity, state government, federal government or any agency thereof.
   PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER. A peace officer, county code enforcement officer,
fire prevention inspector, firefighter or any person who, during an emergency
formally declared by the County Board of Commissioners, has been deputized by
and is acting pursuant to the orders of the County Sheriff.
   TOXIC WASTE. Includes, but is not limited to, all “P-list” substances and
“F-list” substances defined by the State Department of Environmental Quality,
specifically:
      (1)   F998. Residues from demilitarization, treatment and testing of
blister agents (such as Mustard agent);
      (2)   F999. Residues from demilitarization, treatment and testing of
nerve agents (such as GB (Sarin) and VX);
      (3)   P998. Blister agents (such as Mustard agent); and
      (4)   P999. Nerve agents (such as GE (Sarin) and VX).
   TOXIC WASTE STORAGE UNIT. Any real property or construct thereon, including
tanks, barrels, silos, igloos or enclosure of any kind used, or intended for
use, for the storage of toxic waste.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a roadway, public or private and includes vehicles
that are propelled or powered by any means.
(Ord. MC-C-1-97, passed 3-5-1997)
§ 51.42 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall store, or permit to be stored, within the county any
toxic waste unless:
      (1)   A complete inventory of each kind, amount and location of such
toxic waste has been provided to the County Planning Department; and
      (2)   All storage fees, if any, imposed by the County Board of
Commissioners have been paid.
   (B)   No person shall transport, or permit to be transported, within the
county any toxic waste unless:
      (1)   A schedule of intended transport has been furnished to the County
Emergency Management Department, which schedule shall included the point of
departure, the intended destination, the kind and amount of waste to be
transported and the hours of transport within the county; or
      (2)   All transport fees, if any, imposed by the County Board of
Commissioners have been paid.
(Ord. MC-C-1-97, passed 3-5-1997) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.43 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Citations may be issued for violations of this chapter.
   (B)   In addition to other remedies provided by this subchapter, a violation
may be enjoined by a civil action pursuant to O.R.S. 30.315.
   (C)   In addition to other remedies provided by this subchapter, a violation
is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and may be regarded as such in all
actions, suits and proceedings.
(Ord. MC-C-1-97, passed 3-5-1997) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.44 JURISDICTION.
   This subchapter shall apply within those areas located inside the county
which are situated outside the city limits of an incorporated city. The
circuit, district and justice courts for the state for the county have
concurrent jurisdiction over any and all violations of this subchapter. In all
cases where civil penalty is sought to be imposed as provided in §
51.99, a complaint, signed by the County District Attorney or the county
counsel, shall be filed in the county justice court, which shall have original
jurisdiction over the proceedings. The proceedings shall thereafter be
conducted in accordance with the laws of the state and the rules of the county
justice court, including any right of appeal therefrom.
(Ord. MC-C-1-97, passed 3-5-1997)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   The county may enforce the provisions of §§
51.15 and
51.16 by administrative, civil or criminal proceedings or a combination
thereof, as necessary to achieve compliance. Further violation of this
subchapter may be punishable as a Class A misdemeanor under the provisions of
O.R.S. 459.992 and/or in addition thereof, a civil fine of up to $500 per day,
for each day of violation under the provisions of O.R.S. 459.995. The county
may also enforce the provisions of §
51.15 and 51.16 with the use of a lien as provided for herein.
   (C)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §
51.42 is guilty of a violation and may be issued a citation for the violation
which is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
      (2)   Any violation of any provision of §
51.42 which continues in duration for longer than 24 hours is a continuing
violation; a continuing violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the county from treating each 24-hour
period of a continuing violation as a separate violation, prosecutable as such.
(Ord. MC-C-1-97, passed 3-5-1997)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM PLAN
      
71.   WEIGHT LIMITS
CHAPTER 70: TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM PLAN
Section
   
70.01   Adoption of plan
   
70.02   Port of Morrow and Interstate 84/Highway 730 Interchange Area
Management Plan
§ 70.01 ADOPTION OF PLAN.
   The County Board of Commissioners adopts the County Transportation System
Plan and all amendments thereto.
(Ord. MC-C-2-02, passed 7-10-2002; Ord. MC-C-3-02, passed 8-7-2002; Ord. MC-C-
1-03, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. MC-06-2006, passed 10-18-2006; Ord. MC-03-2007,
passed 11-28-2007; Ord. MC-05-2007, passed 12-12-2007; Ord. MC-03-2008, passed
2-27-2008; Ord. MC-3-2009, passed 6-24-2009; Ord. MC-07-2010, passed 10-13-
2010; Ord. MC-1-2012, passed 1-11-2012; Ord. MC-2-2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord.
ORD-2-2013, passed 11-25-2013; Ord. ORD-2015-2, passed 5-20-2015; Ord. ORD-
2017-1, passed 6-14-2017; Ord. ORD-2019-1, passed 1-3-2019; Ord. ORD-2022-1,
passed 4-20-2022)
§ 70.02 PORT OF MORROW AND INTERSTATE 84/HIGHWAY 730 INTERCHANGE AREA
MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The County Board of Commissioners adopts the Port of Morrow and Interstate
84/Highway 730 Interchange Area Management Plan, and all amendments thereto, as
part of the Transportation System Plan.
(Ord. MC-2-2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-4, passed 9-21-2022)
CHAPTER 71: WEIGHT LIMITS
Section
Road Weight Limits and Closures
   
71.01   Title
   
71.02   Statutory authority
   
71.03   Definitions
   
71.04   Load limits; imposition
   
71.05   Load limits; Roadmaster powers and duties
   
71.06   Load limits; determination for procedures
   
71.07   Load limits; available for public inspection
   
71.08   Road closures
   
71.09   Exemptions from compliance; permit requirements
   
71.10   Load limits; statutory limits
   
71.11   Enforcement; statutory authority
   
71.12   Liability for unlawful operation
   
71.13   Weighmaster
   
71.14   Enforcement; citations
   
71.15   Citations; jurisdiction
Bridge Weight Limits
   
71.30   Definitions
   
71.31   Weight limits on bridges designated
   
71.32   Exemptions to weight limits
 
   
71.99   Penalty
ROAD WEIGHT LIMITS AND CLOSURES
§ 71.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Weight Limit and
Closure Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 8.04.010) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.02 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   This subchapter is authorized under state law by O.R.S. 368.016, which
provides that the exercise of governmental powers relating to roads within a
county is a matter of county concern, and by O.R.S. 203.035, which grants to
counties the authority to enact ordinances governing matters of county concern.
   (B)   The County Board of Commissioners herein designates the exercise of
governmental powers relative to roads to be a matter of county concern to the
county.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.020) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY ROAD. A dedicated county road located outside an incorporated area.
It shall not include state highways.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor-driven method of conveyance, or farm implement,
including, but not limited to, automobiles, pickup trucks, trucks of any
nature, motorcycles or snowmobiles. MOTOR VEHICLE does not include county,
state or federal vehicles being used in the course of their public function,
ambulances or other emergency vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.030) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.04 LOAD LIMITS; IMPOSITION.
   The Roadmaster shall designate and maintain maximum weight limits for
vehicles traveling upon county roads. Such designation shall be made when, in
the judgment of the Roadmaster, weather conditions, atmospheric conditions,
surface conditions or other appropriate conditions are such that allowing
vehicles of greater weight to travel upon a county road would be detrimental to
vehicles, road surfaces, adjacent property or human beings, or would, in the
judgment of the Roadmaster, create such other detrimental condition sought to
be avoided.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.040) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.05 LOAD LIMITS; ROADMASTER POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Roadmaster is authorized to designate maximum weight limits at any
time, and without prior notice, and such designation shall carry the full force
and effect of law. However, the Roadmaster shall attend the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the County Board of Commissioners after a designation of
weight limit.
   (B)   At the County Board of Commissioners meeting, the Roadmaster shall
report all such designations. After such a report, the Roadmaster’s designation
shall be deemed to be ratified and adopted by the County Board of
Commissioners, unless contrary intention is expressed by the Board, at which
point the Roadmaster shall follow the direction of the Board.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.050) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.06 LOAD LIMITS; DETERMINATION FOR PROCEDURES.
   Section 71.11 notwithstanding, for the purpose of determining any gross
weight, actual scale weights shall govern. In the absence of information as to
scale weights or of convenient facilities for ascertaining scale weights, the
weights furnished by dealers, manufacturers or their agents or the weights
assigned to the particular vehicle by the state as the “light-weight” of the
vehicle, as to the weights of vehicles and parts of vehicles, and bills of
lading or cargo manifests as to weights of loads may be accepted as the weights
thereof, but such weights shall be subject at all times to verification by
actual weights subsequently ascertained.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.060) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.07 LOAD LIMITS; AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   (A)   (1)   At such time as the Roadmaster designates, a maximum weight
limit for a county road, he or she shall enter the following information into a
journal kept for that purpose:
         (a)   The road or portion of road so restricted;
         (b)   The maximum weight of vehicles for such road;
         (c)   The time and date upon which the restriction shall take effect;
and
         (d)   The duration of such restriction, which may or may not be
indefinite.
      (2)   Such journal shall be available for public inspection during
working hours at the County Public Works office in Lexington, Oregon.
   (B)   At such time as the Roadmaster designates a maximum weight limit for a
county road, he or she shall take the following steps to notify the public of
such restrictions.
      (1)   He or she shall notify all newspapers of general circulation within
the county of all information contained in division (A)(1) above.
      (2)   He or she shall notify any radio stations which serve the area
affected by the maximum weight designation of all information contained in
division (A)(1) above.
      (3)   He or she shall cause to be posted signs indicating the maximum
weight designation. Such signs shall be clearly readable highway-type signs and
shall display the maximum weight permitted; no other wording shall be
necessary. Signs shall be posted prominently at all points at which such county
road intersects with state or federal highways and at such other points as the
Roadmaster shall see fit.
   (C)   The Roadmaster may, at his or her discretion, give notice to
individual persons or business entities of any maximum weight designation, by
telephone or other suitable means, but he or she is not required to do so.
   (D)   Record shall be made of any notice given under divisions (B)(1)
through (B)(3) and (C) above, by entry in the journal provided for in division
(B)(1) above.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.070) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.08 ROAD CLOSURES.
   The Roadmaster is empowered to order that county roads be closed to motor
vehicle traffic. Except as may be specifically noted hereafter, all provisions
of this subchapter with reference to notice, enforcement, exemptions,
jurisdiction and penalties shall be applicable to road closures.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.080) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.09 EXEMPTIONS FROM COMPLIANCE; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Roadmaster is empowered to grant permits, which shall act as
temporary exemptions from compliance with maximum weight designations or
temporary closures authorized by this subchapter. Permits shall be available
from the Public Works Department office in Lexington, Oregon and shall be in
the form of a certificate. Permits shall indicate:
      (1)   To whom the permit applies;
      (2)   The duration of the permit;
      (3)   The road(s) to which the permit applies; and
      (4)   The degree to which the permit holder may exceed the maximum weight
and/or the extent to which the permit holder may travel upon a road which has
been temporarily closed.
   (B)   Other sections of this subchapter or the state statutes
notwithstanding, the Roadmaster, in his or her discretion, may permit an
overweight vehicle to travel upon a county road, or may allow a vehicle to
travel upon a closed road, in order to allow that vehicle to reach a roadway
upon which it would be a legally operating vehicle. Such discretionary
permission shall in no way affect the validity of a traffic citation issued in
that or any other instance.
   (C)   In the discretion of the County Board of Commissioners, a fee may be
charged for an exemption granted under this section. The amount of the fee
shall be by agreement between the Board and the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.090) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.10 LOAD LIMITS; STATUTORY LIMITS.
   In the absence of a maximum weight designation under this subchapter, weight
limits imposed by the state statutes shall be in effect. Enforcement mechanisms
provided in this subchapter shall be applicable to O.R.S.-prescribed weight
limits, and such weight limits shall be enforceable under this subchapter as a
county offense, except that the notice provisions of §§
71.04 through
71.07 shall not be required.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.100) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.11 ENFORCEMENT; STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   Enforcement of this subchapter shall be as provided in O.R.S. 483.534,
483.536, 484.110 and by other relevant sections as applicable.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.110) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.12 LIABILITY FOR UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   The operation of any vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of this
subchapter is prima facie evidence that the owner of such vehicle or
combination caused or permitted it to be so operated, and the owner shall be
liable for any penalties imposed as a result of such operation.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.120) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.13 WEIGHMASTER.
   (A)   Appointment. The County Board of Commissioners shall appoint a person
to act as Weighmaster for the county, in whom shall reside all powers granted
to Weighmasters by this subchapter or by state statute.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.130)
   (B)   Deputies. The Weighmaster may appoint as Deputy Weighmasters those
persons that he or she may deem necessary. Appointments to the position of
Deputy Weighmaster shall not be effective until approved by the County Board of
Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.140)
   (C)   Weighmaster and Deputy identification cards. The Weighmaster and
Deputy Weighmasters shall be issued identification cards identifying them as
empowered to enforce this subchapter and state weight and closure statutes. In
addition, the Weighmaster and Deputy Weighmasters shall carry copies of O.R.S.
483.534, 483.536, 483.991 and 484.110, although failure to do so shall not
constitute an avoidance or defense to uniform traffic citations issued under
this subchapter or state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.150)
(Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.14 ENFORCEMENT; CITATIONS.
   When, in accordance with state statute, the Weighmaster or Deputy
Weighmasters shall seek to enforce this subchapter or state statute with
reference to vehicle weight violations or road closure violations, they shall
do so by issuing a uniform traffic citation to the operator of the offending
vehicle. Such uniform traffic citation shall refer to this subchapter by its
short title.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.160) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
§ 71.15 CITATIONS; JURISDICTION.
   Concurrent jurisdiction over uniform traffic citations issued under this
subchapter shall rest with the county district court and the county justice
courts.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.170) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
BRIDGE WEIGHT LIMITS
§ 71.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BRIDGE. All bridges constructed, owned or maintained by the county.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The whole weight of any weight of any motor vehicle or
combination of vehicles and its load.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.010) (Ord. passed 11-6-1963)
§ 71.31 WEIGHT LIMITS ON BRIDGES DESIGNATED.
   No person shall drive or move, and no owner shall cause or permit to be
driven or moved any vehicle or combination of vehicles with a combined weight
exceeding 20,000 pounds over or across any county-owned or county-maintained
bridge.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.020) (Ord. passed 11-6-1963) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.32 EXEMPTIONS TO WEIGHT LIMITS.
   Section 71.31 does not apply to bridges that are a part of the state highway
system or federal interstate highway system, or so far as the provisions of
that section may be in conflict with O.R.S. Chapter 483 or 23 U.S.C. § 127.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.030) (Ord. passed 11-6-1963)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Violation by any driver, chauffeur or owner of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles of the weight provisions of §§
71.01 through
71.15 is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine based upon the excess weight by
which any gross weight exceeds the applicable gross weight authorized, as
follows:
         (a)   Two thousand pounds or less, by a fine of not less than $15;
         (b)   More than 2,000 pounds, but not in excess of 3,000 pounds, by a
fine of not more than $0.01 per pound for each pound of the excess weight;
         (c)   More than 3,000 pounds, but not in excess of 5,000 pounds, by a
fine of not more than $0.02 per pound for each pound of the excess weight;
         (d)   More than 5,000 pounds, by a fine of not more than $0.07 per
pound for each pound of excess weight; and
         (e)   More than 7,500 pounds, by a fine of not more than $0.10 for
each pound of excess weight.
      (2)   Violation by any driver, chauffeur or owner or any vehicle or
combination of vehicles of the weight provisions of any permit issued under the
authority of §§
71.01 through
71.15 is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not more than $100, plus
$0.10 per pound for each pound by which any gross weight exceeds the applicable
gross weight authorized by the permit.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (B) above, any
driver, chauffeur or owner of any vehicle who operates or permits to be
operated a motor vehicle in violation of a closure order issued pursuant to §
71.08 shall be subject to a fine, upon conviction, of up to $1,000.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.180) (Ord. MC-C-1-84, passed - -1984)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   PARKS MASTER PLAN
      
92.   AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDERS
      
93.   CODE ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Livestock Grazing; Multiple-Use Compliance
   
90.01   Title
   
90.02   Criteria for determination
   
90.03   Application requirements
   
90.04   Notice requirements
   
90.05   Appeal
   
90.06   Venue
   
90.07   Jurisdiction
   
90.08   Conflict with state law
 
   
90.99   Penalty
LIVESTOCK GRAZING; MULTIPLE-USE COMPLIANCE
§ 90.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Multiple-Use
Compliance Ordinance.”
(Ord. MC-C-6-92, passed 7-29-1992)
§ 90.02 CRITERIA FOR DETERMINATION.
   Livestock grazing on public or private lands situated within the county
shall not, on the grounds that emergency conditions exist, be limited,
prohibited or made subject to regulation requiring substantial expenditure,
unless a written determination is obtained from the County Planning Director
(hereinafter referred to as “Director”), which determination is based upon
evidence sufficient to support the following findings:
   (A)   Serious resource damage is presently occurring;
   (B)   The damage is of a nature which is likely to produce effects beyond
the period of one grazing season;
   (C)   The damage is the result of actions or events not occurring naturally
on forest lands;
   (D)   The damage is directly attributable to livestock grazing; and
   (E)   No less burdensome alternative is reasonably available or practical.
(Ord. MC-C-6-92, passed 7-29-1992)
§ 90.03 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person, partnership, association, corporation or governmental agency
which owns or controls the use of forest lands may request a determination from
the Director that livestock grazing upon such lands situated in the county may
be limited, prohibited or made subject to regulation on the grounds that an
emergency exists upon an application providing all of the following
information:
   (A)   A specific description of the lands alleged to be affected by the
emergency;
   (B)   A specific description of the nature and effects of the emergency
alleged;
   (C)   A specific description of the resource or resources alleged to be
damaged, together with a description of the particular damage which is
occurring;
   (D)   The names and addresses of all persons whose livestock or other
property would be affected by the Director’s finding;
   (E)   All data which supports a finding that:
      (1)   The damage is of a nature which is likely to produce effects beyond
the period of one grazing season;
      (2)   The damage is the result of actions or events not occurring
naturally on forest lands; and
      (3)   The damage is directly attributable to livestock grazing.
   (F)   A detailed explanation of all facts which render any less burdensome
alternative unreasonable or impractical; and
   (G)   Any other information deemed necessary by the Director.
(Ord. MC-C-6-92, passed 7-29-1992)
§ 90.04 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as set forth in division (B) below, upon receipt of an
application described in §
90.03, the Director shall, within three working days, send notice by registered
or certified mail to all persons whose livestock or other property may be
affected by the Director’s finding. The notice, with a copy of the application
attached, shall establish a time and place at which such person may appear and
be heard on the matter. The Director shall also notify the applicant of the
time and place of such hearing. The time set for said hearing shall be not less
than seven days or more than 14 days from the date upon which notice was sent
to the interested parties.
   (B)   If the Director determines that the information provided in the
application is inadequate or lacks sufficient specificity upon which to base a
determination, the Director shall notify the applicant of the particular
deficiency, in writing, within three days of receipt of the application. The
applicant shall have not more than 14 days to make such corrections or
additions to the application as the Director requires. If corrections or
additions to an application are deemed necessary, the Director shall not send
the notices required by division (A) above until the Director has approved the
application in final form.
(Ord. MC-C-6-92, passed 7-29-1992)
§ 90.05 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director may appeal the decision
in the same manner and to the same extent as is provided by law for appeal of a
decision of the Director pursuant to the County Comprehensive Plan and Zoning
Ordinance.
(Ord. MC-C-6-92, passed 7-29-1992)
§ 90.06 VENUE.
   This subchapter shall be applicable in the county and in all situations
which would establish venue for a criminal proceeding in the county under
O.R.S. 131.305 and 131.315.
(Ord. MC-C-6-92, passed 7-29-1992)
§ 90.07 JURISDICTION.
   Jurisdiction and prosecution of offenses under this subchapter may be
initiated in either the justice court for the county or the district court for
the county; those courts having concurrent jurisdiction under this subchapter.
All other rules of procedure shall be as provided for other violation or
infraction prosecutions initiated in the respective court.
(Ord. MC-C-6-92, passed 7-29-1992)
§ 90.08 CONFLICT WITH STATE LAW.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed in such a way as to conflict
with state statutes or any other provision of law.
(Ord. MC-C-6-92, passed 7-29-1992)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   No person shall order, authorize, require or otherwise effect the
removal of livestock from public or private forest lands situated within the
county, on the grounds that an emergency exists, other than an owner of such
livestock or a person acting at the direction of such owner, unless the person
has obtained the written determination of the Director as described in §
90.02. Any person who violates this provision, upon conviction, may be assessed
a fine not to exceed $500.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly assemble, create, gather, transmit or
present false, misleading or biased information or data in support of, or in
opposition to, a determination that serious resource damage is occurring, or
that an emergency exists, which requires the removal of livestock from forest
lands within the county. Any person who violates this provision, upon
conviction, may be assessed a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. MC-C-6-92, passed 7-29-1992)
CHAPTER 91: PARKS MASTER PLAN
Section
   
91.01   Parks Master Plan adopted
§ 91.01 PARKS MASTER PLAN ADOPTED.
   The County Board of Commissioners adopts the County Master Park Plan,
replacing relevant sections of the Comprehensive Plan and the County Zoning
Ordinance.
(Ord. MC-C-6-98, passed 7-22-1998; Ord. ORD-2018-2, passed 9-5-2018)
CHAPTER 92: AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDERS
Section
   
92.01   Title
   
92.02   Authority
   
92.03   Purpose
   
92.04   Definitions
   
92.05   Exemptions
   
92.06   Ambulance service areas
   
92.07   Assignment of ambulance service areas
   
92.08   Duties of ambulance service provider
   
92.09   Suspension or revocation of assignment
   
92.10   Appeal
   
92.11   Emergency Medical Services Advisory Committee
   
92.12   Initial responder
   
92.13   Nuisances
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Ambulance Service
Providers Ordinance.”
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.02 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to O.R.S. 203.035, 682.031, 682.062 and
other applicable law.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.03 PURPOSE.
   The County Board of Commissioners finds:
   (A)   O.R.S. 682.062 requires the county to develop a plan for the county
relating to the need for and coordination of ambulance services and to
establish Ambulance Service Areas consistent with the plan to provide efficient
and effective ambulance services.
   (B)   This chapter, which establishes Ambulance Service Areas, the methods
for selecting ambulance providers for each service area and establishes the
County Emergency Medical Services Advisory Committee together with Attachment
“A” of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which shall be incorporated
herein by this reference, make up the County Ambulance Service Area Plan.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.04 DEFINITIONS.
   The words and phrases in this chapter shall have the meaning provided in
O.R.S. Chapter 682 and O.A.R. Chapter 333, divisions 250, 255, 260 and 265
unless specifically defined herein to have a different meaning.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Ambulances owned by or operated under the control of the United States
government;
   (B)   Vehicles being used to render temporary assistance in the case of a
major catastrophe or emergency with which the ambulance service of the
surrounding locality are unable to cope, or when directed to be used to render
temporary assistance by an official at the scene of an accident;
   (C)   Vehicles operated solely on private property or within the confines of
institutional grounds, whether or not the incidental crossing of any public
street, road or highway through the property or grounds is involved;
   (D)   Vehicles operated solely for the transportation of lumber industry
employees; and
   (E)   Ambulances or vehicles transporting patients from outside the county
to a healthcare facility within the county, or which are passing through
without a destination in the county.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.06 AMBULANCE SERVICE AREAS.
   For the efficient and effective provision of ambulance service in accordance
with the County Ambulance Service Area Plan, the ambulance service area shown
on the map attached as Exhibit “A” attached to the ordinance codified in this
chapter and incorporated herein by this reference, is hereby adopted as the
Ambulance Service Area for the county. The County Board of Commissioners, by
the adoption of an Order, may adjust the boundaries of the Ambulance Service
Area(s) from time to time as necessary to provide efficient and effective
ambulance service.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.07 ASSIGNMENT OF AMBULANCE SERVICE AREAS.
   (A)   No person shall provide ambulance service in the county unless an
Ambulance Service Area has been assigned to that person pursuant to this
section.
   (B)   Any person desiring to provide ambulance service within the county
shall submit an application to be assigned an Ambulance Service Area within 30
days of the effective date of this chapter. The application shall be submitted
to the County Health District. The applications shall be reviewed by the County
Emergency Medical Services Advisory Committee created by this chapter which
shall recommend the assignment of Ambulance Service Areas to the County Board
of Commissioners. The assignment of Ambulance Service Areas shall be made by an
Order of the County Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   An application required by division (B) above shall include the
following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the person applying for assignment of an
Ambulance Service Area;
      (2)   The Ambulance Service Area the person desires to service and the
location from which ambulance services will be provided;
      (3)   A list of vehicles to be used in providing ambulance services,
including year, make and model and verification that each vehicle is licensed
as a basic life support and/or advance life support ambulance by the state;
      (4)   A list of personnel to be used in providing ambulance service and
their current emergency medical technician certificate number;
      (5)   Sufficient additional information to allow for the review of the
application in light of the review criteria established by the County Ambulance
Service Area Plan; and
      (6)   Such additional information deemed necessary by the County
Emergency Medical Services Advisory Committee or the County Board of
Commissioners.
   (D)   Each application shall be reviewed for the applicant’s conformity with
the requirements of state law for providing ambulance services, the specific
criteria of the County Ambulance Service Area Plan and the need for efficient
and effective ambulance service within the county.
   (E)   The assignment of the initial Ambulance Service Area shall be valid
from the date of issuance for a period of five years. Thereafter, the
assignment of Ambulance Service Areas may be renewed for additional five-year
terms commencing on July 1 pursuant to division (F) below and subject to the
provisions for suspension or revocation as set forth in §
92.09.
   (F)   Not less than 45 days prior to the expiration of the assignment of an
Ambulance Service Area (e.g., five years less 45 days for the initial
assignment), any person desiring the renewal of an assignment or a new
assignment of an Ambulance Service Area shall submit an application to be
assigned an Ambulance Service Area. The application shall include the
information required by division (C) above except that applications for renewal
need only provide such information necessary to bring the original application
up to date. The review of the application and assignment of the Ambulance
Service Area shall be in accordance with this section.
   (G)   In the event that a person assigned an Ambulance Service Area
discontinues service before the expiration of the assignment, the County Board
of Commissioners shall set a time by which applications must be submitted for
reassignment of the Ambulance Service Area. The review of the application and
assignment of the Ambulance Service Area shall be in accordance with this
section and the assignment shall be for the remainder of the term unless
otherwise specified by the County Board of Commissioners.
   (H)   Not less than 15 days prior to any date when the applications for the
assignment of an Ambulance Service Area are due, notice of such application due
date shall be posted in three public places and published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.08 DUTIES OF AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDER.
   Upon assignment of an Ambulance Service Area to a person in accordance with
§
92.07, the person providing ambulance service:
   (A)   Shall conduct its operations in strict compliance with all applicable
state and federal laws and regulations and the terms of this chapter and the
County Ambulance Service Area Plan;
   (B)   Shall not fail or refuse to respond to an emergency call for service
if an ambulance is available for service;
   (C)   Shall not respond to a medical emergency located outside its assigned
Ambulance Service Area except:
      (1)   When request for a specific ambulance service provider is made by
the person calling for the ambulance and the call does not dictate an emergency
response;
      (2)   When the ambulance service provider assigned to the Ambulance
Service Area is unavailable to respond or the person is requested by the other
provider or 9-1-1 dispatch to respond; or
      (3)   When the response is for supplemental assistance or mutual aid.
   (D)   Shall not transfer the assignment of an Ambulance Service Area without
written notice to and approval of the County Board of Commissioners. The
written notice shall include an application for assignment of the Ambulance
Service Area submitted by the transferee. The application shall be reviewed in
accordance with §
92.07; and
   (E)   Shall not voluntarily discontinue service to the assigned Ambulance
Service Area without giving 90 days’ written notice to the County Board of
Commissioners.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.09 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF ASSIGNMENT.
   (A)   Upon a recommendation by the County Emergency Medical Services
Advisory Committee, or upon its own motion, the County Board of Commissioners
may suspend or revoke the assignment of an Ambulance Service Area upon a
finding that the holder thereof has:
      (1)   Willfully violated provisions of this chapter, the County Ambulance
Service Area Plan or provisions of state or federal laws and regulations; or
      (2)   Materially misrepresented facts or information given in the
application for the assignment of an Ambulance Service Area or as part of the
review of the performance of the service furnished by the provider.
   (B)   In lieu of the suspension or revocation of the assignment of Ambulance
Service Area, the County Board of Commissioners may order that the violation be
corrected and make the suspension or revocation contingent upon compliance with
the order within the period of time stated therein. Notice of the County Board
of Commissioners action shall be provided to the holder of the assignment which
shall specify the violation, the action necessary to correct the violation and
the date by which the action must be taken. The holder of such assignment shall
notify the County Board of Commissioners of the action taken. If the holder of
the assignment fails to take corrective action within the time required, the
County Board of Commissioners shall notify the holder that the assignment is
suspended or revoked upon receipt of the notice.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.10 APPEAL.
   A person receiving a notice of the assignment, denial, suspension,
revocation or contingent suspension or revocation of an Ambulance Service Area
may request a hearing before the County Board of Commissioners by filing with
the County Board of Commissioners a written request for hearing within 14 days
of the decision, setting forth the reasons for the hearing and the issues
proposed to be reviewed. The filing of a hearing request shall stay the action
pending the hearing and final determination by the County Board of
Commissioners unless the County Board of Commissioners makes a written finding
that prompt implementation of the decision is required due to an immediate
hazard to the public safety. The County Board of Commissioners shall set a time
and place for a hearing which shall be de novo on the record or a full de novo
hearing, as determined by the County Board of Commissioners. Within 14 days
after the conclusion of the hearing, the County Board of Commissioners shall
affirm, reverse or modify its original decision.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.11 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   There is hereby created a County Emergency Medical Services Advisory
Committee, the members of which shall be appointed by the County Board of
Commissioners for two-year terms. The Committee shall choose its own
Chairperson and meet quarterly or when called upon by the County Board of
Commissioners or its Chairperson. Motions shall be passed by majority of those
attending.
   (B)   The Committee shall consist of:
      (1)   One supervising physician for ambulance service providers or their
designee;
      (2)   Three EMTs from ambulance service provider (one each from Boardman,
Heppner and Irrigon);
      (3)   Two Directors of nursing services or designee (one each from
Pioneer Memorial Hospital and Good Shepherd Hospital, Hermiston);
      (4)   One Fire Department representative;
      (5)   One 9-1-1 systems representative; and
      (6)   Two quick response team representatives (one each from Lexington
and Ione).
   (C)   The Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Review and make recommendations to the County Board of
Commissioners regarding all applications for assignment of Ambulance Service
Areas;
      (2)   Provide for ongoing input to the County Board of Commissioners from
pre-hospital care consumers, providers and the medical community;
      (3)   Periodically review the performance of ambulance service providers
within the county;
      (4)   Periodically review the County Ambulance Service Area Plan and make
recommendation to the County Board of Commissioners, including, but not limited
to:
         (a)   Review standards established in the plan and make
recommendations regarding improvements and/or new standards;
         (b)   Monitor coordination between emergency medical service
resources;
         (c)   Review dispatch procedures and compliance; and
         (d)   Review the effectiveness and efficiency of the Ambulance Service
Area boundaries.
      (5)   Develop and implement a quality assurance program, including, but
not limited to, training, to ensure compliance with the County Ambulance
Service Area Plan.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.12 INITIAL RESPONDER.
   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a 9-1-1 agency responsible for the
dispatching of emergency services from dispatching an initial responder to the
scene of a medical emergency in addition to dispatching an ambulance service
provider. Such initial response shall only be in accordance with this section.
   (A)   The initial responder shall be a municipal corporation or a special
district within the county that provides emergency services within its
jurisdiction and requests to be dispatched to medical emergencies.
   (B)   The initial responder shall respond with emergency medical technicians
and/or first responders that are certified by the state and who are employed by
or volunteer with the initial responder.
   (C)   Upon the arrival of the ambulance service provider at the location of
the medical emergency, the ambulance service provider shall be in charge of,
and responsible for, the continuation of emergency medical services. The
initial responder shall continue to provide emergency medical services only at
the direction of the ambulance service provider.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.13 NUISANCES.
   In addition to penalties provided by §
92.99, violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a
nuisance and may be regarded as such in all actions, suits and proceedings
unless this chapter is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Pursuant to O.R.S. 682.051, this chapter shall be enforceable by the Health
Division of the State Department of Human Resources in a proceeding in circuit
court for equitable relief.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is
guilty of a violation. Failure from day to day to comply with the terms of this
chapter shall be a separate offense for each such day. Failure to comply with
any provision of this chapter shall be a separate offense for each such
provision.
   (B)   Violations of the provisions of this chapter is punishable, upon
conviction, by a fine of note more than $500 for a non-continuing offense,
i.e., an offense not spanning two or more calendar days. In the case of a
continuing offense, i.e., an offense which spans two or more consecutive
calendar days, violation of the provisions of this chapter is punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 per day up to the maximum of $1,000 as provided by
law.
(Ord. MC-C-4-98, passed 4-15-1998)
CHAPTER 93: CODE ENFORCEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
93.001   Purpose and policy
   
93.002   Definitions
   
93.003   Jurisdiction
Motor Vehicles
   
93.015   Abandoned vehicles
   
93.016   Junk slips
   
93.017   Motor vehicle impound
   
93.018   Towing and storage liens
   
93.019   Suspension of notice and hearing requirements
   
93.020   Nuisance vehicles
Nuisances
   
93.035   Prohibited acts
   
93.036   General nuisance
   
93.037   General nuisance abatement
   
93.038   Compliance with Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances
Housing as a Public Nuisance
   
93.050   Authority
   
93.051   Purpose and policy
   
93.052   Nuisance housing
   
93.053   Benchmarks
   
93.054   Resolution
   
93.055   Inspection and right of entry
   
93.056   Appeals
Chronic Nuisances
   
93.070   Definitions
   
93.071   Violations
   
93.072   Procedures
   
93.073   Commencement of actions; remedies; burden of proof
   
93.074   Summary closure
   
93.075   Enforcement
   
93.076   Attorneys’ fees
Noise as a Public Nuisance
   
93.090   Prohibited acts
   
93.091   Exceptions
   
93.092   Violations
Dogs as a Public Nuisance and Animal Neglect
   
93.105   Dog Control District
   
93.106   Dogs as a nuisance
   
93.107   Owner responsibility
   
93.108   Dogs and livestock
   
93.109   Dog impoundment
   
93.110   Animal abuse; neglect and abandonment
   
93.111   Violations
Environmental Health
   
93.125   Purpose
   
93.126   Adoption
   
93.127   Permits required
   
93.128   Violations
   
93.129   Public nuisance
   
93.130   Updates to statutes and/or rules
   
93.131   Remedies not exclusive
   
93.132   Delegation
Weed Control
   
93.145   Weed Control District
   
93.146   Noxious weeds
   
93.147   Property owner responsibility
   
93.148   Weed Inspector
   
93.149   County disposition of weeds
   
93.150   Violations; lien
Administration and Enforcement
   
93.165   Enforcement actions
   
93.166   Investigation authority
   
93.167   Enforcement by voluntary compliance; warning notice
   
93.168   Enforcement process by citation
   
93.169   Enforcement by consent agreement
   
93.170   Enforcement by stipulated judgment
   
93.171   Enforcement by order of abatement
   
93.172   Summary abatement
   
93.173   Hearings
   
93.174   Appeal
   
93.175   Records
   
93.176   Stop work or stop use order
Money Judgments and Funds
   
93.190   Code Enforcement Cleanup Fund
   
93.191   Weed Control Fund
   
93.192   Recovery on a money judgment
 
   
93.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Noxious weeds
   
Appendix B: Weeds of economic importance
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   Authority. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted
to general law counties by O.R.S. Chapter 203 for the purpose of providing
procedures to be used in enforcing this code. It is a violation under O.R.S.
203.065 to fail to comply with any provision or requirement of a county
ordinance, order, permit approval, consent agreement, enforcement order or
state statute which the county has the authority to enforce.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the welfare,
safety and health of the citizens of the county by establishing a procedure
wherein the ordinances of the county and state statutes can be enforced. In
order to ensure timely and uniform enforcement of county ordinances and to
maintain public confidence and certainty in county ordinances, it is necessary
to enact the enforcement procedures in this chapter.
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   County policies and ordinances to be enforced under this chapter
are those contained herein and the County Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance,
Subdivision Ordinance, Solid Waste Management Ordinance to the extent it is not
enforced under specific enforcement procedures contained therein, and city
comprehensive or development or land use ordinances co-adopted by the county
pursuant to a joint management agreement. A violation in any provision in any
chapter of a county ordinance that does not have an enforcement procedure in
that ordinance to dispose of a violation is subject to this chapter.
      (2)   Except for a violation which unmistakably exists and imminently
endangers health or property, a complaint shall be first placed against any
applicable permit approved by the county under the County Zoning Ordinance,
Subdivision Ordinance or Solid Waste Management Ordinance. This chapter shall
apply when the permit language does not address violations relating to the
particular complaint.
   (D)   Other applications. A violation of an Oregon State Statute (O.R.S.) or
Oregon Administrative Rule (O.A.R.) that is not adopted by this chapter may be
enforced in the manner provided in that statute or rule by a person having
lawful authority to enforce such statute or rule.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A vehicle which satisfies one of the following criteria:
a vehicle that is disabled, abandoned, parked or left standing unattended upon
the right-of-way of any county road, state highway or upon any street or alley
over which the county has jurisdiction, or upon any county property.
   ABATEMENT. Any action on public or private property and any adjacent
property as may be necessary to remove or alleviate a nuisance, including, but
not limited to, demolition, removal, repair, boarding and securing or
replacement of property.
   ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE. Any negligent action or condition of property which
would be both attractive and dangerous to curious children or attract an
infestation.
   CHRONIC DERELICTION. Whenever a derelict building remains unoccupied for a
period in excess of six months or a period less than six months when the
building or portion thereof constitutes an attractive nuisance or hazard to the
public.
   CHRONIC OFFENDER. A responsible party who has not complied with an order of
the code enforcement officer or justice of the peace for any number of
violations within 12 consecutive months.
   CITATION, COMPLAINT AND SUMMONS. The official form which charges a person(s)
with a violation of a county ordinance and requires that person to appear
before the court to answer the charges specified.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT FILE. The public record retained in the County Sheriff’s
Office which shall contain all documents, reports, evidence and other
information concerning a particular complaint or enforcement action.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The person(s) whose primary duties are to conduct
code investigations, issue stop work or stop use orders, issue citations and
generally initiate enforcement actions under this chapter. ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
have all authority to carry out the purposes of this chapter and the provisions
of the code under their authority. These persons may include any law
enforcement officer, code enforcement officer, Public Health Official,
Administrator or Director, Solid Waste Administrator, Building Official, Weed
Coordinator/Inspector and Planning Official.
   COMPLAINANT. A person(s) who initiates a complaint against another person(s)
alleging a violation of a county ordinance which is authorized by a Board of
Commissioners order to be enforced under this chapter.
   CONSENT AGREEMENT. A written agreement signed by the responsible party or
parties (as defined below) and the code enforcement officer stating the
specific steps or conditions which the responsible party(s) must take or meet
to cure a violation of a county ordinance.
   DEBRIS. The remains of something broken down or destroyed, including, but
not limited to, scrap metal, paper, plastic or wood, pieces of asphalt,
concrete, lumber or other building supplies or yard clippings or cuttings of
plant material.
   DERELICT BUILDING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is
unoccupied and meets any of the following criteria or any residential structure
which is at least 50% unoccupied and meets any of the following criteria:
      (1)   Has been ordered vacated by a process outlined within this chapter;
      (2)   Has been issued a correction notice by a process outlined within
this chapter;
      (3)   Is unsecured;
      (4)   Is boarded;
      (5)   Has been posted for violation of any portion of this chapter more
than once in any two-year period; or
      (6)   Has, while vacant, had a nuisance abated by the county pursuant to
this chapter.
   GARBAGE, TRASH or WASTE. All useless or discarded putrescible and non-
putrescible materials, including, but not limited to, rubbish, refuse, ashes,
paper and cardboard, sewage sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpings or other
sludge, useless or discarded commercial, industrial, demolition and
construction materials, discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof,
discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid and
semi-solid materials, dead animals and infectious waste. This definition also
includes medical and infectious waste as defined in O.R.S. 459.386 and O.A.R.
340-93-030(56) and (66); all wastes capable of being recycled that are
commingled with other wastes; and incidental household hazardous waste or small
quantity generator hazardous waste as defined under 40 C.F.R. § 261.5. The fact
that materials, which would otherwise come within the definition of GARBAGE,
TRASH or WASTE, may from time-to-time have value, and thus could be utilized,
shall not remove them from the definition.
   HAZARDOUS VEHICLE. A vehicle left in a location or condition such as to
constitute an immediate threat to the safety of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
and as defined in State Highway Division administrative rules and O.A.R. 734-
020-0147.
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any discarded, useless or unwanted chemical,
material, substance or product that is or may be hazardous or toxic to the
public or the environment and is commonly used in or around households and is
generated by the household. HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE may include, but is not
limited to, some cleaners, solvents, pesticides and automotive and paint
products.
   INFESTATION. To be overrun to an unwanted degree or in troublesome manner,
especially as predatory animals, insects or vermin do.
   INVASIVE SPECIES. An organism that causes ecological or economic harm in a
new environment where it is not native.
   JUNK. Includes, but is not limited to, nuisance vehicles, all vehicles,
vehicle parts, abandoned automobiles, machinery, machinery parts, appliances or
appliance parts, iron or other metal, glass, paper, lumber, wood or other
useless, unwanted or discarded material. The fact that materials, which would
otherwise come within the definition of JUNK, may from time-to-time have value,
and thus could be utilized, shall not remove them from the definition. JUNK
shall include, but not be limited to, a description of items which are
dilapidated, abandoned, inoperable or otherwise in a state of disrepair. JUNK
means broken, discarded or accumulated objects including, but not limited to,
appliances, building supplies, furniture, vehicles or parts of vehicles. This
definition is not meant to include a bone yard, as defined in the Solid Waste
Management Plan.
   JUSTICE OF THE PEACE (JP). The elected official in the county who handles
minor legal issues such as traffic offenses and code enforcement violations.
   LIVESTOCK. Domestic animals of types customarily raised or kept on a farm
for profit or other purposes.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that is self-propelled or designed for self-
propulsion.
   NOISE NUISANCE. Any sound which injures or endangers the safety or health of
humans; or annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
   NOXIOUS WEED. Any plant which is determined by the Board of Commissioners to
be injurious to public health, crops, livestock, land or other property. (See
Appendix A.)
   NUISANCE. Any thing, substance or act that is a threat to the public health,
safety or welfare.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle that meets at least one of the following
conditions:
      (1)   Is not currently licensed and registered for operation;
      (2)   Is being used to store junk, solid waste or waste as defined in
this section; or
      (3)   Has parts which have been discarded, dismantled or partially
dismantled, or stripped, or the vehicle is in a rusted, damaged, wrecked or
other condition which renders the vehicle inoperable.
   PENALTY. A fine assessed according to the schedule set forth in the
applicable ordinance(s) against a responsible party(s) upon a finding by the
justice court that a violation has occurred.
   PERSON. Any public or private corporation, local governmental unit, public
agency, individual, partnership, association, firm, trust, estate or any other
legal entity, contractor, subcontractor or combination thereof.
   PERSON IN CONTROL OF PROPERTY. An owner, agent, contract purchaser, lessee,
occupant or other person having possession or control of property.
   PLACE or PROPERTY. Any premises, room, house, building or structure or any
separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the ground
itself.
   PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER. A peace officer, code enforcement officer, fire
prevention inspector, firefighter or any person who, during an emergency
formally declared by the County Board of Commissioners, has been deputized by
and is acting pursuant to the orders of the County Sheriff.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY/VIOLATOR. An owner, title holder, contract seller,
contract buyer, possessor or user of the land upon which a violation is
occurring, or the person(s) responsible for the action, conduct or omission
which constitutes a violation of a county ordinance, may each be held
responsible for a violation of a county ordinance.
   STOP WORK or STOP USE ORDER. A formal written order issued by the code
enforcement officer or Building Official directing that any work, action or use
is in violation of a county ordinance, must stop immediately. Such an order
must be issued according to the requirements of §
93.176.
   STREET or ROADWAY. The portion of the road right-of-way developed for
vehicular traffic.
   UNSAFE BUILDING. Any building or structure where defects exist to the extent
that life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are
endangered.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway and includes vehicles that are
propelled or powered by any means.
   VIOLATION. An offense created by an ordinance of the county or the state
which is punishable by a fine or punishment in addition to a fine but does not
provide that the offense is punishable by a term of imprisonment.
   WEEDS OF ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE. Weeds which result in economic impact and
which are identified by the Weed Advisory Board and approved by Board of
Commissioners as appropriate targets for intensive control or eradication as
feasible (see Appendix B).
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.003 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall apply within those areas located inside the county which
are situated outside the city limits of an incorporated city. The circuit and
justice courts for the state for the county have concurrent jurisdiction over
any and all violations of this chapter.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 93.015 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   An abandoned vehicle may be taken into immediate custody and removed by an
appropriate authority. The County Sheriff has all authority to enforce O.R.S.
819.100 through 819.200.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.016 JUNK SLIPS.
   (A)   A person may make a request to the County Sheriff’s office, or
designee, to dispose of a vehicle that is on the private property of the person
and that is appraised at a value of $500 of less, as determined by a holder of
a certificate issued under O.R.S. 819.480, if the person is in lawful
possession of the vehicle. For the purposes of this division (A), a person need
not have the certificate of title to be in lawful possession of the vehicle.
   (B)   When the Sheriff’s office chooses to dispose of a vehicle under
division (A) above, the Sheriff’s office shall do all of the following:
      (1)   Photograph the vehicle;
      (2)   Verify that the person is in lawful possession of the vehicle;
      (3)   Provide notification on a “junk slip” document recording the vital
information of an abandoned or accumulated vehicle to the person requesting the
disposal and the Department of Motor Vehicles of all of the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the person requesting the disposal;
         (b)   The vehicle identification number;
         (c)   The appraised value of the vehicle; and
         (d)   The name and address of the authority disposing of the vehicle.
      (4)   Dispose of the vehicle and its contents to a person who holds a
valid dismantler certificate issued under O.R.S. 822.110.
   (C)   The Sheriff’s office may charge the person requesting the disposal a
fee to dispose of the vehicle.
   (D)   Disposal of a vehicle to a dismantler as provided in this section
extinguishes all prior ownership and possessory rights. No title shall further
be issued upon the vehicle, including salvage title.
   (E)   In lieu of submitting ownership or other title documents for the
vehicle, the Sheriff’s office may submit to the dismantler a copy of the junk
slip notification provided to the Department of Motor Vehicles under division
(B) above.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.017 MOTOR VEHICLE IMPOUND.
   A police officer who has probable cause to believe that a person, at or just
prior to the time the police officer stops the person, has committed an offense
described in state statutes may, without prior notice, order the vehicle
impounded until a person with right to possession of the vehicle complies with
the conditions for release or the vehicle is ordered released by a hearings
officer.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.018 TOWING AND STORAGE LIENS.
   The lien that attaches to the vehicle shall be a possessory chattel lien in
accordance with O.R.S. 87.142 and shall be foreclosed in the manner provided in
O.R.S. 87.152 through 87.212. If the appraised value of the vehicle is $1,000
or less, the vehicle shall be disposed of in the manner provided in O.R.S.
819.220. Evidence regarding market value from any person who deals, trades,
buys or disposes of such vehicles in the ordinary course of such person’s
business shall be sufficient to establish market value.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.019 SUSPENSION OF NOTICE AND HEARING REQUIREMENTS.
   In all cases where removal, towing or impoundment of any vehicle has been
performed by persons engaged in emergency operations after formal declaration
of emergency by the County Board of Commissioners, all notice and hearings
requirements shall be suspended and held in abeyance until abatement of the
conditions creating the emergency reasonably allow for providing notice and
hearing.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.020 NUISANCE VEHICLES.
   (A)   Vehicles as attractive nuisances. No person in charge of property may
permit, or no person may cause to exist, vehicles or parts thereof which could
cause an attractive nuisance or infestation.
   (B)   Nuisance vehicle storage.
      (1)   Storing or permitting to be stored more than two nuisance vehicles,
or portions thereof, or any vehicle leaking fluids onto the ground or into a
waterway, on any private property is prohibited, unless the vehicle is
completely enclosed within a building, is covered with a fitted car cover
specifically designed to protect vehicles from the elements or is stored on the
premises of a business enterprise dealing in used vehicles that is being
lawfully conducted within the county.
      (2)   (a)   Farm-related equipment that is not required to be registered
as a motor vehicle is excluded from this section if it meets the following
criteria:
            1.   Equipment function is clearly related to farming/ranch
practices and/or the equipment is historically related to agricultural
operations, such as combines; and
            2.   Equipment is not leaking fluids onto the ground or into a
waterway.
         (b)   The owner of record or person in charge of the property must be
able to demonstrate that non-registered farm equipment is either used as part
of the agricultural operation or is of historical significance.
      (3)   Removal of an unregistered or inoperable vehicle from one tax lot
to another tax lot, or removal of an unregistered or inoperable vehicle from
private property onto a public right-of-way, or removal of an unregistered or
inoperable vehicle from one location to another location on a public right-of-
way, after the responsible party has received a notice of violation shall not
prevent the county from proceeding with the process to have the vehicle towed
from a tax lot or the public right-of way and impounded under the provisions of
§
93.003.
      (4)   Storing or permitting to be stored in excess of 30 days within any
consecutive 12-month period, more than three operational and registered
vehicles, not registered to the property address, shall be an illegal parking
lot unless they are completely enclosed within a building or are stored on the
premises of a business enterprise dealing in new or used vehicles or the
storage of vehicles lawfully conducted within the county.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
NUISANCES
§ 93.035 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person in charge of property may permit, or no person may cause to exist,
any thing, substance or act that is an imminent threat to the public health,
safety or welfare. An imminent nuisance may be summarily abated as provided in
§§
93.165 through
93.176.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.036 GENERAL NUISANCE.
   (A)   All accumulation of garbage, waste and debris must be in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter 51 of this code. No person in charge of
property may permit, or no person may cause to exist, accumulation of debris,
garbage, junk or animal excrement that are not removed within a reasonable
time, except as follows.
      (1)   Junk may be accumulated if authorized by permit or business
license.
      (2)   Yard cuttings, other than grass clippings, may be accumulated on
property owned or leased by the person for burning at the first available burn
season. It is the landowners’ responsibility to obtain any required burning
permits.
      (3)   Yard cuttings and other organic material may be accumulated on
property owned or leased by a person for composting, if maintained in a manner
that does not attract vermin and does not produce an offensive odor.
      (4)   Garbage may be accumulated in order to be hauled by a licensed
solid waste hauler or to be taken by the person to an authorized depository if
the garbage is secured within a fly-proof, rodent-proof, water-tight covered
container that is kept clean and in good repair and is removed within a
reasonable time.
      (5)   Animal excrement from livestock may be accumulated for farm or
agricultural purposes as long as it does not become a danger to health or
safety.
   (B)   The owner or person in charge of property shall not permit the growth,
seeding or spreading of weeds as a fire danger. Local Fire Chiefs and Marshals
are recognized as the enforcement authority for fire hazards. Additionally, the
county is declared a Weed Control District and is further regulated as
characterized by §§
93.145 through
93.150.
   (C)   No person may cause to exist vegetation that:
      (1)   Is a hazard to pedestrian use of a public sidewalk or is a hazard
to bicycle or vehicular use of a public or private street by impeding passage
or vision. The hazards include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Vegetation that encroaches upon, or overhangs lower than eight
feet, a public sidewalk or other pedestrian way, or encroaches upon or
overhangs lower than ten feet, a public or private street; and/or
         (b)   Vegetation that impedes motorist, bicyclist or pedestrian views
of traffic, traffic signs or signals, street lights or name signs or other
safety fixtures or markings placed in the public way.
      (2)   Is a hazard to the public or property on or near the property where
the vegetation is located;
      (3)   Impedes access to or use of any public facility;
      (4)   Obstructs drainage facilities in the public way, including, but not
limited to, roadside ditches, street curbs and gutters, catch basins or
culverts;
      (5)   Has roots that have entered a sewer or water line, main or system
and that stops, restricts or retards the flow of sewage or water or damages the
pipes or connectors; has roots that have cracked or displaced a sidewalk, curb
or street; and/or
      (6)   Extends across a property line. Tree and shrub branches or limbs
may extend across a property line when by condition or location they do not
create a hazard to the health, safety or well-being of the general public.
   (D)   The owner or person in charge of property shall not permit shrubs or
trees to interfere with the use of a sidewalk or roadway, or obstruct a
driver’s view of an intersection or of traffic upon streets approaching an
intersection, or otherwise create a hazard to the public. Such owner or person
in charge of property shall also trim the trees so that the minimum clearance
of the overhanging part of the tree is eight feet above the sidewalk and 11
feet above the roadway.
   (E)   No person in charge of property may permit or no person may cause to
exist on private or public property accessible containers with a capacity of
more than one cubic foot and a door or lid that locks or fastens when closed
and that cannot be easily opened from the inside.
   (F)   No person in charge of property may permit or no person may cause to
exist a well, cistern, cesspool, pit, quarry, excavation, swimming pool or
other hole of a depth of four feet or more, unless:
      (1)   It is fenced or securely covered; or
      (2)   The excavation is part of an authorized construction project and
during the course of construction reasonable safeguards are maintained to
prevent injury.
   (G)   No person in charge of property may permit or no person may cause to
exist on a sidewalk or public or private street adjacent to the property, any
dumping or storage of dirt, sand, rocks, gravel, lawn clippings, bark dust,
lumber or other similar material.
   (H)   No person in charge of a development project may permit, or no driver
of a vehicle may cause, any deposit of dirt, mud, lumber or other material or
object on any street or sidewalk.
   (I)   (1)   No person may attach or cause to be attached an advertisement,
bill, placard, poster or sign upon real or personal property, whether public or
private, without first securing permission from the owner or person in control
of the property.
      (2)   This section shall not be construed as an amendment to or a repeal
of any county development code regulation of the use and location of signs.
   (J)   No person in charge of property may possess nuisance vehicles on the
property, except as otherwise allowed in §
93.020(B).
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.037 GENERAL NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   A general nuisance may be abated as provided in §§
93.165 through
93.176.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.038 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING AND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCES.
   Violations of Chapters 155 and 156 of this code and subject to this chapter.
   (A)   Development without land use review and approval. Whether approvable
or not, development within the county conducted without having obtained the
permits and approvals required by Chapter 156 of this code regardless of
whether or not it could comply with all applicable land use requirements.
   (B)   Noncompliance with approval. Development that does not comply with the
specifications set out in the approval issued by the County Planning Department
or built inconsistently with approval, including, but not limited to, placing
structures in different locations than approved, not meeting setback or buffer
requirements, building structures taller or larger than approved or increasing
or altering the nature and intensity of the approved use.
   (C)   Continuation of use after expiration of approval.
      (1)   A permit may be approved with a limited time duration. Use
continuing beyond the expiration of approval granted via a permit, temporary
use or other is prohibited.
      (2)   Failure to remove additional dwellings within 60 days of the
expiration of a temporary use permit granted due to family hardship or until a
primary dwelling is built:
         (a)   Temporary placement of an additional dwelling shall be granted
for a specified time period, with the period not exceeding two years; and
         (b)   If the temporary placement is not renewed, the owner of record
or person in charge of the property shall have 60 days in which to remove the
additional dwelling from the property, unless an extension is granted.
   (D)   Nonconforming uses. The following nonconforming uses shall be
considered violations:
      (1)   Any change, alteration, restoration or replacement of structures,
uses or area related to the pre-existing nonconforming structure, use or area
that fails to conform to the applicable nonconforming use standards or those of
the current zoning designation; and
      (2)   Use or employment of a structure, use or area that is discontinued
or abandoned according to the applicable nonconforming use standards.
   (E)   Outdoor lights. Outdoor lights shall be directed downward and sited,
hooded and shielded in a manner that prevents the lighting from projecting on
to adjacent properties.
   (F)   Illegal uses. No development may occur that conflicts with the
requirements of Chapter 156 of this code or that require permits and approvals
that were not obtained. These illegal uses include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Illegal dwellings. Structures designed for, or used in the capacity
of a dwelling, or parts thereof erected, moved, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged or altered which did not receive all of the applicable approvals
(local, state or federal) that were required at the time the structure was
built or placed on the property;
      (2)   Illegal structures. Structures or parts thereof erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered which did not receive all of the
applicable approvals (local, state or federal) that were required at the time
the structure was built or placed on the property;
      (3)   Illegal home occupations. Any for-profit activity conducted,
without Planning Department approvals, within a dwelling or other structure,
normally associated with uses permitted in the zone contrary to applicable
approvals (local, state or federal);
      (4)   Illegal businesses. Any for-profit activity conducted, without
Planning Department approvals, within a dwelling or other structure, normally
associated with uses permitted in the zone contrary to applicable approvals
(local, state or federal); and
      (5)   Illegal land divisions/property line adjustments. Partitions,
replats, property line adjustments that do not comply with applicable approvals
(local, state or federal).
   (G)   Violation of structure restrictions. No structures larger than 100
square feet in area or ten feet in height are permitted without applicable
approvals (local, state or federal).
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
HOUSING AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
§ 93.050 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Whenever the county finds that there exists in the county dwellings,
buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation due to unsanitary
conditions, dilapidation or other defects detrimental to the public health,
welfare and safety of the county residents the county may exercise its
authority under state statute to repair, close or demolish these dwellings in
the manner provided in this section and in state statutes.
   (B)   For the purposes of aiding the code enforcement officer, the county
will, pursuant to this section, utilize the authority given to the County
Public Health Director in O.R.S. 431.150 in all matters pertaining to the
public health and the authority given to the Building Official in O.A.R. 918-
480-0140(4) to revoke a certificate of occupancy of a residential dwelling in
violation of applicable law that poses a threat to health and safety. The Fire
Chief of an appropriate Fire Protection District will have all authority to
enforce the State Fire Code, being adopted by reference at O.A.R. 837-040-0010
and O.R.S. 476.030 et seq. in order to protect the public safety and health of
the citizens of the county.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.051 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to address the matter of concern in
the county with particular, although not widespread, instances of unsafe,
unsanitary and dilapidated housing that exist and are detrimental to the public
health, welfare and safety. It is not the purpose of this section to constrain
rural, isolated dwellings such as cabins built for recreational use but may be
applied if such a dwelling is occupied for a full calendar year.
   (B)   It shall be the policy of the county to:
      (1)   Endeavor to educate responsible parties when a health and safety
issue with housing becomes apparent. It is recognized that not all landlords
and tenants are aware of their resources and responsibilities according to
state law;
      (2)   Provide clear evidence and health benchmarks as provided by this
section and the expertise, experience and authority of the code enforcement
officer, the Public Health Director, the Building Official, fire officials and
other public officials whose work, training and lawful authority allow for
enforcement of health and safety issues; and
      (3)   Identify and abate chronic violations. Properties that have had
ongoing or repeated violations and have been identified as chronic offenders
are especially at risk for county action. County actions are meant to encourage
property owners to comply. Lack of compliance may lead to additional penalties.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.052 NUISANCE HOUSING.
   (A)   Any structure that is in such a condition as to constitute a public
nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence or whenever any
structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any
specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such structure provided by
the building regulations of the county, the State Structural Code, the Fire and
Life Safety Code or any local law or ordinance relating to the condition,
location or structure of buildings.
   (B)   A building shall be declared dangerous:
      (1)   Whenever the structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake or flood or any other cause, or has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated as to become:
         (a)   An attractive nuisance;
         (b)   A harbor for vagrants or criminals; or
         (c)   As to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of
committing unlawful or immoral acts.
      (2)   Whenever a structure has become chronically derelict;
      (3)   Unsafe buildings and burned or partially burned structures that
have become unsafe or dangerous; or
      (4)   When deemed dangerous by the Building Official or local Fire
Marshal.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.053 BENCHMARKS.
   A tenant or property owner, or both, can be considered a responsible party
for meeting the requirements of this section. For the purpose of this section,
a dwelling unit shall be considered uninhabitable if it substantially lacks any
one or a combination of the following:
   (A)   As applied to landlord responsibilities:
      (1)   Effective waterproofing and weather protection of roof and exterior
walls, including windows and doors;
      (2)   Plumbing facilities which conform to applicable law in effect at
the time of installation and maintained in good working order;
      (3)   A water supply approved under applicable law, which is:
         (a)   Under the control of the tenant or landlord and is capable of
producing hot and cold running water;
         (b)   Furnished with appropriate fixtures;
         (c)   Connected to a sewage disposal system approved under applicable
law; and
         (d)   Maintained so as to provide safe drinking water and to be in
good working order to the extent that the system can be controlled by the
landlord.
      (4)   Adequate heating facilities which conform to applicable law at the
time of installation and maintained in good working order;
      (5)   Electrical lighting with wiring and electrical equipment which
conform to applicable law at the time of installation and maintained in good
working order;
      (6)   Buildings, grounds and appurtenances at the time of the
commencement of the rental agreement in every part safe for normal and
reasonably foreseeable uses, clean, sanitary and free from all accumulations of
debris, filth, rubbish, garbage, rodents and vermin, and all areas under
control of the landlord kept in every part safe for normal and reasonably
foreseeable uses, clean, sanitary and free from all accumulations of debris,
filth, rubbish, garbage, rodents and vermin; and
      (7)   Safety from fire hazards as required by the State Fire Code.
   (B)   (1)   As applied to tenant duties:
         (a)   All areas of the premises kept in every part as clean, sanitary
and free from all accumulations of debris, filth, rubbish, garbage, rodents and
vermin, as the condition of the premises permits and to the extent that the
tenant is responsible for causing the problem;
         (b)   All ashes, garbage, rubbish and other waste disposed of from the
dwelling unit in a clean, safe and legal manner; and
         (c)   All plumbing fixtures in the dwelling unit kept or used by the
tenant as clean as their condition permits.
      (2)   The tenant shall cooperate to a reasonable extent in assisting the
landlord in any reasonable effort to remedy the problem.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.054 RESOLUTION.
   Resolution of a violation of this section may be sought as stipulated in §§
93.165 through
93.176 with the following changes.
   (A)   Discovery. A complaint under this section shall be filed for
investigation by recommendation to the code enforcement officer or a local Fire
Chief.
   (B)   Investigation and confirmation. An action for enforcement by the code
enforcement officer shall be investigated and authorized by at least one
authorized public health official as identified in §
93.050. The investigation shall be accomplished either by physical inspection
of the property or by inspection of photographic or video evidence of the
alleged violation. When a violation of this section has been confirmed upon
this investigation, the public health official(s) shall provide the code
enforcement officer with a confirmation statement avowing the existence of a
public health and safety violation according to the benchmarks provided in §
93.053.
   (C)   Actions.
      (1)   The first confirmed violation with respect to location and property
owner shall follow the guidelines of §
93.165(A) if summary abatement is not warranted. The responsible party or
parties shall be provided with appropriate education materials as to property
owner and/or tenant resources and responsibilities.
      (2)   Subsequent violations on the same property with the same property
owner may meet the definition of chronic offender. The county may utilize an
enforcement action most appropriate to the situation in compliance with §§
93.165 through
93.176. Penalties and costs will be assessed according to §
93.999, including recovery in the form of a lien to recover costs and penalties
for abatement.
      (3)   A chronic offender will face additional sanctions, such as citation
and county abatement with the requirement to pay the county’s costs plus
chronic offender percentage penalties as stipulated in Chapter 36 of this code.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.055 INSPECTION AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Right of entry. A code enforcement officer may enter property,
including the interior of structures, at all reasonable times whenever an
inspection is necessary to enforce any building regulations, or whenever the
officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or
upon any property any condition which would constitute a violation as described
in this section, the State Fire Code or Building Code. In the case of entry
into areas of property that are plainly enclosed to create privacy and prevent
access by unauthorized persons, the following steps shall be taken.
      (1)   Occupied property. If any structure on the property is occupied,
the code enforcement officer shall first present proper credentials and request
entry. If entry is refused, the code enforcement officer may obtain entry by
obtaining an inspection warrant.
      (2)   Unoccupied property.
         (a)   If the property is unoccupied, the code enforcement officer
shall contact the property owner, or other persons having charge or control of
the property, and request entry. If entry is refused, the code enforcement
officer may obtain entry by obtaining an inspection warrant.
         (b)   If structures on the property are unoccupied, the code
enforcement officer shall first make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner
or other persons having charge or control of the property and request entry. If
entry is refused, the code enforcement officer may obtain entry by obtaining an
inspection warrant.
   (B)   Grounds for issuance of inspection warrants; affidavit.
      (1)   Affidavit. An inspection warrant shall be issued only upon cause,
supported by affidavit, particularly describing the applicant’s status in
applying for the warrant, the statute, ordinance or regulation requiring or
authorizing the inspection or investigation, the property to be inspected or
investigated and the purpose for which the inspection or investigation is to be
made, including the basis upon which cause exists to inspect. In addition, the
affidavit shall contain either a statement that entry has been sought and
refused, or facts or circumstances reasonably showing that the purposes of the
inspection or investigation might be frustrated if entry were sought without an
inspection warrant.
      (2)   Cause. Cause shall be deemed to exist if reasonable legislative or
administrative standards for conducting a routine, periodic or area inspection
are satisfied with respect to any building or upon any property, or there is
probable cause to believe that a condition of nonconformity with any building
regulation exists with respect to the designated property, or an investigation
is reasonably believed to be necessary in order to discover or verify the
condition of the property for conformity with building regulations.
   (C)   Procedure for issuance of inspection warrant.
      (1)   Examination. Before issuing an inspection warrant, the justice of
the peace may examine under oath the applicant and any other witness and shall
be satisfied of the existence of grounds for granting such application.
      (2)   Issuance. If the justice of the peace is satisfied that cause for
the inspection or investigation exists and that the other requirements for
granting the application are satisfied, the justice of the peace shall issue
the warrant, particularly describing the person or persons authorized to
execute the warrant, the property to be entered and the purpose of the
inspection or investigation. The warrant shall contain a direction that it be
executed on any day of the week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
or where the justice of the peace has specially determined upon a showing that
it cannot be effectively executed between those hours, that it be executed at
any additional or other time of the day or night.
      (3)   Police assistance. In issuing an inspection warrant on unoccupied
property, the justice of the peace may authorize any peace officer, as defined
in state statutes, to enter the described property to remove any person or
obstacle and assist the code enforcement officer(s) inspecting the property in
any way necessary to complete the inspection.
   (D)   Execution of inspection warrants.
      (1)   Occupied property. Except as provided in division (D)(2) below, in
executing an inspection warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant
shall, before entry into the occupied premises, make a reasonable effort to
present the person’s credentials, authority and purpose to an occupant or
person in possession of the property designated in the warrant and show the
occupant or person in possession of the property the warrant or a copy thereof
upon request.
      (2)   Unoccupied property. In executing an inspection warrant, the person
authorized to execute the warrant need not inform anyone of the person’s
authority and purpose, as prescribed in division (D)(1) above, but may promptly
enter the property if it is at the time unoccupied or not in the possession of
any person or at the time reasonably believed to be in such condition. In such
case a copy of the warrant shall be conspicuously posted upon the property.
      (3)   Return. An inspection warrant must be executed within ten working
days of its issue and returned to the justice of the peace by whom it was
issued within ten working days from its date of execution. After the expiration
of the time prescribed by this division (D)(3), the warrant unless executed is
void.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.056 APPEALS.
   Appeals of code enforcement decisions shall be made to the County Board of
Commissioners, which will act as an Advisory and Appeals Board. A written
appeal must be filed with the Planning Department within 20 days after the day
of the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be
based on a claim that the true intent of this section or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions do not
fully apply or the requirements are adequately satisfied by other means. The
Board of Commissioners shall meet to hear an appeal upon notice from the
Planning Director within 20 days of the filing of an appeal at a separate
hearing or at a regularly scheduled Board of Commissioners hearing. All appeal
hearings shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant’s
representative, the code enforcement officer and any person whose interests are
affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The Board of Commissioners
shall modify or reverse the decision of the code enforcement officer only by a
concurring vote of a majority of the Board of Commissioners and upon
consultation with the public health officials responsible for signing the
original confirmation statement stipulated in §
93.054(B). Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices)
shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by
the Board of Commissioner. The code enforcement officer shall take immediate
action in accordance with the decision of the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
CHRONIC NUISANCES
§ 93.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY.
      (1)   Property on which three or more nuisance activities exist or have
occurred during any 30-day period;
      (2)   Property on which or within 400 feet of which any person associated
with the property has engaged in three or more nuisance activities during any
30-day period;
      (3)   Property which, upon request for execution of a search warrant, has
been the subject of a determination by a court that probable cause that
possession, manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance or related
offenses as defined in the state statutes has occurred within the previous 30
days, and the County Sheriff has determined that the search warrant was based
on evidence of continuous or repeated nuisance activities at the property; or
      (4)   Property on which continuous or repeated nuisance activities as
defined in this chapter exist or have occurred.
   NUISANCE ACTIVITIES. Any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct:
      (1)   Harassment, as defined in the state statutes;
      (2)   Intimidation, as defined in the state statutes;
      (3)   Disorderly conduct, as defined in the state statutes;
      (4)   Assault or menacing, as defined in the state statutes;
      (5)   Sexual abuse, contributing to the delinquency of a minor or sexual
misconduct, as defined in the state statutes;
      (6)   Public indecency, as defined in the state statutes;
      (7)   Prostitution or related offenses, as defined in the state statutes;
      (8)   Alcoholic liquor violations, as defined in the state statutes;
      (9)   Offensive littering, as defined in the state statutes;
      (10)   Criminal trespass, as defined in the state statutes;
      (11)   Theft, as defined in the state statutes;
      (12)   Arson or related offenses, as defined in the state statutes;
      (13)   Possession, manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance or
related offenses, as defined in the state statutes;
      (14)   Illegal gambling, as defined in the state statutes;
      (15)   Criminal mischief, as defined in the state statutes; and/or
      (16)   Any attempt to commit (as defined in the state statutes), any of
the above activities, behaviors or conduct.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.071 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any property determined by the County Sheriff to be chronic nuisance
property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.
   (B)   Any person in control of property determined by the County Sheriff to
be a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to
its remedies.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.072 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   When the County Sheriff receives two or more police reports
documenting the occurrence of nuisance activities on or within 400 feet of a
property, the County Sheriff shall independently review such reports to
determine whether they describe the activities, behaviors or conduct enumerated
under this chapter. Upon such a finding, the County Sheriff may notify the
person in control in writing that the property is in danger of becoming chronic
nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property;
      (2)   A statement that the County Sheriff has information that the
property may be chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the
nuisance activities that exist or that have occurred. The County Sheriff shall
offer the person in control an opportunity to propose a course of action that
the County Sheriff agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the
violation; and
      (3)   Demand that the person in control respond to the County Sheriff
within ten days to discuss the nuisance activities.
   (B)   (1)   When the County Sheriff receives a police report documenting the
occurrence of additional nuisance activity on or within 400 feet of a property
after notification as provided by this chapter; or, in the case of chronic
nuisance property as defined in this chapter, for which notice is not required,
the County Sheriff shall notify the person in control in writing that the
property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property.
      (2)   The notice shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property;
         (b)   A statement that the County Sheriff has determined the property
to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance
activities leading to his or her determination; and
         (c)   Demand that the person in control respond within ten days to the
County Sheriff and propose a course of action that the County Sheriff agrees
will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
      (3)   Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in control
at the address of the property determined to be a chronic nuisance property, or
such other place which is likely to give the person in control notice of the
determination by the County Sheriff; and
      (4)   A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at the address
shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, and/or
the occupant at the address of the property, if these persons are different
than the person in control, and shall be made either personally or by first
class mail, postage prepaid.
   (C)   If the person in control fails to respond as required, the County
Sheriff may refer the matter to the County Board of Commissioners and the
County Counsel. Prior to referring the matter to the County Board of
Commissioners and the County Counsel, the notice shall also be posted at the
property.
   (D)   If the person in control responds as required and agrees to abate
nuisance activities giving rise to the violation, the County Sheriff may
postpone referring the matter to the County Board of Commissioners and the
County Counsel. If an agreed course of action does not result in the abatement
of the nuisance activities within 60 days; or, if no agreement concerning
abatement is reached within 60 days, the County Sheriff may refer the matter to
the County Board of Commissioners and the County Counsel.
   (E)   When a person in control makes a response to the County Sheriff as
required, any conduct or statements made in connection with the furnishing of
that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance activities
have occurred or are occurring. This division (E) does not require the
exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise admissible or offered for any
other purpose.
   (F)   The failure of any person to receive notice as provided by shall not
invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this chapter.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.073 COMMENCEMENT OF ACTIONS; REMEDIES; BURDEN OF PROOF.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners may authorize the County Counsel to
commence legal proceedings in the circuit court or justice court to abate
chronic nuisance property and seek closure, the imposition of civil penalties
against any or all of the persons in charge thereof, and, any other relief
deemed appropriate.
   (B)   If the Board determines property to be chronic nuisance property, the
Board shall order that the property be closed and secured against all
unauthorized access, use and occupancy for a period of not less than six
months, nor more than one year. The order shall be entered as part of the final
judgment. The Board shall retain jurisdiction during any period of closure.
   (C)   If the Board determines a property to be chronic nuisance property,
the Board may impose a civil penalty of up to $100 per day for each day
nuisance activities occurred on the property; or, the cost to the county to
abate the nuisance activities at the property whichever is greater. The amount
of the civil penalty shall be assessed against the person in control and/or the
property and may be included in the county’s money judgment.
   (D)   If satisfied of the good faith of the person in control, the Board
shall not award civil penalties if the Board finds that the person in control
at all material times could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or
diligence, determine that the property had become chronic nuisance property.
   (E)   In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, the Board may
consider any of the following factors and shall cite those found applicable:
      (1)   The actions taken by the person in control to mitigate or correct
the nuisance activities at the property;
      (2)   The financial condition of the person in control;
      (3)   Repeated or continuous nature of the problem;
      (4)   The magnitude or gravity of the problem;
      (5)   The cooperation of the person in control with the county;
      (6)   The cost to the county of investigating and correcting or
attempting to correct the nuisance activities; and
      (7)   Any other factor deemed relevant by the Board.
   (F)   The county shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a
preponderance of the evidence that the property is chronic nuisance property.
   (G)   Evidence of a property’s general reputation and/or the reputation of
persons residing in or frequenting it shall be admissible.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.074 SUMMARY CLOSURE.
   Any summary closure proceeding shall be based on evidence showing that
nuisance activities exist or have occurred on the property and that emergency
action is necessary to avoid an immediate threat to public welfare and safety.
Proceedings to obtain an order of summary closure shall be governed by the
provisions of the State Rules of Civil Procedure for obtaining temporary
restraining orders. In the event of summary closure, the county is not required
to comply with the notification procedures set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.075 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Board may authorize the county to physically secure the property
against all unauthorized access, use or occupancy in the event that the person
in control fails to do so within the time specified by the Board. In the event
that the county is authorized to secure the property, the county shall recover
all costs reasonably incurred by the county to physically secure the property
as provided by this section. The county shall prepare a statement of costs and
the county shall thereafter submit that statement to the Board for its review
as provided by the State Rules of Civil Procedure.
   (B)   A lien shall be created against the property for the amount of the
county’s money judgment. Judgments imposed by this chapter shall bear interest
at the statutory rate.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.076 ATTORNEYS’ FEES.
   The Board may, in its discretion, award attorneys’ fees to the prevailing
party.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
NOISE AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
§ 93.090 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in creating, permit,
continue or permit the continuance of any loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise
in the county. The following acts are declared to be violations of this
section, but such enumerations shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   Any loud and continuing noise that obstructs the free use of property
so as to essentially interfere with the reasonable comfort and enjoyment of
life and property and meets one of the following: repeated at least three times
during a 30-minute time period;
   (B)   Noise that is plainly audible within a dwelling unit 100 feet or more
away from the source of the noise, including the use of domestic power tools,
construction work, noise created by dogs or any similar offensive noise from
any building used as a private residence, apartment house, rooming house or
hotel between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and/or
   (C)   A continuing offense, which shall be one in which the sound
constituting the violation occurs without substantial break for a period of 24
hours or more.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.091 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following acts are exceptions in this chapter:
   (A)   Noise emanating from aircraft, railway locomotives, military
operations, energy facilities and farm equipment and operations;
   (B)   Noise created by the normal operation of construction, road work, road
repair, drilling or demolition work that occurs between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m.;
   (C)   Noise created by a community outdoor activity or event conducted on
public or private parks, playgrounds and public or private school grounds;
   (D)   When an alleged noise nuisance is the result of an activity allowed by
a permit issued by an authority of the state or federal jurisdiction, the
nuisance shall be enforced under the provisions and conditions of that
particular permit; and
   (E)   Noise caused by the performance of emergency work, emergency alarms or
by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency apparatus and equipment.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.092 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter, a violation
may be enjoined by a civil action pursuant to state statutes, as described in §
93.176.
   (B)   Violations of O.A.R. 340-035, noise control regulations, are not
enforced under this chapter.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
DOGS AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE AND ANIMAL NEGLECT
§ 93.105 DOG CONTROL DISTRICT.
   The county is hereby declared a Dog Control District. The County Board of
Commissioners shall act as the Dog Control District Board of Supervisors. The
code enforcement officer shall be the dog control officer and will provide for
administration and enforcement of a dog control program.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.106 DOGS AS A NUISANCE.
   (A)   A dog is a public nuisance if it:
      (1)   Chases persons or vehicles on premises other than premises from
which the keeper of the dog may lawfully exclude others;
      (2)   Damages or destroys property of persons other than the keeper of
the dog;
      (3)   Scatters garbage on premises other than premises from which the
keeper of the dog may lawfully exclude others;
      (4)   Trespasses on public or private property of persons other than the
keeper of the dog;
      (5)   Disturbs any person by frequent or prolonged noises;
      (6)   Is a female in heat and running at large;
      (7)   Any dog running at large; or
      (8)   Is a menacing or potentially dangerous dog, but is not a dangerous
dog as defined in state statutes.
   (B)   Any person who has cause to believe a keeper is maintaining a dog that
is a public nuisance may complain, either orally or in writing, to the county.
The receipt of any complaint is sufficient cause for the county to investigate
the matter and determine whether the keeper of the dog is in violation of this
section.
   (C)   A law enforcement officer or dog control officer may cite a keeper,
impound a dog or both if the dog is found running at large as a nuisance as
described in division (A) above.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.107 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   All dogs shall be kept within the real property limits of the keeper
of the dog and under control of the responsible person, or contained with a
fence that maintains control of the animal. While off the property of the
keeper of the dog, a dog must be on a leash or lead under control of a
responsible person or be contained within a portable kennel. If the dog has
been determined by the law enforcement officer or dog control officer to be a
public nuisance consistent with the definition in §
93.106(A), RESTRAINT shall mean contained within a dog run or kennel, inside a
secure structure or leashed and muzzled when off the premises or the premises
occupied by the keeper of the dog.
   (B)   Any dog determined by the county to be a menacing dog or a public
nuisance shall be confined by the keeper of the dog, within a secure building,
secure kennel or dog run. Whenever off the premises, the dog shall be securely
muzzled and leashed or muzzled and caged whenever off the premises of the
keeper of the dog.
   (C)   No dog shall be allowed to cause a nuisance. The keeper of every dog
shall be held responsible for every behavior of such dog under the provisions
of this section and state law.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.108 DOGS AND LIVESTOCK.
   (A)   The owner of any livestock which has been damaged by being injured,
chased, wounded or killed by any dog shall have a cause of action against the
owner of such dog for the damages resulting therefrom, including double the
value of any livestock killed and double the amount of any damage to the
livestock.
   (B)   If one or more of several dogs owned by different persons participate
in damaging any livestock, the owners of the respective dogs shall be jointly
and severally liable under this section. The owners of dogs jointly or
severally liable under this section have a right of contribution among
themselves. The right exists only in favor of an owner who has paid more than
the pro rata share of the owner, determined by dividing the total damage by the
number of dogs involved, of the common liability and the total recovery of the
owner is limited to the amount paid by the owner in excess of the pro rata
share of the owner.
   (C)   Any dog, whether licensed or not, which, while off the premises owned
or under control of its owner, kills, wounds or injures any livestock not
belonging to the master of such dog, is a public nuisance and may be killed
immediately by any person. This regulation does not apply to any dog acting
under the direction of its master, or the agents or employees of such master.
   (D)   If any dog, not under the control of its owner or keeper, is found
chasing or feeding upon the warm carcass of livestock not the property of such
owner or keeper it shall be deemed, prima facie, as engaged in killing,
wounding or injuring livestock.
   (E)   No person shall kill any dog for killing, wounding, injuring or
chasing chickens upon a public place or highway.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.109 DOG IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   A law enforcement officer or dog control officer may cite a keeper,
impound a dog or both if the dog is a public nuisance as described above; or
the officer has probable cause to believe that the dog is a dangerous dog as
defined in O.R.S. 609.098.
   (B)   All dogs impounded under this section shall be held in an adequate and
sanitary pound to be provided by the county governing body from the General
Fund or out of funds obtained from dog licenses and from the redemption of dogs
so impounded. However, in lieu of the establishment of a dog pound, the
governing body may contract for the care of the dogs. Unless claimed by its
keeper, a dog shall be impounded for at least three days if the dog is without
a license or identification tag and for at least five days if it has a license
or identification tag. A reasonable effort shall be made to notify the keeper
of a dog before the dog is removed from impoundment.
   (C)   Unless the county governing body provides otherwise, if the keeper
appears and redeems the dog, the keeper shall pay a fee for each subsequent
impoundment, pay the expense of keeping the dog during the time it was
impounded and obtain necessary immunizations. Fees will be in accordance with
the current County Fee Schedule.
   (D)   In addition to any payment required pursuant to division (C) above,
the county governing body may require as a condition for redeeming the dog that
the keeper agree to reasonable restrictions on the keeping of the dog,
including, but not limited to, §
93.107. The keeper must pay the cost of complying with the reasonable
restrictions. For the purpose of this section, REASONABLE RESTRICTIONS may
include, but is not limited to, sterilization.
   (E)   A keeper of a dog maintains a public nuisance if the keeper fails to
comply with reasonable restrictions imposed under division (D) above or if a
keeper fails to provide acceptable proof of compliance to the county governing
body on or before the tenth day after issuance of the order imposing the
restrictions. If the Board or governing body finds the proof submitted by the
keeper unacceptable, the Board or governing body shall send notice of that
finding to the keeper no later than five days after the proof is received.
   (F)   The county governing body may release the dog to a responsible person
upon receiving assurance that the person will properly care for the dog,
including providing necessary immunizations, and upon payment of a sum
established by the county governing body plus cost of keep during its
impounding, and purchase of a license if required. The person shall thereafter
be the keeper of the dog for purposes of O.R.S. 609.035 through 609.110.
   (G)   If the keeper of a dog is not charged with violating O.R.S. 609.095(2)
or (3) or 609.098, and the county governing body finds that the dog has menaced
or chased a person when on premises other than the premises from which the
keeper may lawfully exclude others or has bitten a person, the county governing
body may order that the dog be killed in a humane manner. Before ordering that
the dog be killed, the Board or governing body shall consider the factors
described in O.R.S. 609.093 and issue written findings on those factors.
Notwithstanding O.R.S. 34.030, if the disposition order issued by the Board or
governing body provides that the dog is to be killed, a petition by the keeper
for a writ of review must be filed no later than the tenth day after the county
governing body sends notice of the order to the keeper. Notwithstanding O.R.S.
19.270, 19.330 and 34.070, the order for the killing of the dog may not be
carried out during the period that the order is subject to review or appeal. If
the dog is not killed, the Board or governing body may impose reasonable
restrictions on the keeping of the dog. The keeper must pay the cost of
complying with the reasonable restrictions. If no keeper appears to redeem a
dog within the allotted time, or the keeper of the dog is not able or willing
to comply with the required restrictions, the dog may be surrendered to the
county.
   (H)   If the keeper of a dog is charged with violating O.R.S. 609.095(2) or
(3) or 609.098, upon conviction of the keeper the court may determine the
disposition of the dog as provided under O.R.S. 609.990 up to and including
euthanization.
   (I)   Notwithstanding divisions (B), (C), (F), (G) and (H) above, any dog
impounded for biting a person shall be held for at least ten days before
redemption or destruction to determine if the dog is rabid.
   (J)   Notwithstanding divisions (B) and (C) above, if the keeper is charged
with violating O.R.S. 609.098, the dog shall be kept in impoundment pending
resolution of the charges. A court may order the keeper to post a deposit with
the county governing body to cover the cost of keeping the dog in impoundment.
If the keeper is convicted of violating O.R.S. 609.098, the court may order the
deposit forfeited to the Board or governing body.
   (K)   The county governing body may impose lesser fees or penalties under
divisions (C) and (F) above for certain senior citizens under certain
circumstances.
   (L)   The county governing body may euthanize the dog if not claimed within
30 days.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.110 ANIMAL ABUSE; NEGLECT AND ABANDONMENT.
   A person who commits a crime of animal abuse, neglect or abandonment shall
be subject to the provisions of O.R.S. 167.310 through 167.390.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.111 VIOLATIONS.
   Fines and penalties shall be paid in accordance with the County Fee Schedule
and O.R.S. 609.162, 609.163, 609.166 and 609.990. In addition to any fine or
sentence imposed under this section, a court may order a person who keeps a
nuisance dog as set forth in §
93.106 to pay restitution for any physical injury, death or property damage
caused by the dog as a result of the keeper’s violation. The court may also
order the person to pay the cost of keeping the dog in impoundment.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
§ 93.125 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to implement the county’s authority to
enforce the environmental health programs delegated to Umatilla County by the
state for on-site septic systems, food service facilities, tourist facilities
and pool facilities.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.126 ADOPTION.
   (A)   Except as specifically provided herein, all administrative rules which
are duly existing and adopted by the State Environmental Quality Commission,
and the Department of Environmental Quality on [date of adoption of MOA],
pursuant to O.R.S. 454.605 through 454.779, including appendices, are adopted
as regulations by the county and shall have full force and effect as law in the
county. These rules include O.A.R. 340-012-0060. The administrative rules are
adopted as part of this subchapter and are incorporated into this subchapter by
this reference. Violations of this subchapter shall be measured by the
technical and other standards found in said rules.
   (B)   The following state statutes and administrative rules are adopted as
part of this subchapter and are incorporated into this subchapter by this
reference:
      (1)   Restaurants and bed and breakfast facilities (including limited
service restaurants and temporary restaurants). O.R.S. 624.010 through 624.029,
624.060 through 624.106, 624.130 and 624.992 and administrative rules adopted
by the Department of Human Services (or its successor agency) pursuant to those
statutes, including O.A.R. Chapter 333, divisions 150, 157, 158, 160 and 170;
      (2)   Commissaries, mobile units and vending machines (including
warehouses). O.R.S. 624.310 through 624.430 and 624.992, and administrative
rules adopted by the Department of Human Services (or its successor agency)
pursuant to those statutes, including O.A.R. Chapter 333, division 162;
      (3)   Tourist facilities (including travelers’ accommodations, hostels,
picnic parks, recreation parks and organizational camps). O.R.S. 446.310
through 446.320, 446.322 through 446.349 and administrative rules adopted by
the Department of Human Services (or its successor agency) pursuant to those
statutes, including O.A.R. Chapter 333, divisions 29, 30 and 31;
      (4)   Pool facilities (including public swimming pools, public spa pools,
public wading pools and bathhouses). O.R.S. 448.005 through 448.060, 448.095
through 448.100 and administrative rules adopted by the Department of Human
Services (or its successor agency) pursuant to those statutes, including O.A.R.
Chapter 333, divisions 60 and 62; and
      (5)   Administrative procedures. O.R.S. 183.310, 183.413 through 183.502
and 183.745, and O.A.R. 333-012-0050 through 333-012-0070, and 137-003-0001
through 137-003-0092.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.127 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All proposed or approved sewage facilities shall comply will all
applicable provisions of state statutes and rules and regulations of the State
Department of Environmental Quality.
   (B)   Except as specifically provided in the rules, it is unlawful and a
violation of this subchapter to:
      (1)   Begin construction, installation or development of any system
without first obtaining a construction installation permit from the county;
      (2)   Place into service, change use of or increase the projected daily
sewage flow into an existing system without obtaining either an authorization
notice or alteration permit, as appropriate, from the county; and/or
      (3)   Repair a system without first obtaining a repair permit from the
county, except that emergency repairs may be made when sewage is backing up
into a dwelling or commercial facility, or when there is a broken sewer pipe
and immediate action is necessary; provided, that a permit is obtained within
three days after the emergency repairs are begun.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.128 VIOLATIONS.
   It is unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person to:
   (A)   Construct a subsurface sewage disposal system except in compliance
with O.R.S. Chapter 454 and rules promulgated under that chapter;
   (B)   Habitate on or utilize land except in compliance with O.R.S. Chapter
454 and rules promulgated thereunder;
   (C)   Fail to treat or dispose of any sewage as required by this chapter;
   (D)   Discharge untreated or partially treated sewage or septic tank
effluent directly or indirectly onto the ground surface or into any public
waters;
   (E)   Connect any plumbing fixture from which sewage is or may be discharged
into any sewage disposal system that has not been approved by the county;
   (F)   Obstruct, cover, modify the soil covering or otherwise affect a system
replacement area without first obtaining approval from the county;
   (G)   Fail to abandon an on-site system, including a septic tank and system,
when required to under the rules, or fail to comply with the procedures and
requirements for proper abandonment as provided by the rules;
   (H)   Backfill or cover, connect to or use, any system without first
obtaining a certificate of satisfactory completion of construction,
installation, repair or alteration unless issuance of the certificate has been
waived by operation of law or otherwise;
   (I)   Fail to meet requirements for satisfactorily complying with any
correction notice within the time required;
   (J)   Use any materials that do not comply with standards for on-site
systems set forth in the rules;
   (K)   Falsify or fail to provide any information requested by the county of
any applicant for a permit, variance or hardship relief with the intent to
evade or circumvent the procedures or standards established for regulation of
on-site systems; and/or
   (L)   Fail to comply with the terms or conditions of any permit, including
the duties imposed on permit holders by the rules.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.129 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any facility that is operated in violation of this subchapter is a public
nuisance and dangerous to health and may be abated or enjoined in any manner
provided by law.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.130 UPDATES TO STATUTES AND/OR RULES.
   All amendments to the state statutes and state administrative rules adopted
and incorporated into this subchapter shall automatically be adopted into this
subchapter as well, with the same effective dates as that set forth in such
amended statutes and rules.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.131 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   None of the remedies available to the county as set forth in this subchapter
are exclusive. Nothing in this subchapter shall preclude any remedy otherwise
available to the county, either in law or equity, including enforcement under
§§
93.165 through
93.176.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.132 DELEGATION.
   (A)   The Umatilla County Health Public Administrator is delegated the
authority to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, including those
available to Director of Human Services (or its successor position title) under
the state statutes and state administrative rules.
   (B)   The Public Health Administrator shall administer the programs
necessary to enforce the rules adopted by the State Department of Human
Services.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
WEED CONTROL
§ 93.145 WEED CONTROL DISTRICT.
   The county is hereby declared a Weed Control District. The County Soil and
Water Conservation District shall act as the Weed Advisory Board. The County
Weed Coordinator/Inspector will provide administration and enforcement of a
weed control program as outlined in state statutes.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.146 NOXIOUS WEEDS.
   (A)   A weed is a noxious weed if it:
      (1)   Is recognized by the Board of Commissioners as an imminent and
continuous threat to natural resources, watershed health, livestock, wildlife,
land and agricultural products;
      (2)   Has the potential for widespread infestation; and/or
      (3)   Is not native to the state.
   (B)   The Weed Coordinator/Inspector shall administer and enforce management
and control of noxious weeds and weeds of economic importance, when feasible,
with control practices selected and applied to achieve desired weed management
objectives in a manner that minimizes risks to human health, non-target
organisms, native fish and wildlife, watersheds and the environment.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.147 PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Each person, firm or corporation owning or occupying land within the
District shall destroy or prevent the spread or seeding of any noxious weed by
the use of the best means at hand and within a time deemed reasonable, except
that no weed declared noxious shall be permitted to produce seed.
   (B)   Persons operating or having control of any threshing machinery, clover
huller, hay baler, seed cleaning or treating machinery or other machinery shall
thoroughly clean it before moving it over any public road or from one farm to
another. All hay, straw or other crop residue infested with noxious weeds
having partially or fully formed seeds shall not be moved from the land on
which it was grown.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.148 WEED INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Weed Coordinator/Inspector shall have access to the land within
the District.
   (B)   When provisions of state statutes are not being complied with, the
Weed Coordinator/Inspector or code enforcement officer shall serve a written
notice to the owner or occupant of the land. When the Weed Coordinator/
Inspector or code enforcement officer is unable to serve the notice personally,
the notice shall be posted, and two copies thereof, in three conspicuous places
on the land. The notice shall contain:
      (1)   The date of service or posting of notice; and
      (2)   The name of the weed or weeds growing on the land, and a statement
setting forth that the weeds must be destroyed or must be prevented from
producing seed within a specified time of not less than two days or more than
20 days, to be established by the Inspector, from the date of service of the
notice.
   (C)   The service of notice as provided in division (B) above imposes a
requirement on the owner or occupant of the land to destroy or prevent the
weeds from seeding or spreading during the continuation of ownership or
occupancy of the land or until the District is dissolved. A copy of the notice,
together with proof of service indorsed thereon, shall be filed with the Board
of Commissioners.
   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding division (B) above, with permission of the owner
or occupant of land, employees of the State Department of Agriculture, or of
designated Weed Control Districts, may enter the land to identify noxious weeds
and to implement or provide for the implementation of integrated noxious weed
control measures, including, but not limited to, the application of pesticides
to the land.
      (2)   The control or eradication of noxious weeds may be conducted with
or without charge to the owner or occupant of the land. A notice as described
in division (B) above is not required for the conduct of activities described
in this division (D).
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.149 COUNTY DISPOSITION OF WEEDS.
   (A)   Steps leading to eradication and control of noxious weeds in the
county are necessary and the Weed Coordinator/Inspector shall cooperate with
individual landowners in the control and eradication of noxious weed pests.
   (B)   The Weed Coordinator/Inspector shall destroy or prevent the spread or
seeding of any noxious weed on any land owned by the county or constituted as
the right-of-way for any highway, county road, drainage or irrigation ditch,
power or transmission line or other purposes under its jurisdiction.
   (C)   If the owner or occupant of the land fails or refuses to immediately
destroy or cut the noxious weeds, the Weed Coordinator/Inspector shall at once
notify the Board of Commissioners, who will take enforcement steps.
      (1)   The county shall authorize the Weed Coordinator/Inspector to go
upon the land or premises and destroy the noxious weeds or control them in such
a manner as will destroy all seeds using the most effective and practical
method in the judgment of the Inspector and with the least injury to the land
or crops.
      (2)   If the weeds are too far advanced for local control procedures, the
Inspector shall notify the Board of Commissioners which shall request the State
Department of Agriculture to immediately quarantine any uncontrolled noxious
weed infested farm within the county to prevent the movement of infested crops
or livestock and to prevent the spread of the weeds.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.150 VIOLATIONS; LIEN.
   (A)   Upon completion of work the person so appointed and authorized by the
Board of Commissioners shall file an itemized statement of expenses necessarily
incurred, including wages. A lien shall be docketed upon the lands or premises
for the cost of expenses. If the charges and expenses are not paid and the lien
discharged by the owner or occupant of such land within 90 days the county may
recover the expenses in an action at law.
   (B)   In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter, violation may
result in a fine assessed in accordance with state statutes and may incur civil
penalties.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 93.165 ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
   Resolution of a violation of county ordinances may be sought in any one or a
combination of the following methods. Which method to be used is solely at the
discretion of the county:
   (A)   Warning notice process seeking voluntary compliance;
   (B)   Consent agreement;
   (C)   Citation;
   (D)   Stipulated judgment;
   (E)   Order of abatement;
   (F)   Other civil actions, seeking a judgment and order for compliance,
including, but not limited to, mandamus, restraining orders, stop work orders;
and
   (G)   Summary abatement.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.166 INVESTIGATION AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Where authorized by statute or as a condition of permit approval,
consent agreement or agreed condition of a prior enforcement order, the code
enforcement officer shall have the power to enter upon and inspect, at any
reasonable time, any public or private property, to investigate any alleged
violation of county ordinance, order or permit approval, a violation of a
statute which the county has the authority to enforce, or to ascertain
compliance or noncompliance with the administrative resolution procedure set
out in this section, a stop work or stop use order under §
93.176 or a consent agreement under §
93.169.
   (B)   A warrant for inspection of private property, including a private
residence, will be accomplished in accordance with §
93.055.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.167 ENFORCEMENT BY VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE; WARNING NOTICE.
   (A)   The process authorized in this section is primarily for the purpose of
seeking voluntary compliance by the alleged violator. At the discretion of the
enforcement officer this process is to be considered in those cases where
voluntary compliance is likely and is in the interests of the county, taking
into consideration the nature and severity of the violation and the history of
the property and the person responsible.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G) below, the enforcement
officer shall solicit the voluntary compliance of the person in violation of
this chapter by the procedure set forth in this section.
   (C)   In cases where the corrective action indicated in a notice requires
both applying for and receiving a permit or approval, the violation shall
continue until all necessary permits or approvals are granted or until they are
denied and code compliance is obtained through other means.
   (D)   If the person responsible is not the property owner, the county shall
give initial and final notice to abate a violation to the property owner;
however, a notice of violation published at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county is sufficient notice to a property owner to
satisfy the notice requirements of this chapter and or other due process
required by law. The notice to the property owner and the publication shall
additionally state that the cost of abatement not paid by the person
responsible may be assessed to and become a lien on the property.
   (E)   On completion of the personal giving of notice, posting and mailing,
the person or persons giving such notice shall execute and maintain affidavits
stating the date, time, place and manner of giving notice.
   (F)   An error in the name or address of the person responsible or property
owner shall not make the notice void, and, in such case, the posted or
published notice, as the case may be, shall be sufficient.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the process authorized in this section, the county may
at any time immediately begin prosecution of any violation on a citation or
file any other action to abate the violation. This determination is at the
discretion of the enforcement officer. The determination is not appealable or
reviewable.
   (H)   (1)   Subject to division (B) above, if an enforcement officer is
satisfied that a violation exists, the enforcement officer shall:
         (a)   Give personal notice;
         (b)   Cause an initial notice to abate to be posted on the premises or
at the site of the violation, directing the person responsible to abate the
violation; and
         (c)   At the time of posting, cause a copy of the notice to abate to
be forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the person
responsible at the last known address of such person.
      (2)   The notice to abate shall contain the following contents:
         (a)   Statement that the notice is a notice to abate a violation;
         (b)   The name of the person issuing the notice along with the name of
the county department to contact regarding the violation;
         (c)   The date the notice was issued;
         (d)   A brief description of the violation alleged to exist;
         (e)   A description of the real property, by street address or
otherwise, on which the violation exists;
         (f)   A statement describing the corrective action that needs to take
place to correct the alleged violation(s);
         (g)   An order to voluntarily abate the violation within ten days from
the date of the notice;
         (h)   A statement that failure to correct the alleged violation(s)
within ten days may result in further enforcement procedures including any
combination of the following:
            1.   An enforcement citation and prosecution, including, but not
limited to, payment of a fine and court costs and court orders to comply;
            2.   Other civil actions in court; or
            3.   Abatement by the county.
         (i)   A statement that if the violation is not voluntarily abated, the
county may seek from the court a judgment to abate the violation which, if not
obeyed, could result in the county itself abating the violation and being
awarded a lien by the court on the specified property for the expenses of
abating the violation and administrative costs.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.168 ENFORCEMENT PROCESS BY CITATION.
   (A)   If the violation has not been satisfactorily abated by the date and
time specified in the warning notice, or the enforcement official makes the
determination set forth in division (B) below, the enforcement officer may
issue a citation pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   If the enforcement officer determines that enforcement of a violation
by means of a citation is warranted, the enforcement officer may issue a
citation under this chapter.
   (C)   Any code enforcement officer may issue and serve a citation for
violation of a county regulation or state statute as described in §
93.001. If the responsible party is cited, or if a stop work/use order is
issued, the responsible party may request a hearing as provided in §
93.173. The setting of priorities among different complaints and enforcement
actions shall be within the discretion of the code enforcement officer, upon
consultation with the county department(s) involved.
   (D)   (1)   The sequence of procedures is as follows.
         (a)   Citation. The code enforcement officer shall use the state
uniform citation and complaint form.
         (b)   Violation. Except where otherwise prohibited by statute, each
calendar date on which the violation occurs shall constitute a separate
violation. A citation shall be written for each day the violation continues to
be a continuing violation.
         (c)   Multiple violations. The prosecution of an individual violation
shall not bar the subsequent prosecution of any additional violations, which
occurred at the same time or as part of the same act.
         (d)   Service. The code enforcement officer shall issue a copy of the
citation to the responsible party(s).
         (e)   Filing. In addition to service on the responsible party or
parties, one copy of the citation, complaint and summons shall be filed with
the justice court and one copy shall be placed in the code enforcement file
within three days of completion of service. The citation, complaint and summons
must be served a minimum of ten days prior to the scheduled date of the
hearing.
      (2)   If the situation has not been abated within the time allowed, the
code enforcement officer may cause the situation to be abated. The public
safety officer or other persons charged with the responsibility of abatement of
the situation shall have the right at reasonable times to enter upon the
property to investigate or cause the removal of the situation. Abatement will
be accomplished according to the abatement procedures set forth in this
section.
   (E)   Pursuant to state statute, any enforcement officer may serve a person
with a citation on which another enforcement officer made a certification.
   (F)   Any enforcement officer issuing a citation pursuant to this chapter
shall, in addition to the date and time, indicate that the responsible party
must appear before the court and the name of the court before which the
responsible party is required to personally appear.
   (G)   The base fine for a violation shall be the maximum amount allowed in
state statutes.
   (H)   The person making the certification is not required to be the person
who serves the citation on the person believed to be in violation of the
ordinance.
   (I)   An enforcement officer may issue a violation citation pursuant to this
chapter even if the conduct alleged to constitute a violation does not take
place in the presence of the officer, if the officer has reasonable grounds to
believe that the conduct alleged constitutes a violation.
   (J)   Violation proceedings for the purpose of enforcing this code and this
chapter may be commenced only by enforcement officers. No private party may
initiate a violation proceeding pursuant to O.R.S. 153.058 or other law.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.169 ENFORCEMENT BY CONSENT AGREEMENT.
   (A)   During the pendency of an action on a violation, but prior to entry of
a judgment, the county and the responsible party may enter into an agreement
designed to abate the violation and petition the court to include it as a part
of a consent agreement as described in this section.
   (B)   The consent agreement may provide that the responsible party does not
admit violation of this code but will make necessary corrections, as set forth
in the agreement, to bring the responsible party’s actions, conduct, omissions
or property into conformance with the code.
   (C)   The responsible party, the responsible party’s attorney, if any, and a
county representative shall sign the consent agreement.
   (D)   The consent agreement shall be filed with the circuit or justice court
as a final adjudication of the proceedings and shall constitute a dismissal of
the action when the responsible party performs as agreed. The violator or the
county may seek a court order dismissing the case upon completion of the
conditions of the consent agreement. The court retains jurisdiction of the
matter until the order dismissing the case is issued.
   (E)   The responsible party’s failure to comply with the consent agreement
allows the county to seek any additional remedies provided by law or this
chapter including an order of abatement.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.170 ENFORCEMENT BY STIPULATED JUDGMENT.
   (A)   During the pendency of an action on a violation, if the responsible
party enters a plea of guilty or is found guilty, the responsible party and the
county may agree to and submit to the court a stipulated agreement and judgment
to abate a violation.
   (B)   As part of a stipulated agreement and judgment under this section:
      (1)   The responsible party must plead guilty to the violation;
      (2)   The responsible party shall abate the violation as provided by the
agreement;
      (3)   The responsible party shall cooperate with the enforcement officer;
      (4)   The county may, but is not required to, bear some or all of the
costs of abatement;
      (5)   Any costs of abatement which the county bears must be repaid by the
responsible party to the county as provided by the agreement; and
      (6)   Any costs paid by the county to abate the violation shall become a
money judgment in favor of the county against the responsible party. The county
may record such judgment as a lien in accordance with applicable law.
   (C)   If the responsible party fails to comply with the terms and conditions
of the stipulated judgment, the county may enter the property and abate the
violation.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.171 ENFORCEMENT BY ORDER OF ABATEMENT.
   (A)   If the parties do not enter into a consent agreement or a stipulated
judgment, and notwithstanding the willingness of the responsible party to pay
the base fine, the justice of the peace shall, if the responsible party pleads
guilty or no contest or is found guilty, issue an order to the responsible
party to abate the violation in a manner and time acceptable to the county and
require the responsible party to provide proof of abatement to the county and
to the justice of the peace.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to, not in lieu of, any remedy allowed by this
section and pursuant to O.R.S. 153.090(1)(e), as part of a judgment entered
under this section, the justice of the peace:
         (a)   May on its own motion and shall on request of the enforcement
officer, order a responsible party to abate any violation of which the
responsible party is found guilty or enters a plea of guilty or no contest. The
justice of the peace shall set a time by which the responsible party must abate
the violation and may set other conditions on the order of abatement. Any
abatement order shall include authorization for an enforcement officer to enter
the property to determine compliance with the code and compliance with an order
to abate. Any failure to abate the violation as ordered by the justice of the
peace shall be contempt of court; or
         (b)   Shall on request of the enforcement officer, authorize the
county to enter the property for the purposes of abating the violation.
      (2)   The responsible party shall cooperate with the enforcement
officers, including not preventing the officer and any other persons employed
or contracted by the county to enter the property to determine compliance with
the code and any orders to abate.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.172 SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
   The health officer, the Chief of a Fire Department, the Sheriff, the
Planning Director or the Director of Public Works may, through coordination
with the code enforcement officer, proceed summarily to abate a health or other
violation which unmistakably exists and which imminently endangers health or
property; however, such summary abatement shall be limited to only those
actions necessary to reduce the threat to a level that eliminates the imminent
danger to health or property. No notice to the property owner or person in
control of the property is required. Costs of the abatement may be assessed as
provided in §§
93.190 through
93.192 and 93.999.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.173 HEARINGS.
   (A)   A person to whom a citation is issued shall have a hearing before the
justice court of the county on an issue of violation or abatement pursuant to
this chapter and the date shall be as set forth in the citation.
   (B)   The county justice of the peace may act as an administrative hearings
officer for the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise appointed by the
Board of Commissioners. The county shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the validity of the violation, citation or abatement. The
county may present evidence either by testimony or written report of the public
safety officer or code enforcement officer. If the county’s evidence is
presented only by written report and the justice of the peace cannot resolve a
question solely upon the information contained in the report, the hearing may
be continued for a reasonable time to obtain additional information.
   (C)   (1)   If the justice of the peace finds that the citation or abatement
was proper, the justice of the peace:
         (a)   Shall enter a written order supporting the citation or
abatement;
         (b)   Shall find that the owner or responsible person is liable for
any costs resulting from the abatement; and
         (c)   May find that the owner or responsible person is liable for the
costs of the hearing.
      (2)   If the justice of the peace finds that the citation or abatement
was improper, the justice of the peace shall:
         (a)   Find that the owner or responsible person is not liable for any
charges or abatement costs resulting from the abatement; and
         (b)   Order the county to satisfy the abatement costs.
   (D)   The decision of the justice of the peace is final subject to the
protesting party having right to file a writ of review pursuant to O.R.S.
34.010 through 34.100.
   (E)   If the person requesting the hearing does not appear at the scheduled
hearing, the justice of the peace may enter an order supporting the assessed
costs of the abatement.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.174 APPEAL.
   A decision of the justice court on an enforcement action may be appealed to
the circuit court within 30 days of the date of the decision, in accordance
with the requirements of O.R.S. 34.102 for a writ of review.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.175 RECORDS.
   All records of enforcement proceedings shall be permanent county records.
All court orders, consent agreements and other justice court actions entered
into after the issuance of a citation, and stop work or stop use orders shall
be filed with the justice court. Liens shall be filed with the County Clerk.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.176 STOP WORK OR STOP USE ORDER.
   The code enforcement officer, having reasonable grounds to believe that a
person(s) has committed a violation, in lieu of or in addition to issuing a
citation, may issue a stop work or stop use order according to the provisions
of this section.
   (A)   Grounds for issuance. A stop work or stop use order may be issued by
the code enforcement officer at any point in the enforcement process, if the
violation observed is on which requires immediate remedial action:
      (1)   To protect the public health, safety or welfare;
      (2)   Because the responsible party(s) refuses to cooperate with the code
enforcement officer; or
      (3)   Because the violation continues despite notice to the responsible
party(s) of the violation or notice to obtain a necessary permit.
   (B)   Contents. A stop work or stop use order shall be in writing and
contain the following:
      (1)   An order that all work or action in violation of county ordinance
(s) stop immediately;
      (2)   The name of the person(s) or entity(s) to whom it is issued (if
known);
      (3)   The effective date of the order;
      (4)   The date the order is issued;
      (5)   The location or address of the violation;
      (6)   The tax account identification number;
      (7)   The specific sections of the county ordinance(s) violated;
      (8)   A factual description of the nature of the violation;
      (9)   The specific steps which the responsible party(s) must take to
correct the violation;
      (10)   The name and signature of the code enforcement officer; and
      (11)   An address and phone number where the code enforcement officer can
be contacted.
   (C)   Service. A copy of a stop work or stop use order shall be posted on
the property where the violation is occurring (hereinafter “subject property”)
and sent certified mail with return receipt, or any means of mailing by which a
return receipt can be obtained, to the following:
      (1)   All owners and contract purchasers of the subject property;
      (2)   Any known lessees;
      (3)   The State Building Codes Agency;
      (4)   Any known contractors doing construction work on the subject
property which would be in violation of a county ordinance(s); and
      (5)   Any other person(s) identifiable as a responsible party(s).
   (D)   Priority. If a hearing is requested, a stop work or stop use order
shall be given priority for court appearance over all other code enforcement
citations and be heard by the justice of the peace on the next scheduled court
date.
   (E)   Violation of order. If the responsible party(s) fails to obey the
order, the code enforcement officer shall promptly issue a citation for
violation of a stop work or stop use order. Violation of a stop work or stop
use order constitutes a separate violation.
   (F)   Impact on other permits. No building permit, sanitation permit or
other permit or license may be issued, or any work continued under such permits
while a stop work or stop use order is in effect.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
MONEY JUDGMENTS AND FUNDS
§ 93.190 CODE ENFORCEMENT CLEANUP FUND.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Cleanup Fund is hereby established. The Planning
Department shall recommend an amount to be approved annually by the Budget
Committee, and all amounts so approved are appropriated for the purposes set
forth in this section.
   (B)   Moneys in the Fund created by this section may be used at the sole
discretion of the county in any abatement ordered under this chapter. Moneys
expended from the Code Enforcement Cleanup Fund and repaid by the responsible
party to the county shall be applied to the Fund established in this chapter.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.191 WEED CONTROL FUND.
   (A)   The Weed Control Fund is hereby established. The Board of
Commissioners shall recommend an amount to be approved annually by the Budget
Committee, and all amounts so approved are appropriated for the purposes set
forth in this section.
   (B)   Moneys in the Fund created by this section may be used at the sole
discretion of the county in any abatement ordered under this chapter. Moneys
expended from the Weed Control Fund and repaid by the responsible party to the
county shall be applied to the Fund established in this chapter.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.192 RECOVERY ON A MONEY JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Every money judgment shall name the county as the judgment creditor.
   (B)   A money judgment, including, but not limited to, funds described in §
93.190, Code Enforcement Cleanup Fund and §
93.191, Weed Control Fund, must be repaid by the responsible party to the
county.
   (C)   (1)   The amount of any fine imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
transferred to the County General Fund. Fifty percent of the fine amount shall
then be transferred to the Code Enforcement Cleanup Fund or Weed Control Fund,
established in this section.
      (2)   The justice court shall charge court costs to the responsible
party, as determined within the county fee schedule, where:
         (a)   The responsible party admits a violation or is found guilty of a
provision of this code;
         (b)   The responsible party fails to appear for the hearing or,
following a hearing, is found to have violated a provision of this code;
         (c)   The defendant enters into a stipulated judgment with the county
wherein the responsible party pleads guilty on the citation but agrees to make
necessary corrections, as set forth in the agreement, in order to bring the
responsible party’s conduct, actions, omissions or property into compliance
with this code; or
         (d)   If the responsible party fails to pay the costs, the costs shall
be entered as a judgment against the responsible party in the same manner and
with like effect as a judgment for a fine.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Except for any separate fine issued for an amount otherwise
established by law for any specific fine violation such as a nuisance dog, any
person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable, upon
conviction, by a fine for a Class A violation as provided in state statutes for
a non-continuing offense and for each continuing offense. Each day upon which a
continuing offense occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation if
cited as such. In addition to the civil penalty amounts assessable herein, the
county may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs and other expenses
associated with enforcement activities and the costs of any actual damages
incurred by the county attributable to the responsible party.
      (2)   Payment of any fine shall not excuse or discharge a responsible
party from the duty to immediately abate and correct a violation of the code,
nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or a
repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code.
      (3)   For the purposes of this chapter, a continuing offense occurs when
a responsible party or person allows the circumstances constituting the offense
to continue over consecutive 24-hour periods after:
         (a)   Having received notice of the violation;
         (b)   Having refused notice of the violation; or
         (c)   It is reasonable to expect that the person has actual knowledge
of the circumstances constituting the offense.
   (B)   Costs recoverable.
      (1)   Upon a finding that a violation has occurred, the justice court has
the discretion to order the violator, in addition to any penalties assessed, to
reimburse the county for actual costs or expenditures incurred by the county in
prosecuting, cleaning up or abating an ordinance violation for any of the
following:
         (a)   Any fees charged the county for service on responsible party(s);
         (b)   Mileage for investigation service or other activities directly
related to the enforcement action at the current county rate;
         (c)   Postage;
         (d)   Photocopying;
         (e)   Publication charges;
         (f)   Sampling and monitoring expenses;
         (g)   Film and development costs; and
         (h)   Any expense incurred by the county in abating or correcting a
violation which the responsible party(s) has refused to correct.
      (2)   All costs and expenses to be reimbursed must be documented by
receipts, vouchers or records verified by affidavit of the public official
keeping such records.
   (C)   Liens.
      (1)   Penalties and costs assessed against a violator(s) by order of the
justice court shall, if not paid within 60 days of the date of the order or as
otherwise specified in the order, be county liens as provided in state statutes
for recovery of fines and forfeitures.
      (2)   Recording and releasing liens:
         (a)   If the county intends to pursue recovery of penalties and costs
against a violator the Board of Commissioners shall cause to be filed with the
County Clerk an itemized statement of the penalties and costs, as ordered by
the justice of the peace, to be recovered. When the statement of penalties and
costs is filed the Clerk shall cause it to be entered upon a lien docket
prepared for that purpose. The amount of the penalties and costs when so
docketed shall constitute a first lien upon such property, except as to taxes.
It shall be the responsibility of the County Treasurer to create and maintain a
record of payments made by the responsible party, on a form identifying the
case, the responsible party, the amount and date payment was made;
         (b)   The county may record a money judgment as a lien in accordance
with this section and may pursue recovery of any money judgment;
         (c)   For purposes of a lien that has been filed, an error in the name
of the owner or person responsible shall not void the assessment, nor will a
failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment
void but it shall remain a valid lien against the property; and
         (d)   The code enforcement officer is responsible, in consultation
with the Treasurer and County Counsel, to ensure that a satisfaction of
judgment and release of lien is executed and filed as appropriate, once any
money judgment is paid in full.
(Ord. ORD 2021-4, passed 6-2-2021)
APPENDIX A: NOXIOUS WEEDS
   (A)   Rush Skeletonweed;
   (B)   Yellow Starthistle;
   (C)   Tansy Ragwort;
   (D)   Dalmatian and Yellow Toadflax;
   (E)   Mediterranean Sage;
   (F)   Leafy Spurge;
   (G)   Spikeweed;
   (H)   Musk Thistle;
   (I)   Scotch Thistle;
   (J)   Purple Loosestrife;
   (K)   Common Crupina;
   (L)   White Top;
   (M)   Hounds tongue;
   (N)   Plumeless Thistle;
   (O)   Flowering Rush; and
   (P)   Yellow Flag Iris.
APPENDIX B: WEEDS OF ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE
   (A)   Poison Hemlock;
   (B)   Canada Thistle;
   (C)   Jointed Goatgrass;
   (D)   St. Johnswort;
   (E)   Perennial Sowthistle;
   (F)   Field Bindweed;
   (G)   Cereal Rye;
   (H)   Wild Oats;
   (I)   Johnsongrass;
   (J)   Knapweeds-Russian, Diffuse, Spotted;
   (K)   Field Dodder;
   (L)   Water Hemlock;
   (M)   Medusahead Rye;
   (N)   Puncturevine;
   (O)   Kochia;
   (P)   Perennial Pepperweed;
   (Q)   Myrtle Spurge; and
   (R)   Ventenata.
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS
      
111.   MARIJUANA OPERATIONS
CHAPTER 110: PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS
Section
   
110.01   Licenses for peddlers and hawkers
§ 110.01 LICENSES FOR PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS.
   The Board has under consideration the provisions of the Act of the
legislative assembly of the state, passed at the last session thereof, entitled
and Act to amend “An act to license peddlers, hawkers and itinerant vendors,
who sell goods, wares or merchandise without a license and to repeal §§ 3876
and 3877 of the Codes and Statutes of Oregon,” and it appearing to the Board
from the provisions of said Act that the Board is clothed with the authority to
fix a license fee for such peddlers, hawkers and itinerant vendors, as provided
in § 1 of the Act, and that now is the proper time to determine the matter; and
the Board being further advised from the provisions of said section that such
fee shall not be less than $200 nor more than $500 for the period of one year,
and that no license shall issue for a period less than one calendar year, and
the Board being now fully advised in the premises, it is therefore ordered,
adjudged and decreed that the license fee for the county coming under the
provisions of said Act is fixed in the sum of $400, such fee to be paid into
the hands of the County Treasurer as provided for in § 2 of said Act.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.010) (Ord. passed 1-6-1906)
CHAPTER 111: MARIJUANA OPERATIONS
Section
   
111.01   Findings
   
111.02   Status as an opt-out county
§ 111.01 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners has heard residents provide
testimony to their concerns that marijuana activities near schools and parks,
and availability to the general public and children, is not desired.
   (B)   The Planning Commission previously determined that the ability for an
individual with a medical condition that warranted the use of medical marijuana
could still obtain medical marijuana through the current card holder program.
Or, stated differently, medical marijuana is available to county residents who
have met the necessary requirements of the medical marijuana program managed by
the State Health Authority.
   (C)   Based on testimony received during the public hearing, the County
Board of Commissioners indicated, based on sufficient state administrative
rules adequately regulating the Medical Marijuana Dispensary Program, that they
may reconsider the opt-out of division (B) above restricting medical marijuana
dispensaries.
   (D)   The Port of Morrow Commission identified concerns with the
availability of marijuana, including, but not limited to, conflict with federal
laws related to trucking industries and the need to hold a commercial driver’s
license, and the focus of the Port of Morrow on industries and not service
oriented business more appropriate in commercial zones. In the 2015 Marijuana
Opt-Out Ordinance, Page 2 of 3, it was agreed that it would not be appropriate
to allow dispensaries, grow sites or laboratories on land zoned for industrial
purposes in the county. Additionally, the Port of Morrow Commission was opposed
to retail marijuana activities.
   (E)   The risk to children, impacts to public gathering locations and the
general nuisance caused by marijuana are of concern to the residents of the
county and their concerns are greater than any identified need for or benefit
from marijuana activities.
   (F)   The county is a qualifying city or county and defeated the 2014 Ballot
Measure 91 by 66%.
(Ord. ORD-2015-4, passed 9-23-2015)
§ 111.02 STATUS AS AN OPT-OUT COUNTY.
   The county maintains its status as an opt-out county concerned with
marijuana activities that include the following:
   (A)   Marijuana processing sites;
   (B)   Medical marijuana dispensaries;
   (C)   Marijuana producers;
   (D)   Marijuana processors;
   (E)   Marijuana wholesalers;
   (F)   Marijuana retailers;
   (G)   Marijuana producers that hold a license issued under O.R.S. 475C.065
and that the State Liquor Control Commission has designated as an exclusively
medical licensee under O.R.S. 475C.121;
   (H)   Marijuana processors that hold a license issued under O.R.S. 475C.085
and that the commission has designated as an exclusively medical licensee under
§ 25 of Enrolled Senate Bill (2017) O.R.S. 475C.125;
   (I)   Marijuana wholesalers that hold a license issued under O.R.S. 475C.093
and that the commission has designated as an exclusively medical licensee under
O.R.S. 475C.129; and
   (J)   Marijuana retailers that hold a license issued under O.R.S. 475C.097
and that the commission has designated as an exclusively medical licensee under
O.R.S. 475C.133.
(Ord. ORD-2017-5, passed 10-25-2017)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   JUVENILE OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
Interference with Police Officers
   
130.01   Title
   
130.02   “Police officer” defined
   
130.03   Applicability
   
130.04   Hindering or obstructing police officers
   
130.05   Assisting escape from policy authority
   
130.06   Impersonating law enforcement officers
   
130.07   Use of property to plan criminal activities
   
130.08   Filing false crime reports
   
130.09   Delivering liquor or drugs to prisoners
   
130.10   Jurisdiction and prosecution of offenses
   
130.11   No conflict with state statutes
INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OFFICERS
§ 130.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Interference with
Police Ordinance.” In the event that a person is charged with violation of this
subchapter, it is sufficient that the complaint or information refer to this
subchapter by its short title.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.010) (Ord. MC-C-2-84, passed - -1984)
§ 130.02 “POLICE OFFICER” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   POLICE OFFICER. Includes any person designated by governmental authority to
enforce the law as a peace officer. POLICE OFFICER shall include, but is not
limited to, the paid and volunteer, full-time and reserve police officers
acting under the authority of any municipality, county, state or federal
government.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.020) (Ord. MC-C-2-84, passed - -1984)
§ 130.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall be applicable in Morrow County, Oregon.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.030) (Ord. MC-C-2-84, passed - -1984)
§ 130.04 HINDERING OR OBSTRUCTING POLICE OFFICERS.
   No person shall hinder, delay, obstruct, resist or interfere with any police
officer or person duly empowered with police authority who is acting in the
discharge of his or her duty.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.040) (Ord. MC-C-2-84, passed - -1984) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05 ASSISTING ESCAPE FROM POLICY AUTHORITY.
   No person shall offer or endeavor to assist any person in the custody of a
police officer or a person duly empowered with police authority to escape or
attempt to escape from such custody.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.050) (Ord. MC-C-2-84, passed - -1984) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.06 IMPERSONATING LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   No person shall impersonate, falsely assume or pretend to be a law
enforcement officer.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.060) (Ord. MC-C-2-84, passed - -1984) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.07 USE OF PROPERTY TO PLAN CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES.
   No person shall use or permit the use of property for planning or promoting
criminal activities or violation of county ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.070) (Ord. MC-C-2-84, passed - -1984) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.08 FILING FALSE CRIME REPORTS.
   No person shall knowingly make or file with any Police Department of the
county any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the
commission or alleged commission of any crime.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.080) (Ord. MC-C-2-84, passed - -1984) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.09 DELIVERING LIQUOR OR DRUGS TO PRISONERS.
   No person shall take into a county holding facility, or deliver to any
prisoner confined therein, any spiritous liquor or narcotic, except upon the
prescription of a practicing physician for such prisoner.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.090) (Ord. MC-C-2-84, passed - -1984) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.10 JURISDICTION AND PROSECUTION OF OFFENSES.
   Jurisdiction and prosecution of offenses under this subchapter may be
initiated in either justice or district court, those courts having concurrent
jurisdiction under this subchapter. All other rules of criminal procedure shall
be as provided for other criminal prosecutions initiated in the respective
court.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.100) (Ord. MC-C-2-84, passed - -1984)
§ 130.11 NO CONFLICT WITH STATE STATUTES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed in such a way as to conflict
with the state statutes. In the event that a section of this subchapter is
ruled to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, it shall not affect the
operation of the remaining sections of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.110) (Ord. MC-C-2-84, passed - -1984)
CHAPTER 131: JUVENILE OFFENSES
Section
Curfew for Minors
   
131.01   Title
   
131.02   Definitions
   
131.03   Unlawful activities
   
131.04   Burden of proof
Juvenile Oversight Assessment
   
131.15   Title
   
131.16   Imposition of assessment
   
131.17   Limitation
   
131.18   Discretionary waiver
   
131.19   Disposition of assessment
 
   
131.99   Penalty
CURFEW FOR MINORS
§ 131.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be referred to as the “Curfew Ordinance for Minors.”
(Prior Code, § 6.08.010) (Ord. MC-C6, passed - -1981)
§ 131.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PARENT or GUARDIAN. The actual parent or legal guardian that has the
care, custody or control of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Includes, but is not limited to, places of amusement and
entertainment, public buildings, parks, playgrounds, dance halls, vacant lots
or other supervised or unsupervised places.
      STREET. Any alley, thoroughfare, pathway, sidewalk, road, land or other
terminal or continuance of any roadway or any other places of travel open to
the public.
   (B)   The hours of time specified in this subchapter shall refer to the time
prevailing in the county at the time of the offense, whether such be Pacific
Standard Time or Pacific Daylight Time.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.020) (Ord. MC-C6, passed - -1981)
§ 131.03 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES.
   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to be upon any
street or public place between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on
Saturday morning and Sunday morning and between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any
other night unless:
   (A)   Such minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person 18
years of age or over and authorized by the parent or by law to have care and
custody of the minor;
   (B)   Such minor has been engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity which
requires the minor to be present in such public places during the hours
specified in this subchapter; or
   (C)   The minor is emancipated pursuant to O.R.S. 419B.558.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.030) (Ord. MC-C6, passed - -1981) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 BURDEN OF PROOF.
   If questioned by a law of proving the right to be during the times specified
enforcement officer, the burden upon any street or public place above shall be
upon the minor.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.040) (Ord. MC-C6, passed - -1981)
JUVENILE OVERSIGHT ASSESSMENT
§ 131.15 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as “The Juvenile Oversight
Assessment Ordinance.”
(Ord. MC-C-2-96, passed 4-3-1996)
§ 131.16 IMPOSITION OF ASSESSMENT.
   The juvenile judge of the county shall impose, in addition to any other
sanction authorized by law, an assessment in an amount not to exceed the limits
established by the county court for the particular year of imposition, in any
of the following circumstances:
   (A)   Upon any juvenile found to be within the jurisdiction of the juvenile
court by reason of having committed an act which, if committed by an adult,
would constitute a violation; or
   (B)   Upon any juvenile found to have committed a status offense involving
alcoholic liquor or tobacco.
(Ord. MC-C-2-96, passed 4-3-1996)
§ 131.17 LIMITATION.
   No more than one assessment per petition or citation shall be imposed
regardless of the number of counts contained therein.
(Ord. MC-C-2-96, passed 4-3-1996)
§ 131.18 DISCRETIONARY WAIVER.
   The juvenile judge, for good cause found, may waive the assessment described
herein or any portion thereof.
(Ord. MC-C-2-96, passed 4-3-1996)
§ 131.19 DISPOSITION OF ASSESSMENT.
   All moneys collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited in the
General Fund of the county and shall be credited to Line Item 101-112-3-40-4729
as carried in the county budget for the Juvenile Department.
(Ord. MC-C-2-96, passed 4-3-1996)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person convicted of a violation of §§
131.01 through
131.04 may be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, or by incarceration for a
period of not more than one year, or both.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.120) (Ord. MC-C-3-85, passed - -1985; Ord. MC-C-2-84,
passed - -1984)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
      
152.   MINING
      
153.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
154.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
      
155.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
156.   ZONING
      
157.   LEXINGTON AIRPORT MASTER PLAN
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Permit Inspection
   
150.01   Title
   
150.02   Definitions
   
150.03   State Building Code adopted
   
150.04   Statutory compliance requirements
   
150.05   Fee exemptions
   
150.06   Effect of provisions on prior law
   
150.07   Power to contract for inspection services
   
150.08   Building inspection fees
BUILDING PERMIT INSPECTION
§ 150.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Building Permit
Inspection Ordinance” and shall serve to amend Ord. C-9-82, adopted by the
county on December 22, 1982, nunc pro tunc as of November 3, 1982.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.010) (Ord. C-9-82, passed - -1982; Ord. MC-C-2-83, passed
- -1983)
§ 150.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING CODE. The building code adopted by the State Commerce Department,
plus any amendments added by the county or the state.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. A duly appointed official to enforce and administer the
specialty sections of the building code. He or she shall attend to all aspects
of building code enforcement, including the issuance of all building permits.
   BUILDING PERMIT. Includes the process of applying and the inspection of
building, sanitation, structural, electrical, heating, ventilating and plumbing
projects.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Commissioners.
   LOCAL PLANNING OFFICIAL. Includes any member of the County Planning
Department, any duly appointed planning official within a franchised political
subdivision of the county, or part of a city planning department within the
county.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.020) (Ord. C-9-82, passed - -1982; Ord. MC-C-2-83, passed
- -1983)
§ 150.03 STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   This subchapter adopts the State Building Code in total, except as this
subchapter may later be amended by the county, or as the State Building Code
may be amended by the state.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.030) (Ord. C-9-82, passed - -1982; Ord. MC-C-2-83, passed
- -1983)
§ 150.04 STATUTORY COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   The County Board of Commissioners, in order to comply with the state
statutes, shall:
   (A)   Notify the state that the county will relieve the state of all
building permit applications and inspections in the county;
   (B)   Appoint a Building Official to attend to all aspects of the building
code of the state within the county; and
   (C)   Set a schedule of permit application fees to be approved by the State
Department of Commerce.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.040) (Ord. C-9-82, passed - -1982; Ord. MC-C-2-83, passed
- -1983)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see O.R.S. 455.020 and 455.150 et seq.
§ 150.05 FEE EXEMPTIONS.
   Section 150.04(C) notwithstanding, the county itself shall not be required
to pay any permit, inspection or other fees arising from pursuance of this
subchapter. The county’s exemption from fees shall be in effect during such
times as it, rather than the state, is providing building inspection services.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.050) (Ord. C-9-82, passed - -1982; Ord. MC-C-2-83, passed
- -1983)
§ 150.06 EFFECT OF PROVISIONS ON PRIOR LAW.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted as modifying the provisions
in force under state law prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified
herein, and the Building Inspector appointed under the authority of this
subchapter shall have full authority to investigate and act upon continuing
violations arising prior the adoption of the ordinance codified herein.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.060) (Ord. C-9-82, passed - -1982; Ord. MC-C-2-83, passed
- -1983)
§ 150.07 POWER TO CONTRACT FOR INSPECTION SERVICES.
   This subchapter empowers the county to contract with an independent
organization to provide the county with inspection services on permit
applications for building, sanitation, structural, electrical, heating and
ventilating and plumbing projects. In the event a contract has been executed,
it shall remain in full force and effect, and the ordinance codified in this
subchapter shall be deemed a ratification of the contract.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.070) (Ord. C-9-82, passed - -1982; Ord. MC-C-2-83, passed
- -1983)
§ 150.08 BUILDING INSPECTION FEES.
   The County Board of Commissioners establishes the following building permit
fees pursuant to O.R.S. 203.035:
   (A)   Plan review fee: 65% of the building permit fee;
   (B)   Fire and life safety plan review: 40% of the building permit fee;
   (C)   Manufactured home park plan review: 65% of the permit fee;
   (D)   Recreational park plan review: 65% of the permit fee;
   (E)   Mechanical plan review: 25% of the mechanical permit fee;
   (F)   Plumbing plan review: 30% of the permit fee; and
   (G)   Other permits: fees as listed on the attached permit forms attached to
the ordinance codified in this section.
(Ord. MC-C-3-00, passed 6-21-2000)
CHAPTER 151: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Section
Road Approaches to County Roads
   
151.001   Approach roads or right-of-way work; permit required
   
151.002   Approach roads or right-of-way work; permit decision
   
151.003   Appeals
   
151.004   Culvert and grade specifications
   
151.005   Construction requirements
   
151.006   Expenses of road approaches
   
151.007   Removal authorization; costs
Excavations
   
151.020   Title
   
151.021   Definitions
   
151.022   Excavations; permit requirements
   
151.023   Permit application
   
151.024   Surety bond and insurance
   
151.025   Permit fees
   
151.026   Bond; continuation to cover repairs
   
151.027   Prompt completion of work
   
151.028   Breaking through pavement
   
151.029   Excavating newly-surfaced roads
   
151.030   Preservation of monuments
   
151.031   Traffic routing and safety precautions
   
151.032   Clearance for vital structures
   
151.033   Utilities; liability for breakage
   
151.034   Depth of substructure installation
   
151.035   Excavated material
   
151.036   Watercourse protection
   
151.037   Length of trenches
   
151.038   Noise, dust and debris control
   
151.039   Backfilling requirements
   
151.040   Restoration of surface
   
151.041   Cleanup requirements
   
151.042   Abandonment of substructures
   
151.043   Removal, relocation or repairs
   
151.044   Urgent work
   
151.045   Emergency excavations
   
151.046   Liability limitations
   
151.047   Inspections
Road Naming
   
151.060   Title, authority, purpose
   
151.061   Required review and action for road naming
   
151.062   Application
   
151.063   Fee
   
151.064   Processing road name application
   
151.065   County Board of Commissioners
   
151.066   Records
Rural Addressing
   
151.080   Purpose
   
151.081   Exceptions
   
151.082   Definitions
   
151.083   Address assignment program
   
151.084   Rural address application
   
151.085   Assignment process
 
   
151.999   Penalty
ROAD APPROACHES TO COUNTY ROADS
§ 151.001 APPROACH ROADS OR RIGHT-OF-WAY WORK; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any approach road to a county road or work within county rights-of-way
requires a permit from the Public Works Department. Application for a permit
shall be submitted in writing to the Public Works Department on forms provided
by the Public Works Director. The application shall include any requested
plans, payment of the fee adopted by the Board of Commissioners and any other
requested information.
(Ord. ORD-2017-2, passed 6-21-2017; Ord. ORD-2023-3, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 151.002 APPROACH ROADS OR RIGHT-OF-WAY WORK; PERMIT DECISION.
   (A)   The County Public Works Director or his or her designee shall render a
decision on all permits submitted under §
151.001.
   (B)   All permits will be signed off for approval by the Assistant
Roadmaster and Public Works Director. Applications submitted under §
151.001 may be granted only if they meet the criteria listed in this chapter
and any other applicable county ordinances, state statutes, state
administrative rules and all other applicable standards.
(Ord. ORD-2017-2, passed 6-21-2017; Ord. ORD-2023-3, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 151.003 APPEALS.
   (A)   An applicant for a permit that was denied under §
151.002 may appeal that decision to the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   The appeal shall be considered by the Board of Commissioners at the
first regular meeting scheduled after the appeal is filed.
   (C)   The Board of Commissioners shall render a final decision on the
permit.
(Ord. ORD-2017-2, passed 6-21-2017)
§ 151.004 CULVERT AND GRADE SPECIFICATIONS.
   All approaches must meet specifications as to culverts or grade and the
like.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.030) (Ord. passed 8-2-1967; Ord. ORD-2023-3, passed 4-5-
2023)
§ 151.005 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   All approaches must be so constructed as not to damage the existing roadway.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.040) (Ord. passed 8-2-1967; Ord. ORD-2023-3, passed 4-5-
2023)
§ 151.006 EXPENSES OF ROAD APPROACHES.
   All expenses of road approaches to county roads must be paid by the
applicant.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.050) (Ord. passed 8-2-1967; Ord. ORD-2023-3, passed 4-5-
2023)
§ 151.007 REMOVAL AUTHORIZATION; COSTS.
   Pursuant to O.R.S. 374.305, the county may, at its option, remove from the
right-of-way any obstruction formed by improperly constructed approaches, and
such cost will be charged to the violator.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.060) (Ord. passed 8-2-1967; Ord. ORD-2023-3, passed 4-5-
2023)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 151.020 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Road and Street
Excavation Ordinance” of the county.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.010) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.021 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXCAVATION. Any opening in the surface of a public place made in any manner
whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure of a public place, the
top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to
permit frequent opening without injury or damage to the public place.
EXCAVATION shall also include horizontal boring for placement of culverts,
pipes, conduits or other underground utilities.
   FACILITY. Pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service trap, vent, vault, manhole,
meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor,
cable, junction box, transformer or any other material, structure or object of
any kind or character, whether enumerated herein or not, which is or may be
lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across, under
or over any public place.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any public road or street, road or street right-of-way, place,
alley, sidewalk, park, square, plaza or any other public property owned or
controlled by the county.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director of the county or his or her
duly appointed agent.
   SUBSTRUCTURE. Any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable
or wire or any other structure located below the surface of any public place.
   VITAL STRUCTURES. The elements of the fire and safety protection systems of
the county and those elements of public and private utility systems which are
vital to the health and safety of the county.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.020) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.022 EXCAVATIONS; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall make an excavation or fill an excavation in a public
place without first obtaining a permit from the Public Works Director except as
otherwise provided in this subchapter. No permit to make an excavation or fill
an excavation in a public place shall be issued except as provided in this
subchapter.
   (B)   The requirements for permits, bonds, insurance, deposits and fees
shall not apply to street excavations made by municipal departments, but the
Public Works Director shall see that utilities, protection of adjoining
property, care of materials, making of excavations and the backfilling of same
are met as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.030) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.023 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications for such permits shall be made by the owner of the
benefited property or, in the case where the excavation is for the benefit of a
public or private utility, the application shall be by the agent of the
utility.
   (B)   The application shall contain the description of the location for the
intended excavation, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, the person doing
the actual work and the person for whom the work is being done and the person
financially responsible for the work and shall contain an agreement that the
applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be
done.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.040) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981; Ord. MC-PW-2-81,
passed - -1981)
§ 151.024 SURETY BOND AND INSURANCE.
   Before an excavation permit, as provided in this subchapter, is issued, the
applicant shall:
   (A)   Deposit with the Public Works Director a corporate surety bond written
in the amount of $1,000, or twice the estimated cost of backfilling the
excavation and resurfacing the street, whichever sum is the greater. Such
corporate surety bond shall be in the form of a performance bond insuring the
applicant’s performance of all the terms and conditions for an excavation
permit as set forth in this subchapter and specifically include provisions of §
151.027. Such bond shall remain in force for one year after completion of the
excavation and resurfacing; and
   (B)   Deposit with the Public Works Director a certificate of comprehensive
public liability insurance, covering the work to be done by the applicant under
the excavation permit, if issued. The amount of coverage of such policy shall
not be less than $100,000 for any one occurrence, $50,000 for any one person
and $5,000 property damages. This policy shall protect and save harmless the
county, its officers and employees against any and all claims, demands,
judgments or otherwise arising from the excavation and other work covered by
the excavation permit. The policy shall further provide that the applicant and
his or her insurance company shall defend and pay all costs of defending the
county, its officers and employees, in any suit or action or other proceeding
which may be filed against them, or any of them, as a result of the permittee’s
work and activities under the excavation permit.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.050) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.025 PERMIT FEES.
   The application for an excavation permit shall be accompanied by an
application fee in the amount of $1 per square foot of excavation in public
roads, streets and alleys. In no event shall the application fee be less than
$25.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.060) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.026 BOND; CONTINUATION TO COVER REPAIRS.
   The contractor shall guarantee in writing to the county that the bond
required in §
151.024 shall continue in force for one year after completion of the
resurfacing. The bond shall cover the replacement or repair of the surfacing if
defects in the surfacing appear during that time.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.070) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.027 PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK.
   After excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with diligence
and speed all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall
promptly complete such work and restore the road or street to its original
condition, or as near as may be, so as not to obstruct the public place or
travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.080) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.028 BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT.
   (A)   Cutting of pavement surfaces ahead of excavations shall be done in
such a manner as to confine pavement damage to the limits of the trench.
Pavement wearing surface cuts shall be made with a sharp-edged tool which will
result in a smooth edge along the sides of the excavation.
   (B)   Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and over-breakers,
and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
   (C)   Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned
with the centerline of the trench.
   (D)   Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the
trench line.
   (E)   Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be
required by the Public Works Director.
   (F)   The permittee shall not be required to repair damage existing prior to
excavation unless his or her cut results in small floating sections that may be
unstable, in which case the permittee shall remove and refill the area.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.090) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.029 EXCAVATING NEWLY-SURFACED ROADS.
   (A)   In order to conserve new paving and resurfacing or roads or streets,
pavement cuts are prohibited therein except for emergency repairs or upon
payment of a penalty charge. The maximum period of time for which such penalty
shall apply to such a road or street shall be five years. The penalty shall be
five times the cost of restoring the pavement surface during the first year,
four times the restoration cost during the second year, three times the
restoration cost during the third year, two times the restoration cost during
the fourth year and equal to the restoration cost during the fifth year. This
penalty fee shall be computed in addition to normal resurfacing charges and
shall be computed from the date at which the county accepted the newly paved
surface.
   (B)   In order to avoid the necessity of these penalties, the county shall
inform local utilities by mail before new paving or resurfacing is performed.
Affected property owners shall be notified by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation. Failure of any person to receive notice shall not exempt
such person from imposition of the penalty fee.
   (C)   Application for a waiver of this section may be submitted to the
Public Works Director for installation of service lines designed to serve a
single lot or parcel of land.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.100) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.030 PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines
of any road, street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference
point, or a permanent survey bench mark within the county, shall not be removed
or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining
permission in writing from the county to do so.
   (B)   Permission to remove or disturb such monuments, reference points or
bench marks shall only be granted upon condition that the person applying for
such permission shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of
this monument by the county.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.110) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.031 TRAFFIC ROUTING AND SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
   (A)   The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during
the performance of the excavation work traffic conditions as near normal as
practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as little
inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the
general public. The County Board of Commissioners may permit the closing of
roads, streets and alleys to all traffic for a specific period of time if the
permittee can demonstrate necessity.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of every person making an excavation in or
upon any public place to place and maintain such barriers and warning devices
necessary for safety of the general public. Warning lights shall be flares,
torches, lanterns, electrical markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to
traffic from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day. Torches shall be
open-wick or flame flares or bombs generally used in connection with roadway
repairs or construction and operating on kerosene or a similar fluid.
      (2)   Lanterns shall be kerosene or a similar fluid; burning lanterns
shall have clear red or ruby globes. Electrical markers or flashers shall emit
light at sufficient intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable
distance for safety. Reflectors or reflecting materials may be used to
supplement, but not replace, light sources.
   (C)   The permit for a road or street excavation may require that the
permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general
public. In such case, the permit shall not be valid until such notice is given.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.120) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.032 CLEARANCE FOR VITAL STRUCTURES.
   The excavation work shall not interfere with access to vital structures.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.130) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.033 UTILITIES; LIABILITY FOR BREAKAGE.
   The applicant shall inform himself or herself as to the existence and
location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. The
applicant shall be responsible for any damage done to any water pipes, sewer,
electric, phone or cable television line or other utility facilities.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.140) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.034 DEPTH OF SUBSTRUCTURE INSTALLATION.
   (A)   No person shall, without written permission of the Public Works
Director, install substructures, except manholes, vaults, valve casings,
culverts and catch basins, at a distance less than 30 inches below the
established street or alley grade.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall impose a duty upon the permittee to
maintain such specifications as required herein upon subsequent changes of
grade in the surface unless the grade in such substructure interferes with the
maintenance of or travel on a public street.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.150) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.035 EXCAVATED MATERIAL.
   (A)   All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench
or in any road or street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to
endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets and
so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets
and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too
narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, the
permittee shall haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul
it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee’s
responsibility to assure the necessary permission and make all necessary
arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.
   (B)   Whenever necessary in order to expedite the flow of traffic or to
abate the dirt or dust nuisance, tow boards or bins shall be required by the
Public Works Director to prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic lanes.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.160) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.036 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck,
silt, slickings or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from
sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting
from his or her failure to so provide.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.170) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.037 LENGTH OF TRENCHES.
   The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be no more
than 200 feet, and no greater length shall be open for pavement removal,
excavation, construction, backfilling, patching and all other operations.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.180) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.038 NOISE, DUST AND DEBRIS CONTROL.
   Each permittee shall conduct excavation work in such a manner as to avoid
unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of
neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce
to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the excavation work,
noise, dust and unsightly debris, and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. shall not use, except in case of an emergency as herein otherwise
provided, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume
to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.190) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.039 BACKFILLING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Selected backfill material shall be placed in trenches containing pipe
simultaneously on both sides of the pipe for the full width of the trench in
layers about four inches in depth and tamped thoroughly with a pneumatic
tamper. The entire depth of the trench shall be thoroughly compacted with
selected material and by means of hand-operated or mechanically-operated
tampers, in layers of approximately four inches and shall be brought to the
required surface grade without damage to pipe.
   (B)   In lieu of the backfilling procedure specified above, river run gravel
or crushed rock or gravel may be used for backfilling that portion of the
trench more than six inches above the top of the pipe; provided, that the
maximum size of material shall not exceed four inches in diameter and shall be
of uniform graduation, with 20% or more passing a one-fourth-inch square
screen.
   (C)   When this procedure is followed, tamping the rock or gravel is not
necessary. The upper three inches of backfill shall be made with three-quarter-
inch to zero-inch mineral aggregate and compacted flush with the existing
pavement to a density condition not less than that existing prior to
excavation.
   (D)   The backfilled trench shall be maintained by the permittee in such a
manner that will provide a smooth crossing until such time as the road or
street is repaved.
   (E)   The Public Works Director may require soil tests to be furnished by a
recognized soil-testing laboratory or registered professional engineer
specializing in soil mechanics when, in his or her opinion, backfill for any
excavation is not being adequately compacted. In order for the resurfacing to
be permitted, such tests shall show that the backfill material meets the
minimum requirements as prescribed by this subchapter. All expense of such
tests shall be borne by the permittee.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.200) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.040 RESTORATION OF SURFACE.
   (A)   Requirements.
      (1)   Permanent resurfacing of excavations shall be made by a contractor
approved by the county, where the type of consolidation used in replacing the
backfill is adequate to prevent settling and when the moisture content of the
backfill is not excessive. Such resurfacing shall be at the expense of the
permittee.
      (2)   (a)   In the event the type of consolidation used in replacing the
backfill is not adequate to prevent further settling, or the moisture content
is excessive, temporary resurfacing shall be provided by the permittee, or by
the county at the expense of the permittee. If temporary resurfacing is
provided, the top surface of the backfill shall be covered with one inch of
bituminous material. Such temporary paving material shall be cold mix, except
that the permittee may use or the county may require hot mix. All temporary
paving material shall conform closely enough to the level of the adjoining
paving surface and shall be compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth
enough to be safe for pedestrian travel over it as well as for vehicular
traffic to pass safely over it at a legal rate of speed.
         (b)   The permittee shall maintain temporary paving after all
backfilling is completed and shall keep the same safe for pedestrian and
vehicular traffic until the excavation has been resurfaced with permanent
paving, except that if it is impractical to maintain the surface of the
temporary paving in a safe condition for pedestrian travel or vehicular
traffic, then the permittee shall maintain barriers and lights where required
in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.210)
   (B)   Acceptance conditions. Acceptance or approval of any excavation work
by the Public Works Director shall not prevent the county from asserting a
claim against the permittee and his, her or its surety under the surety bond
required under this subchapter for incomplete or defective work if discovered
within 12 months from the completion of the excavation work. The presence of
county officials during the performance of excavation work shall not relieve
the permittee of his or her responsibilities hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.220)
(Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.041 CLEANUP REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   As the excavation work progresses, all roads or streets shall be kept
thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris
resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be
complete.
   (B)   From time to time, as may be ordered by the Public Works Director,
and, in any event, immediately after completion of the work, the permittee
shall, at his, her or its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and
unused materials of any kind resulting from such work, and, upon failure to do
so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the Public Works
Director, the work may be done by the county and the cost thereof charged to
the permittee.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.230) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.042 ABANDONMENT OF SUBSTRUCTURES.
   (A)   Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the
abandonment of a service line designed to serve a single property owner, the
person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein shall, within
30 days after such abandonment, file with the Public Works Director a statement
in writing giving in detail the location of the substructure so abandoned.
   (B)   If such abandoned substructure is in the way or subsequently becomes
in the way of an installation of the county or any other public body, the owner
shall remove such abandoned substructure or pay the cost of its removal during
the course of excavation for construction of the facility by the county or any
other public body.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.240) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.043 REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR REPAIRS.
   Upon receiving written notice from the Director to remove, relocate or
repair the facility covered by the permit, the applicant shall within 30 days
make the necessary arrangements, at his or her sole cost, in accordance with
the written notice and instructions received.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.250) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.044 URGENT WORK.
   When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public
or the public interest require urgency, the excavation is granted on condition
that a crew and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day
to the end that such excavation work may be completed as soon as possible.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.260) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.045 EMERGENCY EXCAVATIONS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the making of such
excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property, or
for the location of trouble in a conduit or pipe, or for making repairs;
provided, that the person making such excavation shall apply to the Public
Works Director for such a permit on the first working day after such work is
commenced.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.270) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981)
§ 151.046 LIABILITY LIMITATIONS.
   This subchapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the county, or any
official or employee, any liability or responsibility for damages to any person
injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation
permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the county or any official or employee
thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by
reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or by
the approval of any excavation work.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.280) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981; Ord. MC-PW-2-81,
passed - -1981)
§ 151.047 INSPECTIONS.
   The Public Works Director shall have such inspections made as are reasonably
necessary in the enforcement of this subchapter. The permittee shall notify the
county prior to backfilling an excavation so that proper inspection may be
made.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.290) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981; Ord. MC-PW-2-81,
passed - -1981)
ROAD NAMING
§ 151.060 TITLE, AUTHORITY, PURPOSE.
   (A)   Short title. This subchapter and §§
151.080 through
151.085 shall be known and may be cited as the “Road Naming and Rural
Addressing Procedures Ordinance.”
   (B)   Authority. The following legislative procedural requirements relating
to the naming and renaming of roads and the numbering of properties within the
unincorporated portion of the county are adopted pursuant to the authority
granted the county pursuant to O.R.S. 215.110.
   (C)   Purpose. The procedures set forth herein are for the purpose of
establishing and maintaining a uniform rural addressing policy in the county
for the naming and renaming of roads and the assignment of rural addresses. It
is intended that this policy will clarify and set the requirements and
responsibilities of individuals, public bodies and departments involved in the
naming and renaming of roads and the assignment of rural addresses. In
addition, it provides the public with an outline of the required process for
road naming and renaming and the assignment of rural addresses.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
§ 151.061 REQUIRED REVIEW AND ACTION FOR ROAD NAMING.
   The County Board of Commissioners shall review and take appropriate action
on all road naming and renaming in the following circumstances:
   (A)   Any existing public or county road is named or renamed;
   (B)   Any public or county road is established, except when such new public
or county roads will have names established within the provisions of Chapters
155 and 156 of this code or in the provisions for establishing a public way as
provided by O.R.S. Chapter 368; and
   (C)   Any private road that provides access to three or more buildings and
requires a name in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
§ 151.062 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application to name or rename a road shall be submitted to the
County Board of Commissioners and shall include at a minimum the following
information:
      (1)   Name of applicant;
      (2)   Location or roadway by description and/or map;
      (3)   Legal status, i.e., ownership of road, if known (attach map showing
area);
      (4)   Existing road name, if known;
      (5)   Proposed road name;
      (6)   Reasons for request;
      (7)   Petition (attached, if any); and
      (8)   Fee: see §
151.063.
   (B)   The application may be submitted by any of the following applicants:
      (1)   The property owner(s) or person(s) living along the road;
      (2)   Any public or semi-public agency whose function is affected by road
names; and
      (3)   The following governing bodies and/or officials:
         (a)   County Board of Commissioners;
         (b)   County Clerk;
         (c)   Planning Department;
         (d)   Road Department;
         (e)   Assessor or tax collector; and
         (f)   Sheriff.
   (C)   The proposed road name must comply with the following standards:
      (1)   Name limited to a maximum of 15 letters and three words, excluding
the suffix directional indicator (i.e., Road, Lane, Loop or Drive);
      (2)   No duplication with other existing road names;
      (3)   No similar sounding or confusing names;
      (4)   The designation of roads shall generally conform to the following:
         (a)   Roads running predominantly north-south shall be known as a
Road;
         (b)   Roads running predominantly east-west shall be known as a Lane;
         (c)   Roads dead-ending 1,000 feet or less from their beginning points
shall be known as a Drive; and
         (d)   Roads whose beginning and ending points intersect on a common
road shall be known as a Loop.
      (5)   When road names are proposed for change, every effort will be made
to maintain historical road names.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
§ 151.063 FEE.
   (A)   An application fee will be charged for new and changed road names
based on current sign construction and installation costs and the number of new
sign boards required.
   (B)   The supplemental fee shall be paid upon adoption of the new road name
by an order of the County Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   The foregoing application and supplemental fees shall not be
applicable to an application made by any public or semi-public agency, or the
county, or any of its departments.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
§ 151.064 PROCESSING ROAD NAME APPLICATION.
   The County Planning Department shall have the responsibility for processing
and maintaining applications for road naming and renaming and shall perform
such function in the following manner:
   (A)   Verify legal status, i.e., ownership and maintenance or road;
   (B)   Check proposed road name(s) for duplication or similarity with other
existing road names;
   (C)   Perform a field check, when deemed necessary;
   (D)   Assist applicant or other affected person(s) to find alternate names
when required;
   (E)   Notify the following departments and agencies if they are affected by
the road naming or renaming:
      (1)   County Assessor;
      (2)   County Road Department;
      (3)   County Clerk;
      (4)   Cities;
      (5)   Private sector businesses; and
      (6)   Emergency services.
   (F)   When appropriate, mail questionnaire to owners of all property
abutting the road to determine general consensus regarding the proposed name;
   (G)   Prepare recommendation on the proposed road name for the County Board
of Commissioners;
   (H)   Determine appropriate County Board of Commissioners meeting date; and
   (I)   Give notice of public hearing by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation and, if appropriate, by posting along the road and/or by mailing
notices to owners of all property abutting the road. Publication notice or
written notice or posting shall be given at least two weeks prior to the date
of the hearing.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
§ 151.065 COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners shall consider advisory committee
and staff recommendations for new and changed road names at a regular County
Board of Commissioners meeting.
   (B)   The County Board of Commissioners shall notify the original applicant
for final decisions rendered on naming or renaming of any road.
   (C)   Copies of the Board’s order and any related maps approving new or
changed road names shall be sent by the office of the County Board of
Commissioners to the following:
      (1)   Road Department;
      (2)   Assessor’s office and tax office;
      (3)   Post Office;
      (4)   Planning Department;
      (5)   County Clerk’s office;
      (6)   Utility companies:
         (a)   Telephone company;
         (b)   Local electrical company;
         (c)   Gas company; and
         (d)   Sewer and water districts or other similar companies.
      (7)   Affected fire district(s);
      (8)   Local school district(s);
      (9)   County Surveyor;
      (10)   Emergency services; and
      (11)   Adjacent urban jurisdictions.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
§ 151.066 RECORDS.
   The original documentation shall be recorded in the office of the County
Clerk with a copy of the original to be kept in the office of the Planning
Department. County maps and files shall be updated as appropriate.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
RURAL ADDRESSING
§ 151.080 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide a uniform property numbering
system which allows adequate space between numbers for development and also
provides a simple and logical method for expedient response in locating all
buildings (defined in §
151.082) within the county’s road network.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
§ 151.081 EXCEPTIONS.
   Rural addresses shall primarily encompass areas outside city limits or urban
growth areas. Rural addresses may also be applied to areas of conflict such as
an urban growth boundary dividing a road.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
§ 151.082 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. A structure designed for human occupancy, such as a residence or
place of business or other structures as determined by the Planning Department.
   DRIVEWAY. A private way that provides vehicular access to less than three
buildings.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
§ 151.083 ADDRESS ASSIGNMENT PROGRAM.
   Rural address numbers shall be assigned based on a five-digit number derived
from the State Coordinate System with appropriate alterations to meet local
needs for a uniform numbering system.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
§ 151.084 RURAL ADDRESS APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a rural address shall be submitted to the County
Planning Department and shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name of applicant;
      (2)   Location of property for which an address is to be assigned;
      (3)   Name of the road or roads abutting the property for which an
address is to be assigned;
      (4)   Location of access point from adjacent property or roads abutting
the property; and
      (5)   Site plan location of the structure proposed for addressing.
   (B)   The application may be submitted by any of the following applicants:
      (1)   The property owner(s) or person(s) occupying the property;
      (2)   Any public or semi-public agency whose function is affected by
rural addresses; and
      (3)   The following governing bodies and/or officials:
         (a)   County Board of Commissioners;
         (b)   Planning Commission;
         (c)   Planning Department;
         (d)   Road Department;
         (e)   Assessor or tax collector;
         (f)   Sheriff; and
         (g)   Surveyor.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
§ 151.085 ASSIGNMENT PROCESS.
   The County Planning Department shall perform the following functions:
   (A)   Verify property location and appropriate access road;
   (B)   Assign an address number which conforms to the established numbering
system recognizing the following:
      (1)   Buildings accessed from roads predominantly extending north-south
will have a modified five-digit number derived from the north-south axis, or x-
axis, of the State Plane Coordinate System. Addresses for buildings west of a
road shall end in an even number and addresses for buildings east of a road
shall end in an odd number;
      (2)   Buildings accessed from lanes predominantly extending east-west
will have a modified five-digit number derived from the east-west axis, or y-
axis, of the State Coordinate System. Addressed for buildings essentially south
of a lane shall end in an even number and addresses for buildings north of a
lane shall end in an odd number; and
      (3)   Address numbers are derived from a combination of Assessor maps and
United States Geological Survey Maps.
   (C)   Notify the applicant of the assigned address.
(Ord. MC-C-3-92, passed 5-13-1992)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
151.020 through
151.047 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of $500 for a
noncontinuing offense, or $1,000 for a continuing offense.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.300) (Ord. MC-PW-1-81, passed - -1981; Ord. MC-PW-2-81,
passed - -1981; Ord. MC-C-3-85, passed - -1985)
CHAPTER 152: MINING
Section
   
152.01   Purpose
   
152.02   Reclamation Plan required
§ 152.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to govern surface mining operations for the
county itself, in light of the fact that the county sells less than 5,000 cubic
yards of minerals within any consecutive 12-month period. The effect of this
chapter will be to exempt the county from state mining permit requirements of
O.R.S. 517.702 through 517.987 for any such operation.
(Ord. MC-C-3-98, passed 3-4-1998)
§ 152.02 RECLAMATION PLAN REQUIRED.
   All such surface mining operations performed by the county pursuant to this
chapter shall be subject to the following reclamation scheme.
   (A)   At the commencement of each surface mining operation, the county shall
submit a Reclamation Plan, which is consistent with O.A.R. 632-30-025(1)(a)
through (e).
   (B)   The Plan shall also contain provisions to maintain the pre-mine
quantity and the pre-mine quality of affected water resources, pursuant to
O.A.R. 632-30-025(1)(j).
   (C)   The Plan shall also contain provisions for protection of public health
and safety, pursuant to O.A.R. 632-30-025(1)(o).
   (D)   The Plan shall contain a time schedule for surface mining and
reclamation, pursuant to O.A.R. 632-30-025(1)(t).
   (E)   Reclamation sloping shall be performed pursuant to O.A.R. 632-30-025
(1)(u).
   (F)   In addition, any other pertinent and relevant requirements of O.A.R.
632-30-025, shall be performed in the County Reclamation Plan.
(Ord. MC-C-3-98, passed 3-4-1998)
CHAPTER 153: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Findings of fact
   
153.02   Statement of purpose
   
153.03   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
153.04   Definitions
   
153.05   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
153.06   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
153.07   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.08   Interpretation
   
153.09   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
153.20   Development permit required
   
153.21   Application for development permit
   
153.22   County Planning Director
   
153.23   Variance procedure
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
153.35   General standards
   
153.36   Specific standards
   
153.37   Floodways
 
   
153.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare. These flood losses are
caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood
hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately
anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed,
elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood
loss.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.02 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote health, safety and general
welfare; and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by provisions designed:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   (G)   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
   (H)   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.03 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; and
   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Planning Director’s interpretation of
any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly
defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet
flow and AH indicates ponding.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on
maps always includes the letters A or V.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. Also referred to as the 100-year-flood. Designation on maps always
includes the letters A or V.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the
area of special flood hazard.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter found at §
153.36(A)(2).
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain
management purposes, the term MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers,
travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than
180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term MANUFACTURED HOME does
not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel ( or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of this chapter.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
state of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits constructing in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.05 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the county.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.06 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood
Insurance Study for Morrow County,” dated July 5, 1984, with accompanying flood
insurance maps is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter. The flood insurance study is on file at the County Planning
Department, P.O. Box 706, Irrigon, Oregon 97844.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.07 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restriction. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.08 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.09 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the county, any officer or employee
thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.20 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in §
153.06. The permit shall be for all structures, including manufactured homes,
as set forth in §
153.04, and for all development, including fill and other activities, also as
set forth in §
153.04.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.21 APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the County Planning Director and may include, but not be limited to: plans
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
      (2)   Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure
has been floodproofed;
      (3)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in §
153.36(B); and
      (4)   Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.22 COUNTY PLANNING DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Designation. The County Planning Director is hereby appointed to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities. Duties of the County Planning Director
shall include, but not be limited to, the following.
      (1)   Permit review. The County Planning Director shall:
         (a)   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
         (b)   Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required; and
         (c)   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that
the encroachment provisions of §
153.37(A) are met.
      (2)   Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has
not been provided in accordance with §
153.06, the Planning Director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer §§
153.36 and
153.37.
      (3)   Information to be obtained and maintained. The Planning Director
shall:
         (a)   Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood
insurance study or required as in division (B)(2) above, obtain and record the
actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not
the structure contains a basement;
         (b)   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures,
verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and
maintain the floodproofing certifications required in division (B)(1) above;
and
         (c)   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   Alteration of watercourses. The Planning Director shall:
         (a)   Notify adjacent communities and the Division of State Lands
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; and
         (b)   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is
not diminished.
      (5)   Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Planning Director shall make
interpretations where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the
areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
153.23.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.23 VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Appeal Board.
      (1)   The County Planning Commission, as established by the county, shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.
      (2)   The County Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Planning Director in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
      (3)   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Commission, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the County Board of Commissioners, as
provided in the County Zoning Ordinance.
      (4)   In passing upon such applications, the Planning Commission and the
County Board of Commissioners shall consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (e)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         (f)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood or for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         (k)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and
bridges.
      (5)   Upon consideration of the factors of division (A)(4) above and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Commission or the County Board of
Commissioners may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
      (6)   The Planning Director shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon
request.
   (B)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level; provided, that items in divisions (A)(4)(a) through (A)(4)(k)
above have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (2)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in this section.
      (3)   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
as identified in division (A)(4) above or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
      (6)   Variances, as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program,
are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical
piece of property; they are not personal in nature; and they do not pertain to
the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They
primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As
such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
      (7)   Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very
limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than water-
tight or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will
have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except §
153.21(B)(2), and otherwise complies with §
153.35(A) and (B).
      (8)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 153.35 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required.
   (A)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
      (2)   All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement and shall be installed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but
are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
(Reference FEMA’s Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas, a
guidebook for additional techniques.)
   (B)   Construction materials and methods.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (3)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise
elevated or located so as to vent water from entering of accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
   (C)   Utilities.
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize of eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (D)   Subdivision proposals.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
      (4)   Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50
lots or five acres (whichever is less).
   (E)   Review of building permits. Where elevation data is not available
either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source
(see § 153.22(B)(2)), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to
assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The
test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data,
high water marks, photographs of past flooding and the like, where available.
Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in
higher insurance rates.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.36 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in §
153.06 or §
153.22(B)(2), the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
base flood elevation.
      (2)   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level
of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
      (1)   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this division (B) based on
their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and
plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
153.22(B)(3)(b);
      (4)   Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must
meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in
division (A)(2) above; and
      (5)   Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified
that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below
the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood level
will be rated as one foot below that level).
   (C)   Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation and shall be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the
provisions of §
153.35(A)(2). This division (C) does not apply to manufactured homes to be
placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision except where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the
streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the streets,
utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has
commenced.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.37 FLOODWAYS.
   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
153.06 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential
projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply.
   (A)   Encroachments shall be prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments, unless certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (B)   If division (A) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall, upon conviction, be
punishable by imposition of a fine not to exceed:
      (1)   Five hundred dollars in the case of a noncontinuing offense; or
      (2)   One thousand dollars in the case of a continuing offense.
(Ord. MC-C-1-89, passed 1-13-1989)
CHAPTER 154: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
154.01   Comprehensive Plan adopted by reference
§ 154.01 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The County Board of Commissioners adopts the Comprehensive Plan for the
county, and any amendments thereto.
(Ord. passed 9-4-1985; Ord. MC-C-3-86, passed 7-2-1986; Ord. MC-C-1-88, passed
5-11-1988; Ord. MC-C-6-96, passed 6-12-1996; Ord. MC-C-2-97, passed 4-2-1997;
Ord. MC-C-4-97, passed 7-9-1997; Ord. MC-C-5-97, passed 7-16-1997; Ord. MC-C-6-
97, passed 8-6-1997; Ord. MC-C-7-97, passed 8-20-1997; Ord. MC-C-6-98, passed
7-22-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-99, passed 3-17-1999; Ord. MC-C-4-99, passed 9-14-1999;
Ord. MC-C-5-99, passed 10-6-1999; Ord. MC-C-1-01, passed 2-21-2001; Ord. MC-C-
2-02, passed 7-10-2002; Ord. MC-C-3-02, passed 8-7-2002; Ord. MC-C-1-03, passed
10-15-2003; Ord. MC-C-1-04, passed 8-10-2004; Ord. MC-02-04, passed 10-27-2004;
Ord. MC-03-04, passed 10-27-2004; Ord. MC-05-05, passed 11-8-2005; Ord. MC-04-
06, passed 7-12-2006; Ord. MC-01-2007, passed 9-26-2007; Ord. MC-03-2007,
passed 11-28-2007; Ord. MC-05-2008, passed 7-9-2008; Ord. MC-7-2009, passed 12-
23-2009; Ord. MC-2-2010, passed 3-17-2010; Ord. MC-04-2010, passed 7-21-2010;
Ord. MC-05-2010, passed 8-4-2010; Ord. MC-09-2010, passed 11-10-2010; Ord. MC-
10-2010, passed 11-10-2010; Ord. MC-2-2011, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. MC-3-2011,
passed 9-14-2011; Ord. MC-5-2011, passed 12-21-2011; Ord. MC-3-2012, passed 10-
17-2012; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-3, passed 7-2-2014;
Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014; Ord. ORD-2014-5, passed 8-27-2014; Ord. ORD-
2014-6, passed 8-27-2014; Ord. ORD-2015-3, passed 6-10-2015; Ord. ORD-2015-5,
passed 12-16-2015; Ord. ORD-2016-2, passed 4-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2016-3, passed
5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2016-6, passed 12-21-2016; Ord. ORD-2016-7, passed 12-21-
2016; Ord. ORD-2017-7, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2018-1, passed 6-13-2018;
Ord. ORD-2018-3, passed 9-5-2018; Ord. ORD-2019-5, passed 4-24-2019; Ord. ORD-
2021-2, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2023-1, passed 2-22-2023; Ord. ORD-2024-05,
passed 5-15-2024)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Purpose
   
155.002   Interpretation
   
155.003   Repeal of ordinances as affecting existing liabilities
   
155.004   Construction and terminology
   
155.005   Definitions
Subdivision Requirements; Subdivision Review Committee
   
155.020   Scope
   
155.021   Minimum standards
   
155.022   Subdivision Review Committee
   
155.023   Duties of Committee
   
155.024   Subdivision conference
   
155.025   Committee review factors
Tentative Plan
   
155.040   Application submission
   
155.041   Review for completeness
   
155.042   Required findings for approval
   
155.043   Tentative plan required
   
155.044   Scale of tentative plan
   
155.045   Information requirements
   
155.046   Master development plan
   
155.047   Supplemental information required
   
155.048   Approval of tentative subdivision plan
   
155.049   Specific approval requirements
   
155.050   Resubmission of denied tentative plans
Final Plat
   
155.065   Submission of final plat
   
155.066   Form of final plat
   
155.067   Requirements of survey and plat of subdivision
   
155.068   Monument requirements
   
155.069   Marking interior monuments after recording
   
155.070   Information on plat
   
155.071   Supplemental information with plat
   
155.072   Technical plat review
   
155.073   Review for approval of the final plat
   
155.074   Final plat approval
   
155.075   Recording of plat
Land Partitioning
   
155.090   Applicability of regulations
   
155.091   Application procedures and requirements
   
155.092   Requirements for approval
   
155.093   Preliminary plat requirements
   
155.094   Final plat map for partitioning
   
155.095   Replatting
   
155.096   Appeal procedure
   
155.097   Property line adjustment regulations
   
155.098   Additional application types
   
155.099   Partitioning for financial purpose
   
155.100   Land partitioning in the Exclusive Farm Use Zone
   
155.101   Judicial and other illegal partitions
   
155.102   Parcel size exceptions
Planned Unit Development
   
155.115   Authorization
   
155.116   Applicability of regulations
   
155.117   Purpose for planned unit development regulations
   
155.118   Required findings for approval
   
155.119   Planned unit development site size
   
155.120   Dimensional and bulk standards
   
155.121   Project density
   
155.122   Common open space
   
155.123   Accessory uses in a planned unit development
   
155.124   Application submission
   
155.125   Outline development plan
   
155.126   Tentative development plan
   
155.127   Separate approval of the tentative development plan
   
155.128   Control of the development after completion
   
155.129   Authorization to approve or disapprove planned unit developments
   
155.130   Placing conditions on a planned unit development
   
155.131   Procedure for taking action on a planned unit development
   
155.132   Recording of final development plan
   
155.133   Resubmission of denied development plan
Streets and Ways Not Part of a Subdivision
   
155.145   Application
   
155.146   Creation of streets outside a subdivision
   
155.147   Procedure
   
155.148   Creation of ways
Design Standards
   
155.160   Compliance required
   
155.161   Streets
   
155.162   Blocks
   
155.163   Building sites
   
155.164   Grading of building sites
   
155.165   Building lines
   
155.166   Large building sites
   
155.167   Land for public purposes
Improvements
   
155.180   Improvement procedures
   
155.181   Specifications for improvements
   
155.182   Improvements in subdivisions
   
155.183   Improvements in partitions
   
155.184   Approval of improvements
   
155.185   Acceptance of improvements
   
155.186   Building permits
Improvement Guarantee
   
155.200   Agreement for improvements
   
155.201   Bond
Variance and Exceptions
   
155.215   Application
   
155.216   Planning Commission action on variance or exception
Administration; Appeals
   
155.230   Approval or denial of applications
   
155.231   Appeals
   
155.232   Filing fee
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   O.R.S. Chapters 92 and 215 and this chapter sets forth the minimum
standards governing the approval of land development, including subdivision and
partitioning, as necessary to carry out the County Comprehensive Plan and to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   The purpose of these provisions and regulations are to:
      (1)   Encourage well-planned subdivision and partition development to the
end that good livable neighborhoods with all needed amenities and community
facilities may be created;
      (2)   Encourage development in harmony with the natural environment and
within resource carrying capacities;
      (3)   Safeguard the interest of the public, the applicant and the future
lot owner;
      (4)   Improve land records and boundary monumentation;
      (5)   Ensure equitable processing of subdivision and partitioning plans
and accomplish to the greatest extent possible the goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan for the county;
      (6)   Provide for orderly and efficient urban development and coordinate
development with public facilities and service plans and capabilities; and
      (7)   Provide for preservation of farm and forest lands and the resource-
based economy of the county.
   (C)   No person may subdivide or partition land within the county except in
accordance with O.R.S. Chapter 92 and the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.002 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to effect the
purposes set forth in §
155.001. These provisions are declared to be the minimum requirements
fulfilling such objectives, and the county may impose additional requirements
deemed necessary to promote the health, safety and general welfare and to carry
out the Comprehensive Plan of the area.
   (B)   Where conditions set forth herein are less restrictive than
comparative condition imposed by any other provision of this chapter, by
provisions of any other local ordinance, resolution or regulation or by
provisions of state statute or administrative regulation, the more restrictive
shall govern.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.003 REPEAL OF ORDINANCES AS AFFECTING EXISTING LIABILITIES.
   (A)   The repeal of any ordinance by this chapter shall not have the effect
to release or extinguish any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under
such ordinance.
   (B)   Such ordinance repealed shall be treated as still remaining in force
for the purpose of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the
enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture or liability, and for the purpose of
authorizing the accusation, prosecution, conviction and punishment of a person
or a part thereof prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.004 CONSTRUCTION AND TERMINOLOGY.
   (A)   Construction. Words used in the present tense include the future
tense, words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the
plural include the singular; the word SHALL is mandatory, the word MAY
permissive; and the masculine word shall include the feminine and neuter.
   (B)   Terminology. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      COUNTY. Morrow County, Oregon.
      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS and BOARD. The Board of Commissioners of Morrow
County.
      PLANNING COMMISSION and COMMISSION. The County Planning Commission of
Morrow County duly appointed by the Board of Commissioners.
      PLANNING DIRECTOR, COUNTY ROADMASTER, ASSESSOR, COUNTY SANITARIAN, COUNTY
SURVEYOR, COUNTY CLERK and TAX COLLECTOR. The Planning Director, Roadmaster,
Sanitarian, Surveyor, County Clerk, Tax Collector and Assessor of Morrow
County, as applicable.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS. The right to cross between public and private property allowing
pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property.
   ACCESS MANAGEMENT. The provision of improvements, signals and/or the
regulation of access to adjacent property while preserving the flow of traffic
in terms of safety, capacity and speed.
   ACCESSWAY. A walkway that provides the pedestrian and bicycle passage either
between streets or from a street to a building or other destination such as a
school, park or transit stop. ACCESSWAYS generally include a walkway and land
on either side of the walkway, often in the form of an easement or right-of-
way, to provide clearance and separation between the walkway and adjacent uses.
   BICYCLE FACILITIES. A general term denoting improvements and provisions made
to accommodate or encourage bicycling, including parking facilities and all
bikeways.
   BIKEWAYS. Any road, path or way that is in some manner specifically open to
bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the
exclusive use of bicycles or are shared with other modes. The five types of
BIKEWAYS are:
      (1)   BIKE LANE. A four-foot to six-foot wide portion of the roadway that
has been designated by permanent stripping and pavement markings for the
exclusive use of bicycles;
      (2)   MULTI-USE PATH. A paved ten-foot to 12-foot wide way that is
physically separated from motorized traffic; typically shared with pedestrians,
skaters and other non-motorized users;
      (3)   MULTI-USE TRAILS. An unpaved path that accommodates all-terrain
bicycles, typically shared with pedestrians;
      (4)   SHARED ROADWAY. A travel lane that is shared by bicyclists and
motor vehicles; and
      (5)   SHOULDER BIKEWAY. The paved shoulder of a roadway that is four feet
or wider, typically shared with pedestrians in rural areas.
   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision which area may be entirely
bounded on all sides by streets or highways (except alleyways), railroad right-
of-way, unsubdivided land or watercourses.
   COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A domestic water supply source or
distribution system which serves more than three single residences or other
users for the purpose of supplying water for household uses, but is neither a
municipal water supply system nor a public utility water supply system.
   CONTIGUOUS LAND. Parcels of land under the same ownership which abut each
other.
   CORNER CLEARANCE. The distance from an intersection of a public or private
road to the nearest public or private access connection, measured from the
closest edge of the pavement of the intersecting road to the closest edge of
the pavement of the connection along the traveled way.
   CROSS-SECTION. A profile of the ground surface perpendicular to the
centerline of a street, stream or valley bottom.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity who
creates or proposes to create a land development and includes any agent of a
developer so duly authorized.
   DRIVEWAYS. A private vehicle access way or point of entry from a public or
private road.
   EASEMENT. A grant of the right to use a parcel of land for specific
purposes, where ownership of the land is not transferred.
   FIRE BREAK. A break in the ground cover fuels as specified by the Fire
Protection Agency involved or the Commission.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The relatively flat area or low-lands adjoining the
channel of a river stream or watercourse, or lake reservoir, which has been or
may be covered by a base flood.
   FRONTAGE. All property fronting on one side of a street and measured along
the street line, between intersecting and intercepting streets or between a
street and right-of-way, waterway, end of a dead-end or city boundary.
   FUNCTIONAL AREA (INTERSECTION). The area beyond the physical intersection of
two roads that comprises decision and maneuver distance, plus any required
vehicle storage length.
   FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION. A system used to group public roadways into
classes according to their purpose in moving vehicles and providing access.
   INTEREST. Includes a lot or parcel and a share, undivided interest or a
membership which includes the right to occupy the land overnight, the lessee’s
interest may be renewed under the terms of the lease for a total period more
than three years. INTEREST does not include any interest in a condominium as
that term is defined in O.R.S. Chapter 100 or any security interest under a
land sales contract, trust deed or mortgage.
   JOINT ACCESS. A driveway connecting two or more contiguous sites to the
public street system.
   LOT. A unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land, and is
intended as a unit for disposition, transfer or ownership or interest or for
development.
      (1)   LOT AREA. The total horizontal net area within the lot lines of a
lot to mean that square footage of a lot that is free from public and private
road rights-of-way or easements.
      (2)   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting on two or more streets, other than
alleyways, at their intersection; provided, that the angle of intersection does
not exceed 135 degrees.
      (3)   LOT DEPTH. The average horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
      (4)   LOT, FLAG. A lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements and
where access to the public road is by a narrow, private right-of-way.
      (5)   LOT LINE. The property line bounding a lot.
      (6)   LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line separating the lot from a street
other than an alley, and in the case of a corner lot, the shortest lot line
along a street other than an alley.
      (7)   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line which is opposite and most distant
from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular, triangular or other odd-
shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at a
maximum distance from the front lot line.
      (8)   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot other than that of a front or rear lot line
bounding a lot.
      (9)   LOT, THROUGH OR DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two
parallel or approximately parallel streets other than alleys.
      (10)   LOT WIDTH. The average horizontal distance between the side lot
lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the
front and rear lot lines.
   MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A domestic water supply source and
distribution system owned and operated by a city or a county or owned and
operated by a special district or other public corporation which has
independent tax levying powers to support the system.
   OWNER. The owner of the title to real property, or the authorized agent
thereof, or the contract purchaser of real property of record, as shown on the
last available complete county tax assessment roll or County Recorder’s
records.
   PARCEL. A unit of land that is created by partitioning land.
   PARTITION LAND. To divide an area or tract of land into three or fewer
parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit
or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such
year. PARTITION LAND does not include any adjustment of a lot line by the
relocation of a common boundary where an additional parcel is not reduced below
the minimum lot size established by any applicable zoning ordinance. PARTITION
LAND does not include the sale of a lot in a recorded subdivision, even though
the lot may have been acquired prior to the sale with other contiguous lots or
property by a single owner; PARTITION LAND does not include divisions of land
resulting from lien foreclosures, foreclosure of recorded contracts for the
sale of real property and divisions of land resulting from the creation of
cemetery lots.
   PARTITION PLAT. A final diagram, drawing or other writing concerning a
partition.
   PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES. A general term denoting improvements made to
accommodate or encourage walking, including sidewalks, accessways, crosswalks,
ramps, paths and trails.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or
fraternal organization, corporation, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch
of government or any group or combination acting as a unit.
   PLAT. A final map, diagram, drawing, replat or other writing containing all
the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions and
information concerning a subdivision, partition or replat.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area between the boundary lines of a street, road or other
easement.
   ROAD or STREET. A public or private way that is created to provide ingress
or egress for persons to one or more lots, parcels, area or tracts of land,
excluding a private way that is created to provide ingress or egress to such
land for forestry, mining or agricultural purposes.
      (1)   ALLEY. A narrow street through a block primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or side properties abutting on another street.
      (2)   ARTERIAL. A street of considerable continuity which is primarily a
traffic artery for intercommunication among large areas, as identified in the
county’s Transportation System Plan.
      (3)   BICYCLE ROUTE. A right-of-way for bicycle traffic.
      (4)   COLLECTOR. A street supplementary to the arterial street and a
means of intercommunication between this system and smaller areas; used to some
extent for through traffic and to some extent for access to abutting
properties. COLLECTOR STREETS are identified in the county’s Transportation
System Plan.
      (5)   CUL-DE-SAC (DEAD END STREET). A short street having one end open to
traffic and being terminated by a vehicle turn-around.
      (6)   HALF STREET. A portion of the width of a street, usually along the
edge of a subdivision, where the remaining portion of the street could be
provided in another subdivision.
      (7)   LOCAL STREET. A street intended primarily for access to abutting
properties and identified in the county’s Transportation System Plan.
      (8)   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street parallel and adjacent to a
major arterial street providing access to abutting properties but protected
from through traffic.
      (9)   STUBBED STREET. A street having only one outlet for vehicular
traffic and which is intended to be extended or continued to serve future
subdivisions or developments on adjacent lands.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street or road right-of-way developed for
vehicular traffic.
   RURAL/COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY CENTER. Consists primarily of commercial or
industrial uses providing goods and services to surrounding rural area or to
persons traveling through the area, but also includes some dwellings.
   SUBDIVIDED LANDS AND SUBDIVISION. Improved or unimproved land or lands
divided, or created into interests or sold under an agreement to be
subsequently divided or created into interests, for the purpose of sale or
lease, whether immediate or future, into 11 or more undivided interests or four
or more interests. SUBDIVIDED LAND does not include the sale of a lot in a
recorded subdivision or an approved partition even though the seller of the lot
may have owned other contiguous lots or property prior to the sale; said lot
however must be sold as platted and recorded.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person who causes land to be subdivided into a subdivision
for himself or herself or for others, or who undertakes to develop a
subdivision, but does not include a public agency or officer authorized by law
to make subdivisions.
   USE. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   WALKWAY. A hard-surfaced area intended and suitable for pedestrians,
including sidewalks and the surfaced portions of accessways.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS; SUBDIVISION REVIEW COMMITTEE
§ 155.020 SCOPE.
   Before a plat of any subdivision or partition may be made and recorded, the
person proposing the subdivision or the partition or his or her authorized
agent or representative shall make an application in writing to the county for
approval of the proposed subdivision or the proposed partition in accordance
with the requirements and procedures established by this chapter.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.021 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   No proposed subdivision or partition shall be approved unless said
subdivision or partition complies with the Comprehensive Plan for the county
and an affected city, the applicable zoning and the requirements and standards
set forth in this chapter and O.R.S. Chapter 92.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.022 SUBDIVISION REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Subdivision Review Committee to review
all tentative subdivision and partition plans and make recommendations to the
Planning Commission.
   (B)   The Committee shall consist of the following members as applicable to
the county and an affected city:
      (1)   County Planning Director (who will be Chairperson);
      (2)   Affected city representative;
      (3)   County Surveyor;
      (4)   County Roadmaster and affected City Street Supervisor;
      (5)   Police/county and affected city;
      (6)   Fire protection representative;
      (7)   County extension agent;
      (8)   Public utility representative(s);
      (9)   Irrigation District representative or Watermaster;
      (10)   Affected School District representative;
      (11)   The State Department of Transportation District 12 (optional and
ex-officio);
      (12)   Postal Department (optional and ex-officio); and
      (13)   Other state and federal agencies (optional and ex-officio).
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.023 DUTIES OF COMMITTEE.
   It shall be the duty of the Committee to examine all tentative subdivision
and partition plans and make recommendations to the Planning Commission.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.024 SUBDIVISION CONFERENCE.
   The Planning Director shall schedule a meeting with the Subdivision Review
Committee and the subdivider or his or her authorized agent and surveyor.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.025 COMMITTEE REVIEW FACTORS.
   In review of proposed subdivisions and partitions, the Committee shall
consider the following factors:
   (A)   Preliminary plat requirements;
   (B)   Conformance to Chapters 154 and 156;
   (C)   Possible adverse effects on the development by natural hazards;
   (D)   Quantity and quality of existing or proposed water supply;
   (E)   Adequacy of the existing or proposed sewage disposal system to support
the projected population;
   (F)   Adequacy of public services to serve the increase in population to be
created by the development; including schools, police and fire protection,
health facilities, highway and arterial and collector road networks, parks and
the like;
   (G)   Possible conflicts with adjoining property;
   (H)   Protective covenants, deeds or restrictions;
   (I)   Conformance with policies and provisions of local and state
regulations;
   (J)   Marketable title or other interest contracted;
   (K)   Agreement or bylaws to provide for management, construction,
maintenance or services proposed; and
   (L)   Effects of the subdivision for continuity of public services and
access to adjoining lands.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
TENTATIVE PLAN
§ 155.040 APPLICATION SUBMISSION.
   Any person proposing a subdivision, or his or her authorized agent or
representative, shall include with an application for a subdivision a tentative
plan as set forth in §§
155.043 through
155.047 for the proposed subdivision, together with improvement plans and other
supplementary material as may be required and shall submit ten copies of said
plan together with all required accompanying material to the Planning
Department. A tentative plan for a subdivision shall be accompanied by an
application for a subdivision as provided by the Planning Department, together
with the appropriate filing fee, required supplemental material and subdivision
application form and thereof officially received by the Planning Department.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.041 REVIEW FOR COMPLETENESS.
   All applications shall be processed in accordance with administrative
provisions set forth in Chapter 156 and applicable standards in this section.
The Planning Department shall determine whether the application is complete and
shall inform the applicant within 30 days of the application date whether
additional information is required. The applicant has 180 days within which to
submit the requested information or the applicant may, in writing, refuse to
submit additional information, whereupon the application shall be considered
complete for review. The Planning Department shall arrange for a meeting of the
Subdivision Review Committee for review of the tentative plan when the
application has been found to be complete.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.042 REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL.
   A tentative plan for a proposed subdivision shall not be approved unless it
is found, in addition to other requirements and standards set forth in this
chapter, that the subdivision as proposed or modified will satisfy the intent
of this chapter relating to subdivision development, the intent and
requirements of the applicable zoning regulations, will be in compliance with
the Comprehensive Plan and the standards set forth in this subchapter; such
findings shall include the following.
   (A)   The subdivision is an effective, efficient and unified treatment of
the development possibilities on the project site while remaining consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan relative to orderly development and land use
patterns in the area and provides for the preservation of natural features and
resources such as natural vegetation and special terrain feature.
   (B)   The subdivision will be compatible with the area surrounding the
project site and will not create an excessive demand on public facilities and
services required to serve the development.
   (C)   There will not be any adverse impact on natural resource quality and
public service and facilities.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.043 TENTATIVE PLAN REQUIRED.
   The tentative plan for a subdivision shall be prepared and submitted in
compliance with the provision of §§
155.044 through
155.047.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.044 SCALE OF TENTATIVE PLAN.
   (A)   The tentative plan of a proposed subdivision shall be drawn on a sheet
of 18 by 24 inches in size or a multiple thereof at a scale of one inch equals
50 feet for subdivision up to ten acre size, one inch equals 100 feet for
subdivisions up to 50 acre size, one inch equals 200 feet for subdivision up to
100 acre in size and for subdivision of more than 100 acres in size a scale not
greater than one inch equals 400 feet; or multiples thereof as approved by the
Planning Department.
   (B)   The tentative plan must be of scale required by the County Surveyor.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.045 INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following information shall be shown on the tentative subdivision plan
or provided in accompanying materials. No tentative plan submittal shall be
considered “complete” unless all such information is provided.
   (A)   General information required:
      (1)   Proposed name of the subdivision;
      (2)   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner of record and
subdivider, authorized agents or representatives, surveyor and any assumed
business names filed or to be filed with the corporation commissioner by the
owner or subdivider which will be used in connection with the subdivision;
      (3)   Date of preparation, north point, scale and gross area of the
proposed subdivision;
      (4)   Appropriate identification of the drawing as a tentative plan for a
subdivision; and
      (5)   Location and tract designation sufficient to define its location
and boundaries and a legal description of the tract boundaries in relation to
existing plats and streets.
   (B)   Information concerning existing conditions:
      (1)   Location, names and widths of existing improved and unimproved
streets and roads within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision;
      (2)   Location of any existing features such as section lines, section
corners, city and special district boundary lines and survey monuments;
      (3)   Location of existing structures, irrigation canals and ditches,
pipelines, waterways and railroads and natural features such as rock
outcroppings, marshes, wooded areas and natural hazards;
      (4)   Location and direction of watercourses and the location of area
subject to erosion, high water tables and flood hazards;
      (5)   Location, width and use or purpose of any existing easement or
right-of-way within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision;
      (6)   Existing sewer lines, water mains, culverts and underground and
overhead utilities within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision, together
with pipe sizes, grades and locations; and
      (7)   Contour lines related to some established bench mark or other
engineering acceptable datum and having minimum intervals of two feet for
slopes of less than 5%, five feet for slopes of 5% to 15%, ten feet for slopes
of 15% to 20% and 20 feet for slopes greater than 20%.
   (C)   Information concerning proposed subdivisions:
      (1)   Location, names, width, typical improvements, cross-sections,
approximate grades, curve radii and length of all proposed streets and the
relationship to all existing and projected streets;
      (2)   Location, width and purpose of all proposed easements or rights-of-
way and relationship to all existing easements or rights-of-way;
      (3)   Location of at least one temporary bench mark within proposed
subdivision boundary;
      (4)   Location, approximate area and dimension of each lot and proposed
lot and block numbers;
      (5)   Location, approximate area and dimensions of any lot or area
proposed for public use, the use proposed and plans for improvements or
development thereof;
      (6)   Proposed use, location, approximate area and dimensions of any lot
which is intended for nonresidential use;
      (7)   An outline of the area proposed for partial recording of a final
plat if phased development and recording is contemplated or proposed. If the
proposed subdivision pertains to only a portion of the tract owned or
controlled by the subdivider, the Planning Commission may require a tentative
plan for streets and utilities in the unsubdivided portion;
      (8)   Source, method and preliminary plans for domestic and other water
supplies, sewage disposal, solid waste disposal and all utilities;
      (9)   Description and location of any proposed community facilities;
      (10)   Stormwater and other drainage facility plans; and
      (11)   Solar protection statement.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.046 MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   An overall master development plan shall be submitted for all developments
of more than 100 lots or parcels or for all developments planning to utilize
phase or unit development. The master development plan shall include, but not
be limited to, the following elements:
   (A)   Overall development plan, including phase or unit sequences;
   (B)   Schedule of improvements initiation and completion;
   (C)   Overall transportation and traffic pattern plan, including a traffic
impact analysis (TIA) completed by a certified engineer. If the property
frontage includes a state highway, the TIA must meet ODOT traffic impact study
requirements;
   (D)   Sales program timetable projection;
   (E)   Development plans of any common elements or facilities;
   (F)   Financing plan for all improvements; and
   (G)   If the proposed subdivision is determined to have a possible impact
upon adjacent lands or lands within the general vicinity, the Planning
Commission may require a potential street development pattern for adjoining
lands to be submitted together with the tentative plan as part of the master
development plan for the subject subdivision.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.047 SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   The following information shall be submitted with the tentative plan for a
subdivision. If such information cannot be shown practically on the tentative
plan of a proposed subdivision, it shall be submitted on separate documents
accompanying the plan at the time of filing.
   (A)   Proposed deed restriction or protective covenants, if such is proposed
to be utilized for the proposed subdivision.
   (B)   Certified statement from each serving utility company proposed to
serve the proposed subdivision as set forth in the tentative plan, and the
conditions of such service shall be set forth.
   (C)   Proposed fire protection system for the proposed subdivision and
written review thereof by the appropriate serving fire protection agency.
   (D)   Title or subdivision guarantee report from a licensed title company
stating the record owner(s) of the land proposed to be subdivided and setting
forth all encumbrances relative to the subject property. The required title
report shall have been issued within the past 60 days.
   (E)   Reasons and justifications for any variances requested to the
provisions of this chapter or any other applicable ordinance or regulation.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.048 APPROVAL OF TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN.
   (A)   Tentative plan review. The Planning Official shall, within 45 days
from the first regular Commission meeting following the determination that a
tentative subdivision plan is complete, review the tentative plan and all
reports and recommendations of appropriate officials and agencies. The
Commission may approve, modify or disapprove the tentative plan for the
proposed subdivision and shall set forth findings for said decision. The
Planning Commission shall make its decision at a public hearing with notice and
procedures as specified in the Development Ordinance.
   (B)   Tentative plan approval. Approval or disapproval of the tentative plan
by the Commission shall be final unless the decision is appealed to the Board
of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners may review the Planning
Commission’s decision on its own motion. Board of Commissioners review shall be
conducted in accordance with §§
155.230 through
155.232, and failure to do so within the required time limit shall be deemed to
indicate acceptance of the Planning Commission’s decision.
   (C)   Tentative plan approval relative to final plat. Approval of the
tentative plan shall not constitute final acceptance of the plat of the
proposed subdivision for recording; however, approval of such tentative plan
shall be binding upon the county for preparation of the plat.
   (D)   Commission report. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be
set forth in writing in a formal report and, in the case of approval, be noted
on three copies of the tentative plan, including references to any attached
documents describing conditions of approval. One copy of the appropriate
material shall be sent to the subdivider, one copy sent to the affected city or
the Board of Commissioners and one copy shall be retained by the Planning
Commission. Such action shall be completed within ten days of Commission
decision.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.049 SPECIFIC APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the requirements set forth by the provision of this chapter
and applicable local and state regulations, specific requirements for
preliminary plat approval are as follows.
   (A)   No tentative plan of a subdivision shall be approved which bears a
name using a word which is the same as, similar to or pronounced the same as a
word in the name of any other subdivision in the same county, except for the
words “town,” “city,” “place,” “court,” “addition” or similar words, unless the
land platted is contiguous to and platted by the same party that platted the
subdivision bearing that name or unless the party that platted the subdivision
bearing that name. All plats must continue the lot and block numbers of the
plat of the same name last filed.
   (B)   No tentative plan for a proposed subdivision shall be approved unless:
      (1)   The streets and roads are laid out so as to conform to the plats of
subdivisions and maps of partitions already approved for adjoining property as
to width, improvements, general direction and in all other respects, unless the
Planning Commission determines it is in the public interest to modify the
street or road pattern;
      (2)   Streets and roads to be held for private use are approved by the
Commission and are clearly indicated to the tentative plan and all reservations
or restrictions relating to such private streets and roads are set forth
thereon, such as ownership and maintenance responsibilities; and
      (3)   The tentative plan complies with Chapters 154 and 156.
   (C)   Approval or denial shall take into consideration the Subdivision
Review Committee’s recommendations and the factors listed in §
155.025.
   (D)   A review and formal recommendation has been provided for by the
affected city if located within the urban growth boundary thereof, or as
otherwise set for by the applicable urban growth boundary management agreement.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.050 RESUBMISSION OF DENIED TENTATIVE PLANS.
   If the tentative plan for a subdivision is denied, resubmittal thereof shall
not be accepted by the county for a period of six months after the date of the
final action denying said plan. Resubmission shall require the applicant to
consider all items for which the prior denial was based, and the resubmission
shall be accompanied by a new filing fee.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
FINAL PLAT
§ 155.065 SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Filing time period requirements. Within 12 months after the date of
approval of the tentative plan for a subdivision, the subdivider shall prepare
and submit a final plat that is in conformance with the tentative plan as
approved. The subdivider shall submit the original drawing, five prints and any
supplementary information required by the decision and this chapter. If the
subdivider fails to proceed with the subdivision before the expiration of the
12-month period following the approval of the tentative plan, the plan approval
shall be declared void, and the subdivider must submit a new plan together with
the appropriate filing fee if he or she wishes to proceed with the development.
   (B)   Time period extension. Upon submittal of a formal request for a time
extension and justification therefor by the subdivider, a 90-day extension to
the 12-month time period set forth in division (A) above may be granted.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.066 FORM OF FINAL PLAT.
   The final plat shall be submitted in the form prescribed by the state
statutes and this chapter.
   (A)   All plats subdividing any tracts of land in the county, and
dedications of streets or roads or public parks and squares and other writings
made part of such plats offered for record, shall be made in black India ink,
upon material that is 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is suitable for
binding and copying purposes and that has such characteristics of strength and
permanency as may be required by the county.
   (B)   The plat shall be of such a scale, and the lettering of the approvals
thereof, and of the dedication and affidavit of the surveyor, shall be of such
a size or type as will be clearly legible, but no part shall come nearer any
edge of the sheet than one inch. Plat text should be a minimum of eight
hundredths of an inch. The plat may be placed on as many sheets as necessary,
but a face sheet and an index page shall be included for plats placed upon two
or more sheets.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.067 REQUIREMENTS OF SURVEY AND PLAT OF SUBDIVISION.
   No subdivider shall submit a plat of a subdivision for record, until all the
requirements for the survey and the plat of the subdivision have been met.
   (A)   The survey for the plat of the subdivision or partition shall be done
in a manner to achieve sufficient accuracy that measurements may be taken
between monuments within one-tenth of a foot or one-ten-thousandth of the
distance shown on the subdivision or partition plat, whichever is greater.
   (B)   The survey and plat of the subdivision shall be made by a surveyor who
is a licensed land surveyor in the state.
   (C)   The plat of a subdivision shall be of such scale that all survey and
mathematical information, and all other details may be clearly and legibly
shown thereon, as approved by the County Surveyor. Each lot shall be numbered.
All subdivision plats must continue the lot numbers and, if used, the block
numbers of the subdivision plat of the same name last filed. On or after
January 1, 1992, any subdivision submitted for final approval shall not use
block numbers or letters unless such subdivision is a continued phase of a
previously recorded subdivision, bearing the same name, that has previously
used block numbers or letters. The length of all boundaries of each lot shall
be shown, each street shall be named.
   (D)   The locations of descriptions of all monuments shall be clearly
recorded upon all plats, and the proper course and distances of all boundary
lines shall be shown.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.068 MONUMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The initial point of all subdivision plats shall be marked with a
monument conforming to the following specifications. This monument shall be an
iron/steel rod or a galvanized iron pipe, consistent with O.R.S. 92.060. The
monument shall be set with the top at finished grade elevation and the
subdivision name, year of establishment and registration number of the
registered engineer or registered number of the registered land surveyor,
establishing same, clearly marked with steel dyes on the brass cap. The
location of the monument shall be noted with reference to a known corner
established by the United States survey.
   (B)   The intersection of all streets and roads and all points on the
exterior boundary where the boundary line changes direction shall be marked
with monuments either galvanized iron pipe or iron or steel rods.
   (C)   All lot corners except lot corners of cemetery lots shall be marked
with monuments of either galvanized iron pipe not less than one-half inch in
diameter or iron steel rods not less than five-eighths inch in least dimension
and two feet long.
   (D)   Points shall be plainly and permanently marked upon monuments so that
measurements may be taken to them within one-tenth of a foot.
   (E)   All monuments for the exterior boundaries of a subdivision shall be
marked and such monuments shall be referenced on the plat of the subdivision
before the plat of the subdivision is offered for approval by the county and
for recording. However, interior monuments for the subdivision need not be set
prior to the approval and recording of the plat of the subdivision if the
engineer or land surveyor performing the survey work certifies that the
interior monuments will be set on or before a specified date as provided in §
155.069(B).
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.069 MARKING INTERIOR MONUMENTS AFTER RECORDING.
   (A)   If the interior monuments for a subdivision are to be marked on or
before a specified date after the approval and recording of the plat of the
subdivision, the person subdividing the land shall furnish, prior to approval
and recording of the plat, to the governing body of the county, a bond or cash
deposit in an amount equal to 110% of the estimated cost of performing the work
for the interior monumentation.
   (B)   If the person subdividing any land within the county has complied with
division (A) above, the surveyor may prepare the plat of the monuments
referenced thereof as submitted for recording. There shall be attached to any
such plat the affidavit of the surveyor that the interior monuments for the
subdivision will be marked on or before a specified date in accordance with §
155.068 and applicable state statutes and referenced on the plat for the
subdivision as approved by the county.
   (C)   After the interior monuments for a subdivision have been marked as
provided in an affidavit submitted under division (B) above, the surveyor
performing such work shall:
      (1)   Within five days after completion of such work, notify the person
subdividing the land involved in the county; and
      (2)   Upon approval of the work under O.R.S. 92.100 by the County
Surveyor, submit an affidavit for recording stating that the subdivision plat
has been correctly surveyed and marked with proper monuments at the remaining
corners of the subdivisions as noted on the original subdivision plat. Any
monument that cannot be set shall be separately noted, and a reference monument
shall be set. The affidavit shall be approved by the County Surveyor before
recording. The surveyor who prepared the affidavit shall cause the affidavit to
be recorded in the office of the County Recorder where the subdivision plat is
recorded. The County Clerk shall promptly provide a recorded copy of the
affidavit to the County Surveyor. The County Surveyor shall note the monuments
set and the Recorder’s information on the County Surveyor’s copy of the
subdivision plat and any exact copies filed in accordance with O.R.S. 92.120
(3). The original plat may not be corrected or changed after it is recorded
with the County Clerk.
   (D)   At the time the person subdividing the land described in division (A)
above pays the surveyor for performing the interior monumentation work and
notifies the county of such payment, the county, within three months after such
notice, shall release the bond or return the cash deposit upon finding that
such payment has been made.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.070 INFORMATION ON PLAT.
   In addition to that required for the tentative plan or otherwise specified
by law, the following information shall be shown on the plat:
   (A)   Survey reference. Reference points of existing surveys identified,
related to the plat by distances and bearing and referenced to a filed book or
map as follows:
      (1)   Stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground and used to
determine the boundaries of the subdivision;
      (2)   Adjoining corners of adjoining subdivision; and
      (3)   Other monuments found or established in making the survey of the
subdivision or required to be installed by provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Boundary street. The exact location and width of the street easements
intercepting the boundary of the tract;
   (C)   Boundary lines. Tract, block and lot boundary lines and street right-
of-way and centerlines, with dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, water
lines for any creek or other body of water. Tract boundaries and street
bearings shall be shown to the nearest second with basis of bearings. Distances
shall be shown to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot. No ditto marks shall be
used;
   (D)   Streets. The width of the portion of streets being dedicated and with
the width of existing rights-of-way. For streets on curvature, curve data shall
be based on the street centerline. In addition to the centerline dimensions,
the radius and central angle shall be indicated together with the long chord
distance and bearing;
   (E)   Easements. Easements denoted by fine dotted lines, clearly identified
and, if already of record, their recorded reference. If an easement is not
definitely located of record, a statement of the easement shall be given. The
width of the easement, its length and bearing and sufficient ties to locate the
easement with respect to the map, it shall be properly referenced in the
owner’s certificates of dedications;
   (F)   Lot numbers. Lot numbers beginning with the number “1” and numbered
consecutively;
   (G)   Public lands. Identification of land to be dedicated for any purpose,
public or private, to distinguish it from lots intended for sale;
   (H)   Certificates. The following certificates are required and shall be
combined where appropriate:
      (1)   A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, all parties having
record title interest in the land consenting to the preparation and recording
of the plat;
      (2)   A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, dedicating all land
intended for public use, except land which is intended for the exclusive use of
lot owners in the subdivision, their licenses, visitors, tenants and servants;
      (3)   A certificate with the seal of and signed by the surveyor
responsible for the survey and final map;
      (4)   A certificate for execution by the affected City Public Works
Superintendent or other city representative and/or County Roadmaster;
      (5)   A certificate for the execution by the County Planning Director;
      (6)   A certificate for execution by the County Tax Collector;
      (7)   A certificate for execution by the County Assessor;
      (8)   A certificate for execution by the Irrigation District where
applicable;
      (9)   A certificate for approval for execution by the Board of
Commissioners; and
      (10)   All plans, plats or replats of subdivisions located within the
boundaries of an Irrigation District, Drainage District, Water Control
District, district improvement company or similar service district shall be
submitted to the Board of Directors of the district or company and its approval
thereof shall be endorsed thereon by the Board before approval of such plan,
plat or replat of any subdivision by the governing body of the county. Except,
that if a subdivider is unable to obtain action or approval of any district or
company within 45 days, the subdivider shall notify the governing body in
writing and thereafter the governing body shall serve notice on that district
or company by certified mail advising the district or company that any
objections to the plan, plat or replat must be filed with the governing body in
writing within 20 days and failure of the district or company to respond shall
be considered by the governing body as approval of such plan, plat or replat
and the governing body shall endorse, act and the body may thereafter approve
such plan, plat or replat without the approval of such district or company
endorsed thereon.
   (I)   Other certificates required by state regulations.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.071 SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION WITH PLAT.
   The following data shall accompany the plat:
   (A)   Title report. A preliminary title report issued by a title insurance
company in the name of the owner of the land, showing all parties whose consent
is necessary and their evidence of a clear and marketable title. The report
shall have been issued within the last 60 days;
   (B)   Survey data sheets. Sheets and drawings showing the following:
      (1)   Traverse data, including the coordinates of the boundary of the
subdivision and ties to section corners and donation land claim corners, and
showing the error of closure, if any. A survey control work sheet may be
substituted for this item;
      (2)   The computation of distances, angles and courses shown of the plat;
and
      (3)   Ties to existing monuments, proposed monuments, adjacent
subdivision, street corners and state highway stationing.
   (C)   Deed restrictions. A copy of any deed restrictions applicable to the
subdivision;
   (D)   Homeowner’s association. A copy of any homeowner’s association
agreements proposed or required for the subdivision;
   (E)   Dedications. A copy of any dedication requiring separate documents,
specific reference to parks, playgrounds and the like;
   (F)   Taxes. A list of all taxes and assessments on the tract which have
become a lien on the tract;
   (G)   Board of Commissioners’ certificate. A certificate by the Board of
Commissioners that the subdivider has complied with the requirements of §§
155.160 and
155.161 on improvement guarantee;
   (H)   Improvement. If grading and/or street improvements and/or sewer and/or
water facilities are required as the conditions of approval of the final plat,
the following shall be required to be submitted with the final plat:
      (1)   Cross-sections of the proposed streets, showing width of roadways,
types of surfacing, curb locations, width and location of sidewalks;
      (2)   Plans and profiles of proposed water distribution system showing
pipe sizes and location of valves and fire hydrants;
      (3)   Plans and profiles of proposed water distribution system showing
pipe sizes and location of valves and fire hydrants;
      (4)   Specification for the construction of all proposed utilities;
      (5)   Evidence of approved site suitability for on-site septic treatment
systems on undeveloped parcels proposed to be smaller than four acres;
      (6)   Grading plans and specifications as required for areas other than
streets and ways; and
      (7)   Planting plans and specifications for street trees and other
plantings in public area.
   (I)   Access permits. Where access is to be a county road or state highway,
the necessary access permits shall be obtained prior to final plat review.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.072 TECHNICAL PLAT REVIEW.
   (A)   Ordinance check. Upon receipt by the Planning Department, the plat and
other data shall be reviewed by the County Surveyor, affected City Public Works
Superintendent, County Roadmaster and the County Planning Director who shall
examine them to determine that the subdivision as shown is substantially the
same as it appeared on the approved tentative plan and there has been
compliance with provisions of the law of this chapter.
   (B)   Field check. The County Roadmaster, County Surveyor, County Planning
Director and affected City Public Works Superintendent may make such checks in
the field as are desirable to verify that the map is sufficiently correct on
the ground and the Roadmaster or Superintendent or representative thereof may
enter the property for this purpose.
   (C)   Corrections. If the County Roadmaster, County Surveyor, affected City
Public Works Superintendent and County Planning Director determine that full
conformity has not been made, the subdivider shall be advised thereby of the
changes or additions that must be made, and the subdivider shall be afforded a
reasonable opportunity to make the changes or additions.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.073 REVIEW FOR APPROVAL OF THE FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   If the Planning Director does not approve the plat, it shall advise
the subdivider of the changes or additions that must be made and shall afford
him or her an opportunity to make corrections. If the Planning Director
determines that the plat conforms to all requirements, he or she shall give its
approval; provided, that supplemental documents and provision for required
improvements are satisfactory. Approval shall be indicated by the signature of
the Planning Director. The Planning Director may refer any final plat to the
Planning Commission for review, if the final plat does not substantially
conform to the approved tentative plan or if any other conditions warrant
review. Approval of the plat does not constitute or affect an acceptance by the
public of the dedication of any street or other easement shown on the plat; nor
does such approval constitute final approval, said authority for final approval
being vested with the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   No plat of a proposed subdivision shall be approved unless:
      (1)   Streets and roads for public use are to be dedicated without any
reservation nor restriction other than reversionary right upon vacation or
restriction other than reversionary right upon vacation of any such street or
road and easement for public utilities;
      (2)   Streets and roads held for private use and indicated on the
tentative plan of such subdivision have been approved by the county;
      (3)   The plat or map contains provision for the dedication to the public
of all common improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, roads,
parks, sewage disposal and water supply systems; the dedication of which was
made a condition of the approval of the tentative plan for the subdivision or
the partition; and
      (4)   Explanation of all common improvements required as conditions of
approval of the tentative plan of the subdivision will be recorded and
referenced on the final plat or map.
   (C)   No plat of a subdivision shall be approved by the county unless the
county has received and accepted:
      (1)   A certification by a municipally-owned domestic water supply system
or by the owner of a privately owned domestic water supply system, subject to
regulation by the State Public Utility Commissioner, that water will be
available to the lot line of each and every lot depicted in the proposed plat;
      (2)   A bond, contract or other assurance by the subdivider to the county
that a domestic water supply system will be installed by or on behalf of the
subdivider to the lot line of each and every lot depicted in the proposed plat;
and the amount of any such bond, contract or other assurance by the subdivider
shall be determined by a registered professional engineer, subject to any
change in such amount as determined necessary by the county; or
      (3)   In lieu of divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above, a statement that no
domestic water supply facility will be provided to the purchaser of any lot
depicted in the proposed plat, even though a domestic water supply source may
exist. A copy of any such statement, signed by the subdivider and endorsed by
the county, shall be filed by the subdivider with the final plat.
   (D)   No plat of a subdivision shall be approved by the county unless the
county has received and accepted:
      (1)   A certification by a municipally-owned sewage disposal system or by
the owner of a privately owned sewage disposal system that is subject to
regulation by the State Public Utility Commissioner that a sewage disposal
system will be available to the lot line of each and every lot depicted in the
proposed plat;
      (2)   A bond, contract or other assurance by the subdivider to the county
that a sewage disposal system will be installed by or on behalf of the
subdivider to the lot line of each and every lot depicted on the proposed plat;
and the amount of such bond, contract or other assurance shall be determined by
a registered professional engineer, subject to any change in such amount as the
county considers necessary; or
      (3)   In lieu of divisions (D)(1) and (D)(2) above, a statement that no
sewage disposal facility will be provided to the purchaser of any lot depicted
in the proposed plat, where the Department of Environmental Quality has
approved the proposed method on an individual lot-by-lot basis or an
alternative method of sewage disposal. A copy of any such statement, signed by
the subdivider and endorsed by the county shall be filed by the subdivider with
the final plat. The subdivider shall deliver a copy of the statement to each
prospective purchaser of a lot in the subdivision at or prior to the signing by
the purchaser of the first written agreement for the sale of the lot. The
subdivider shall take a signed receipt from the purchaser upon delivery of such
a statement.
   (E)   No plat of a subdivision shall be approved by the county unless the
county has received and accepted:
      (1)   A final plat which is in compliance with the tentative plan
approval and all conditions thereof;
      (2)   A certification that all required and proposed improvements and
repairs to existing public facilities damaged in the development have been
completed or a proposed bond, contract or other assurance by the county and/or
county District Attorney specifying the period within which required
improvements and repairs shall be completed; and
      (3)   The plate complies with the county and affected city Comprehensive
Plans and with any applicable zoning regulations and any ordinance or
regulation applicable to the proposed subdivision or improvement thereof that
are then in effect in the county.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.074 FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
   Final plat approval shall be subject to approval of the County Surveyor and
be consistent with methods discussed in O.R.S. Chapter 92.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.075 RECORDING OF PLAT.
   A subdivider shall, without delay, submit the plat for signatures of other
public officials required by law. Approval of the plat shall be null and void
if the plat is not recorded within 45 days after the date of approval of the
governing body has been obtained. After obtaining all required approvals and
signatures, the subdivider shall file the plat and an exact copy thereof in the
County Clerk’s office and the affected City Recorder’s office.
   (A)   No plat shall be recorded unless all ad valorem taxes and all special
assessments, fees or other charges required by law to be placed upon the tax
roll have been paid which have become a lien upon the subdivision or which will
become a lien during the calendar year.
   (B)   At the time of filing such plat, the person offering it for filing
shall also file with the county recording officer an exact copy thereof, made
with black India ink, or photocopy upon good quality of linen tracing cloth or
any other suitable drafting material having the same or better transparency.
The engineer or surveyor who made the plat shall make an affidavit to indicate
that the photocopy or tracing is an exact copy of the plat. The copy filed with
the county recording officer shall be certified by him or her to be an exact
copy and then shall be filed in the archives of the county and be preserved by
filing without folding. The subdivider shall provide, without cost, prints from
such copy to the County Assessor, affected City Recorder and County Planning
Department.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
LAND PARTITIONING
§ 155.090 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS.
   All land partitioning within the county must be approved by the County
Planning Commission, County Planning Director and/or a designated official
thereof. Said approvals will be granted in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and more particularly this subchapter.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.091 APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any persons proposing a land partitioning, or his or her authorized
agent or representative, will prepare and submit a copy of the tentative plan
for the proposed partitioning together with an application for partitioning and
the appropriate filing fee to the Planning Department in accordance with
administrative provisions set forth in Chapter 156, except as set forth in this
subchapter.
   (B)   The tentative plan for partitioning, when submitted, will include the
following:
      (1)   A vicinity map locating the proposed partitioning in relation to
adjacent subdivisions, roadways and adjoining land use and ownership patterns;
      (2)   A plan of the proposed partitioning showing tract boundaries and
dimensions, the area of each tract or parcel and the names, right-of-way widths
and improvement standards of existing roads;
      (3)   Names and addresses of the landowner, the partitioner, a mortgagee
if applicable and the land surveyor employed or to be employed to make
necessary surveys and prepare the final plat;
      (4)   A statement regarding contemplated water supply, sewage disposal,
solid waste disposal, fire protection, access and the like;
      (5)   North point, scale and date of map and property by tax lot,
section, township and range;
      (6)   Statement regarding the current use of the property and the purpose
for which the parcels may be used in the future; and
      (7)   Title or subdivision guarantee report from a licensed title company
stating the record owner(s) of the land proposed to be subdivided and setting
forth all encumbrances relative to the subject property. The report shall have
been issued within the 60 days previous to the submittal for approval.
   (C)   The preliminary plat may reveal the boundaries of the property to be
other than thought to be correct by the landowner. An applicant is encouraged
to have a boundary survey performed prior to submittal of the application and
tentative plan.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.092 REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL.
   No application for partitioning will be approved unless the following
requirements are met:
   (A)   Proposal is in compliance with O.R.S. Chapter 92 and the county and
affected city Comprehensive Plans and applicable zoning;
   (B)   Each parcel is suited for the use intended or offered, including, but
not limited to, size of the parcels, topography, sewage disposal approval and
guaranteed access. Proof of access must show that each parcel has an easement
sufficient for continued ingress and egress to a public, county or state
highway or has a deeded access way;
   (C)   All required public service and facilities are available and adequate;
   (D)   Proposal will not have any identifiable adverse impacts on adjoining
or area land uses, public services and facilities and natural resource carrying
capacities;
   (E)   An approved water rights diversion plan as applicable;
   (F)   Flag lots will not be permitted when the results would be to increase
the number of properties requiring direct and individual access from a state
highway or other arterial. Flag lots may be permitted to achieve planning
objectives under the following conditions:
      (1)   When flag lot driveways are separated by at least twice the minimum
frontage distance;
      (2)   The driveway must meet driveway standards described in §
155.161(V);
      (3)   The lot meets the minimum lot area of the zoning district, without
including the driveway; and
      (4)   Only one flag lot will be permitted per private right-of-way or
access easement.
   (G)   The depth of any lot will not be restricted as long as a buildable
parcel is proposed;
   (H)   An application for partitioning will be denied when it can be shown
that the partitioning is part of a plan or scheme to create more than three
parcels without going through subdivision, or is part of a development pattern
creating more than three parcels without subdividing. If the Planning Director
determines that the proposed partition constitutes series partitioning, or if
series partitioning has occurred in the past, then the Planning Director may
require the application be subject to the requirements for a subdivision or
planned unit development; and
   (I)   In addition to the requirements set forth above, the following factors
may be considered for approval or disapproval of an application for land
partitioning if a geographical or other factor identified by other, appropriate
professionals or plans such as the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, FEMA
requirements, byways rules and the like requires it:
      (1)   Placement and availability of utilities;
      (2)   Safety from fire, flood and other natural hazards;
      (3)   The same improvements may be required for a partitioning as
required of a subdivision, if required it will be installed by the applicant;
      (4)   Possible effects on natural, scenic and historical resources;
      (5)   Need for on-site or off-site improvements;
      (6)   Need for additional setback, screening, landscaping and other
requirements relative to the protection of adjoining and area land uses. If the
proposed partition is located within an urban growth boundary, the affected
city must be given notice according to the respective Joint Management
Agreement; and
      (7)   In the approval of a land partition, the need for street and other
improvements will be considered and may be required as a condition of approval
at a different standard than for a subdivision.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.093 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Following approval of the tentative plan for a proposed partitioning,
the person proposing partitioning will have prepared three copies of the
preliminary plat map for the subject partitioning to be submitted to the
Assessor’s office, County Surveyor and to the Planning Department. The
preliminary plat will be prepared by a licensed state land surveyor and comply
with all requirements of O.R.S. Chapter 92 or as defined in this subchapter.
The preliminary plat will be drawn to meet the same requirements of the final
plat map described in §
155.094.
   (B)   The following data shall accompany the preliminary plat: title or
subdivision guarantee report from a licensed title company stating the record
owner(s) of the land proposed to be subdivided and setting forth all
encumbrances relative to the subject property. The title report shall have been
issued within the 60 days prior to submittal of the preliminary plat.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.094 FINAL PLAT MAP FOR PARTITIONING.
   The final partition plat will be completed within two years from the date of
the approval or the approval of the partitioning will expire, and said approval
will be declared null and void. A one-year extension may be granted when a
written request is made prior to the expiration of the permit with stated
reasons for the request for which the applicant was not responsible. Five
copies of the final plat map will be submitted to the county for approval. The
five copies will be circulated for approval and signature in the following
order: County Surveyor; Planning Director; County Assessor; and the original
recorded in the office of the County Clerk. Copies of said final map will be
provided by the partitioner without cost to the County Assessor, County
Surveyor and County Planning Director. Two copies of the final plat map will be
of approved reproducible material as required by O.R.S. 92.080. Once recorded,
the copies will be distributed as follows: approved reproducible to the County
Clerk; approved reproducible to the County Surveyor; each paper copy to the
Planning Director and the Assessor; and the final paper copy to be returned to
the surveyor.
   (A)   Final plat map requirements.
      (1)   All plats partitioning any tracts of land in the county shall be
made in black India ink, will be drawn to an appropriate scale on a sheet 18
inches by 24 inches and as required by O.R.S. 92.080 or the County Surveyor.
The plat will be of a scale and lettering size as required by the County
Surveyor so that all details may be clearly and legibly shown;
      (2)   Name of owner, developer and land surveyor will be shown on the
map;
      (3)   Date, scale, north point, legal description of boundaries and a tie
by actual survey to a section or donation land claim corner;
      (4)   Parcel boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings; bearings will
be to the nearest second and distances to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot.
The area of each parcel will be shown;
      (5)   An affidavit by the land surveyor involved in the partitioning
certifying that all parcels have been surveyed and monumented as required for
lots within a partition;
      (6)   A certification of any public dedication;
      (7)   A certification of approval for execution by the County Planning
Director; and
      (8)   When a partition would create parcels greater than ten acres or
when not required by the County Subdivision Ordinance, the partition need not
be surveyed or monumented, but must be platted using the best available
information. The approximate acreage of each unsurveyed parcel will be shown
and any unsurveyed parcel will have the words “unsurveyed” placed in bold
letters adjacent to the parcel number. Unsurveyed parcels need not comply with
O.R.S. 92.050(5), (7) and (8).
   (B)   Approval requirements. No final map for land partitioning will be
approved by the Planning Director unless all of the following requirements are
met.
      (1)   The final map is in strict conformance with the tentative plan as
approved and conditions thereof have been met or guaranteed.
      (2)   The final map is in strict conformance with the requirements set
forth in division (B)(1) above or as otherwise approved by the Commission or as
otherwise set forth in this subchapter.
      (3)   Access is guaranteed to each parcel.
      (4)   Each parcel is approved for subsurface sewage disposal if
applicable to the intended or offered use.
      (5)   All required public utilities are available.
      (6)   A guarantee of all proposed or required improvements has been
submitted and approved or such improvements completed and approved as set forth
by the Commission.
   (C)   Charges. No partition will be recorded unless all taxes, interest and
penalties imposed on land disqualified for any special assessment and all
special assessments, fees or other charges required by law have been paid.
(Ord. MC-C-1-00, passed 3-8-2000; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3,
passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.095 REPLATTING.
   (A)   A reconfiguration of a recorded subdivision or partition plat or a
change in the number of lots in the subdivision or partition may be approved as
defined in O.R.S. 92.180. Replat applications will be processed as and meet the
requirements of either a partition or subdivision as appropriate based on the
definitions in O.R.S. 92.010.
   (B)   Replats will act to vacate the platted lots or parcels and easements
within the replat area with the following conditions.
      (1)   A replat will apply only to a recorded plat.
      (2)   Notice shall be provided when the replat is replatting all of an
undeveloped subdivision, as defined in O.R.S. 92.225.
      (3)   Notice shall be provided to the owners of property adjacent to the
exterior boundaries of the tentative subdivision or partition replat.
      (4)   When a utility easement is proposed to be realigned, reduced in
width or omitted by a replat, all affected utility companies or public agencies
shall be notified, consistent with a governing body’s notice to owners of
property contiguous to the proposed plat. Any utility company that desires to
maintain an easement subject to vacation under this section must notify the
Planning Department in writing within 14 days of the mailing or other service
of the notice.
      (5)   A replat will not serve to vacate any public street or road.
      (6)   A replat will comply with all subdivision or partition provisions
of this subchapter and all applicable ordinances.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.096 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   An appeal of a decision or requirement of the Planning Commission or the
Planning Official relative to a land partitioning will be made in accordance
with the provisions of §§
155.230 through
155.232.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.097 PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT. An adjustment of a property line by the
relocation of a common boundary where an additional unit of land is not created
and where the existing unit of land reduced in size by the adjustment complies
with any applicable zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Applicability and purpose. All property line adjustments within the
county must be approved by the Planning Director. Said approvals will be
granted in accordance with the provisions of state statutes, this chapter and
more particularly this subchapter. The purpose of this section is to provide
the basis to review property line adjustments.
   (C)   Application procedure and requirements.
      (1)   Applications for a property line adjustment will be required to
provide a site plan which shows all of the property line dimensions and the
area and dimensions to be added or reduced from each property. A survey will be
filed with the County Surveyor. New or corrected deeds which describe the
adjusted configuration will be recorded in the county deed records. No property
line adjustment may cause a new lot or parcel to be created. A property line
adjustment deed will contain the names of the parties, the description of the
adjusted line, references to original recorded documents and signatures of all
parties with proper acknowledgment.
      (2)   The application will be evaluated by an interdepartmental review
process whereby the Planning Director, Assessor and County Surveyor will
approve the application prior to final approval.
   (D)   Requirements for approval.
      (1)   The property line adjustment will not create any additional units
of land.
      (2)   A property line adjustment will not create a unit of land which has
been reduced to less than the minimum lot size for the applicable zone.
      (3)   The property line adjustment will not eliminate access for any of
the properties unless an alternative access has been provided and approved.
      (4)   The property line adjustment will not cause an undeveloped property
to become ineligible for a septic system or to maintain water supply.
      (5)   The revised line must not result in a violation of structural
setback requirements of the applicable zone.
      (6)   Notification will be given to an Irrigation District, Drainage
District, Water Control District, Water Improvement District or district
improvement company that lies within the boundaries of a property line
adjustment. The applicant must comply with any requirements of the affected
District, if any.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Additional definitions, see O.R.S. 92.010(9)(b)
§ 155.098 ADDITIONAL APPLICATION TYPES.
   (A)   Split zoning. Property line adjustments may be permitted across a
zoning designation boundary to create a split-zoned property if:
      (1)   The adjusted properties lie entirely outside of an urban growth
boundary and outside of an incorporated city; and
      (2)   Each parcel is consistent with the minimum parcel size of the
applicable zoning area.
   (B)   Combinations. Approval for a combination of properties is made by the
County Assessor. No survey is required but the combination requires a letter of
approval by the Planning Director, or designee, stating the possible land use
implications of the combination.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.099 PARTITIONING FOR FINANCIAL PURPOSE.
   (A)   Upon approval by the Planning Director, a special permit authorizing
the creation of a security interest or leasehold in a parcel of land will be
granted.
   (B)   Permits issued under the authority of this section will be subject to
the following limitations and restrictions.
      (1)   A parcel possessed by a person under the terms of a lease or a
security interest, and the remaining parcels, must remain in the legal use that
the parcels were at the time the interest become possessory; except the parcel
(s) may be put into agricultural use; but in no case may an additional
structure or security interest be added to any parcel by the authority of the
permit authorized in division (A) above. To establish uses other than
agriculture or to erect structures not a part of the security interest,
including farm accessory structures, the owner of the parcel must secure a land
partitioning approval as required by this chapter and this subchapter.
      (2)   The permit authorized in division (B)(1) above will be valid for
the time of the lease or the life of the security interest. When there is a
default and foreclosure, the permit will only be valid until a land
partitioning permit is granted or the parcels are once again rejoined as a
contiguous unit of land.
      (3)   At the end of the life of the security interest, if there is no
default or foreclosure, or in the case of leaseholds at the end of the lease,
the parcels will be rejoined into a contiguous unit of land and combined into a
single tax lot. The owner of the property will be in violation of this chapter
if he or she has not, within 30 days of the permit becoming void, made written
application to the County Assessor for the combination of the parcels into a
single tax lot.
      (4)   The application will be evaluated in an interdepartmental review
process whereby the Planning Director, Assessor and County Surveyor will review
the application prior to final approval.
   (C)   No permit may be issued under this section until the applicant, the
owners of the subject property and the holder of the security or lease interest
sign a statement indicating that all parties understand the limits being placed
upon the permit. This statement will be recorded against the deed to the
property.
   (D)   The permit issued under this section will be immediately void if the
owner of the property attempts any transfer of the subject parcels, except as
provided by the terms of the permit.
   (E)   The partitioning permit authorized by this section will only be
granted if the applicant certifies and the Planning Director finds that:
      (1)   The intended partitioning is temporary and not created for the
purpose of evasion of the requirements of this chapter, other ordinances or
regulations or state statutes and administrative rules adopted pursuant
thereto;
      (2)   The partitioning will not result in the need for additional roads
or other access;
      (3)   A partition map approved by the Planning Director is provided. A
survey may be required; and
      (4)   The partition will not result in the need for additional public
improvements or services.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.100 LAND PARTITIONING IN THE EXCLUSIVE FARM USE ZONE.
   Within the Exclusive Farm Use Zone, partitions must provide for the
continuation of the existing commercial agricultural enterprises within the
area as well as meet the minimum lot requirement. All land partitions in the
Exclusive Farm Use Zone must comply with the standards set forth in §§
156.035 through
156.048.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.101 JUDICIAL AND OTHER ILLEGAL PARTITIONS.
   Land partitions authorized by circuit court settlements which are not part
of a foreclosure, are not exempt from this chapter nor from O.R.S. Chapter 92
requirements. When a court decision has been granted authorizing a land
partition, it is the landowners’ responsibility to follow the procedures
outlined in this chapter. Any action which has the effect of dividing property
into new lots or parcels without the property owners obtaining the required
county approval will result in those affected properties becoming
undevelopable.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.102 PARCEL SIZE EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Whereas land sections in the county are commonly affected by survey
adjustment, requirements relative to parcel sizes will be considered as
standard metes and bounds land section divisions (i.e., 160, 80, 40, 20 and so
forth), parcel sizes may, therefore, be reasonably smaller or larger than set
forth by regulation if an acreage change is due to a survey adjustment.
   (B)   When a parcel to be created would be, because of a survey adjustment,
10% or less deviation from a minimum parcel or lot size, the deviation will be
considered an exception and meet the minimum lot size requirement. In this
instance, an area or minor variance would not be necessary as described in §§
155.145 through
155.148.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 155.115 AUTHORIZATION.
   When a planned unit development has been authorized pursuant to applicable
zoning regulations, such a development may be approved by the county in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and this chapter.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.116 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS.
   The requirements for a planned unit development set forth in this subchapter
are in addition to the requirements set forth for a standard subdivision in
this chapter.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.117 PURPOSE FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The planned unit development authorization serves to encourage
developing as one project tracts of land that are sufficiently large to allow a
site design for a group of structures. Deviation from specific site development
standards is allowable as long as the general purposes for the standards are
achieved and the general provisions of this chapter and applicable zoning
regulations are observed. The planned unit development approach is appropriate
if it maintains compatibility with the surrounding area and creates an
attractive, healthful, efficient and stable environment. It should either
promote a harmonious variety or grouping of uses, or utilize the economy of
shared services and facilities.
   (B)   It is further the purpose of authorizing planned unit development to
take into account the following:
      (1)   Advances in technology and design;
      (2)   Recognition and resolution of problems created by increasing
population density;
      (3)   A comprehensive development equal to or better than that resulting
from traditional lot-by-lot land use development, in which the design of the
overall unit permits increased freedom in the placements and uses of buildings
and the location of open spaces, circulation facilities, off-street parking
areas and other facilities;
      (4)   The potential site characterized by special or limiting features of
geography, topography, size or shape, natural or historic resources;
      (5)   The height and bulk characteristics of buildings can vary as long
as the ratio of site area to dwelling units and openness of the site will be in
harmony with the area in which the proposed development is located;
      (6)   Provision of housing and related land uses at maximum economic
efficiency for the community, buyer and seller; and
      (7)   Provision of a living environment with aesthetic qualities, common
open space and recreation areas and energy efficient access to needed services
and facilities.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.118 REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL.
   The county shall approve a planned unit development only if it finds that
the planned unit development will satisfy the intent of this chapter relating
to standard subdivision development, the intent of applicable zoning
regulations and the standards of this subchapter, including the following.
   (A)   The planned unit development is an effective and unified treatment of
the development possibilities on the project site while remaining consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan and making appropriate provisions for the
reservation of natural features, such as natural vegetation and special terrain
features.
   (B)   The planned unit development will be compatible with the area
surrounding the project site and with no greater demand on public facilities
and services than other authorized uses for the land.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.119 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SITE SIZE.
   No PUDs or subdivisions for non-farm or non-forest purposes shall be allowed
on land zoned EFU and FU unless an exception is taken to the applicable
resource goal under the Statewide Planning Goals, being found at O.A.R. 660-
015-0000. Any such development that creates new urban development or rural land
an exception to Statewide Planning Goals 11 and 14 shall be required,
consistent with O.A.R. 660, division 14.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.120 DIMENSIONAL AND BULK STANDARDS.
   (A)   The minimum lot area, width, frontage and yard requirements otherwise
applying to individual buildings in the zone in which a planned unit
development is proposed do not apply within a planned unit development.
   (B)   If the spacing between main buildings is not equivalent to the spacing
which would be required between buildings similarly developed under this
chapter and applicable zoning on separate parcels, other design features shall
provide light ventilation and other characteristics equivalent to that obtained
from the spacing standards.
   (C)   Buildings, off-street parking and loading facilities, open space,
landscaping and screening shall provide protection outside the boundary lines
of the development comparable to that otherwise required of development in the
applicable zone.
   (D)   The maximum building height shall, in no event, exceed those building
heights prescribed in the zone in which the planned unit development is
proposed, except that greater height may be approved if surrounding open space
within the planned unit development, building setbacks and other design
features are used to avoid any adverse impact due to the greater height on
other uses within and outside the development and on any solar energy
collection systems.
   (E)   The building coverage for any planned unit development shall not
exceed 40% of the land area being developed exclusive of public and private
streets.
   (F)   Common open space and other such amenities, exclusive of streets,
shall constitute at least 30% of the total land area of the development.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.121 PROJECT DENSITY.
   The project density standards set forth hereinafter are in reference to the
number of dwelling units or other potential population measures per acre after
public or private street right-of-way has been excluded.
   (A)   The planned unit development may result in a density in excess of the
density otherwise permitted within the zone in which the planned unit
development is to be constructed hereinafter as set forth:
      (1)   For an approved scheme of open space, a maximum increase in density
of 5% if the space is to be continuously maintained undeveloped and a maximum
increase of 10% if the space is to be continuously maintained and developed;
and
      (2)   For distinctiveness and excellence in siting, design and
landscaping that will provide unusual enhancement to the general area, a
maximum increase in density of 10%.
   (B)   If any of the following conditions would be created by an increase in
density permitted by this section, it may either prohibit any increase in
density or limit the increase in density by the amount deemed necessary to
avoid the creation of any of these conditions:
      (1)   Inconvenient or unsafe access to the planned unit development or
adjoining developments;
      (2)   Traffic congestion in the streets which adjoin the planned unit
development to the overall street system in the area of the development; and
      (3)   An excessive burden on sewage, water supply, parks, recreational
areas, schools or other public facilities which serve or are proposed to serve
the planned unit development.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.122 COMMON OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   No open area may be accepted as common open space within a planned
unit development unless it meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The location, shape, size and character of the common open space
are suitable for the planned development;
      (2)   The common open space is for amenity or recreational purposes and
the uses authorized are appropriate to the scale and character of the planned
unit development, considering its size, density, expected population,
topography and the number and type of dwellings provided;
      (3)   Common open space will be suitably improved for its intended use,
except that common open space containing natural features worthy of
preservation may be left unimproved. The buildings, structures and improvements
to be permitted in the common open space are appropriate to the uses which are
authorized for the common open space;
      (4)   The development schedule which is part of the development plan
coordinates the improvement of the common open space and the construction of
buildings and other structures in the common open space with the construction
of residential dwellings in the planned unit development; and
      (5)   If buildings, structures or other improvements are to be made in
the common open space, the developer provides a bond or other adequate and
approved assurance that the buildings, structures and improvements will be
completed within a specified period of time. The county shall release the bond
and other assurances when the buildings, structures and other improvements have
been completed according to the development plan.
   (B)   Land shown of the final development plan as common open space shall be
conveyed under one of the following options:
      (1)   To a public agency which agrees to accept such conveyance and to
maintain the common open space and any buildings, structures or other
improvements which have been placed on it. Unless such common open space and
improvements thereof are of such scale to provide a public benefit outside the
subject development and such open space and improvements are publicly dedicated
to the appropriate public agency, said agency shall not accept the conveyance
set forth by this provision without establishing by agreement with the
developer an appropriate service and maintenance fee on an annual basis. Such
requirement is deemed necessary to preclude general tax moneys being expended
for the benefit of a single development; or
      (2)   To an association of owners or tenants, created as a nonprofit
corporation under the laws of the state, which shall adopt and impose articles
of incorporation and bylaws and adopt and impose a declaration of covenants and
restrictions on the common open space that is acceptable to and approved by the
city and providing for the continuing care of the space. Such an association
shall be formed and continued for the purpose of maintaining the common open
space and all improvements. Such provisions shall be set forth as a part of
each sale, lease or rental contract or deed involving any lot, parcel,
facility, component or interest in the subject development.
   (C)   No common open space may be put to a use not specified in the final
development plan unless the final plan is first amended to permit the use.
However, no change of use may be authorized as a waiver of any of the covenants
limiting the use of common open space area, and all rights to enforce these
covenants against any use are expressly reserved.
   (D)   If the common open space is not conveyed to a public agency, the
covenants governing the use, improvements and maintenance of the common open
space shall authorize the county to enforce their provisions.
   (E)   Bicycle and pedestrian circulation plans shall be included in planned
unit development applications. If appropriate, the installation of bicycle and/
or pedestrian facilities may be required, as provided in §
155.182.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.123 ACCESSORY USES IN A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   In addition to the accessory uses of the primary uses authorized, accessory
uses approved as a part of a planned unit development may include the
following:
   (A)   Golf course;
   (B)   Private park, lake or waterway;
   (C)   Recreation area, building, clubhouse or social hall;
   (D)   Other accessory structures which the Planning Commission finds are
designed to serve primarily the residents of the planned unit development and
are compatible to the design and other uses of the planned unit development;
and
   (E)   Any commercial use permitted as a component of a planned unit
development shall be limited to those types of commercial uses specifically
designed to serve the development zone and shall be subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   Each such use shall be wholly enclosed within a building; no
outside storage shall be permitted.
      (2)   The total of such uses shall not exceed more than 3% of the total
land area of the development, and no commercial use, including buildings and
parking, shall exceed more than 70% of the land area designed therefor.
      (3)   No such use or assemblage of such use shall generate more than 100
auto trips daily per acre, or one auto trip daily per dwelling unit in the
development, whichever is greater.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.124 APPLICATION SUBMISSION.
   An applicant shall include with an application for a planned unit
development either an outline plan or a tentative development plan as described
in §
155.126. Except as otherwise set forth in this subchapter, the procedure for
review and approval of a planned unit development is the same as set forth for
a standard subdivision in this chapter. An application for a planned unit
development shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.125 OUTLINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   If an outline development plan is prepared and submitted with the
application for a planned unit development, it shall include both maps and
written statements as set forth in this section. The information shall deal
with enough of the area surrounding the proposed planned unit development to
demonstrate the relationship of the planned unit development to adjoining uses,
both existing and allowable under applicable zoning.
   (A)   The maps which are part of the outline plan may be in general
schematic form but to scale and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The existing topographic character of the land;
      (2)   Existing and proposed land uses and the approximate location of
buildings and other structures;
      (3)   The character and approximate density of the proposed buildings;
      (4)   The approximate location of the collector streets;
      (5)   Public uses, including schools, parks, playgrounds and other public
open spaces or facilities;
      (6)   Common open spaces and a description of the proposed use of these
spaces;
      (7)   Landscaping plans; and
      (8)   Irrigation plans and design.
   (B)   Written, signed statements which are part of the outline development
plan shall contain the following information:
      (1)   An explanation of the character of the planned unit development and
the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the planned unit
development regulations;
      (2)   A statement of the present ownership of all the land included
within the planned unit development; and
      (3)   A general indication of the expected schedule of development and
improvements.
   (C)   Planning Commission approval of the outline development plan shall
constitute only a provisional approval of the planned unit development
contingent upon the approval of the preliminary development plan.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.126 TENTATIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   A tentative development plan shall be prepared and submitted by the
applicant for a planned unit development and shall include the following
information:
   (A)   A map to scale showing street systems, lot or partition lines and
other divisions of land for management, use or allocation purposes;
   (B)   Areas proposed to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for public
streets, parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites, public buildings and
similar public and semi-public uses and facilities;
   (C)   A plot plan for each building site and common open space area, showing
the location of buildings, structures and other improvements and indicating the
open spaces around buildings and structures;
   (D)   Elevation and perspective drawings of proposed structures, including
floor plans of proposed structures;
   (E)   A development schedule indicating:
      (1)   The approximate date when construction of the project can be
expected to begin;
      (2)   The stages in which the project will be built and the approximate
date when construction of each stage can be expected to begin;
      (3)   The anticipated rate of development;
      (4)   The approximate dates when each stage in the development will be
completed; and
      (5)   The area, location and degree of development of common open space
that will be provided at each stage.
   (F)   Agreements, provisions or covenants which govern the use, maintenance
and continued protection of the planned unit development and any of its common
open space areas; and
   (G)   The following plans and diagrams, insofar as the reviewing body finds
that the planned unit development creates special problems of traffic, parking,
landscaping or economic feasibility:
      (1)   An off-street parking and loading plan;
      (2)   A circulation diagram indicating proposed movement of vehicles,
goods and pedestrians without the planned unit development and to and from
thoroughfares. Any special engineering features and traffic regulation devices
needed to facilitate or ensure the safety of this circulation pattern shall be
shown;
      (3)   A landscaping and tree plan; and
      (4)   An economic feasibility report or market analysis.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.127 SEPARATE APPROVAL OF THE TENTATIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   If an outline development plan has been submitted and the planned unit
development has been provisionally approved based on the information in the
outline development plan, the applicant shall file the tentative development
plan with the Planning Commission within six months following the provisional
approval of the outline development plan. Notice shall be given and the
opportunity shall be provided to each of the following:
      (1)   A person who is on record as having appeared at the hearing on the
outline development plan;
      (2)   A person who has indicated in writing a desire to be notified; and
      (3)   Other persons who may have an interest.
   (B)   The Commission, having previously provisionally approved the proposed
planned unit development, shall then either reapprove, disapprove or reapprove
with modifications the planned unit development based on the tentative
development plan.
   (C)   If an outline development plan has been submitted and approved, a
tentative development plan may be submitted in stages. If a tentative
development plan covering at least 30% of the area of the outline development
plan has not been submitted within six months following the provisional
approval of the planned unit development, then the provisional approval of the
planned unit development by the Planning Commission shall terminate unless, for
good cause, the Planning Commission extend for three months the period for
filing of the tentative development plan.
   (D)   (1)   If the Planning Commission finds evidence of a material
deviation from the approved tentative development plan, the Planning Commission
shall advise the applicant to submit application for amendment of the planned
unit development.
      (2)   An amendment shall be considered in the same manner as an original
application and shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.128 CONTROL OF THE DEVELOPMENT AFTER COMPLETION.
   The final development plan shall continue to control the planned unit
development after it is finished and the following shall apply.
   (A)   The county, in issuing a certificate of completion of the planned unit
development, shall note the issuance on the recorded final development plan.
   (B)   After the certificate of completion has been issued, the use of the
land and the construction, modification or alteration of a building shall be
governed by the approved final development plan.
   (C)   After the certificate of completion has been issued, no change shall
be made in development contrary to the approved final development plan without
approval of an amendment to the plan except as follows.
      (1)   Minor modifications of existing buildings or structures may be
authorized by the Planning Commission if they are consistent with the purposes
and intent of the final plan and do not increase the cubic footage of a
building or structure.
      (2)   A building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed
may be reconstructed without approval of an amended planned unit development if
it is compliance with the purpose and intent of the final development plan.
   (D)   An amendment to a completed planned unit development may be approved
if it is required for the continued success of the planned unit development, if
it is appropriate because of changes in conditions that have occurred since the
final development plan was approved or because there have been changes in the
development policy of the community as reflected by the county and affected
city Comprehensive Plans or related land use regulations.
   (E)   No modification or amendment of a completed planned unit development
is to be considered as a waiver of the covenants against any charge permitted
by this section are expressly reserved.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.129 AUTHORIZATION TO APPROVE OR DISAPPROVE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   A planned unit development as set forth in this chapter shall be approved,
modified, disapproved or amended in accordance with the standards and
procedures of this subchapter, this chapter and other applicable rules and
regulations. In judging whether or not a planned unit development proposal
shall be approved or disapproved, the Planning Commission shall weigh its
appropriateness and desirability or the public convenience or necessity to be
served against any adverse conditions that would result from authorizing the
particular development at the location proposed and, to approve such
development, shall find that the following criteria are either met, can be met
by observance of conditions or are not applicable.
   (A)   The proposal will be consistent with the county and affected city
Comprehensive Plan and the objectives of the Zoning Ordinance and other
applicable policies of the affected city and county.
   (B)   The location, size, design and operating characteristics under the
proposal will have minimal adverse impact on the livability, value or
appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding area.
   (C)   The location and design of the site and structures for the proposal
will be as attractive as the nature of the use and its setting warrants.
   (D)   A proposal will preserve environmental assets of particular interest
to the community.
   (E)   The applicant has a bona fide intent and capability to develop and use
the land as proposed and has no inappropriate purpose for submitting the
proposal, such as to artificially alter property values for speculative
purposes.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.130 PLACING CONDITIONS ON A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   In approving a new planned unit development or the amendment of an
existing planned unit development, the Planning Commission may impose, in
addition to those standards and requirements expressly specified by this
chapter, additional conditions which it finds necessary to avoid a detrimental
environmental impact and to otherwise protect the community as a whole.
   (B)   These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Establishing a special yard or other open space or lot area or
dimension;
      (2)   Limiting the height, size or location of a building or other
structure;
      (3)   Designating the size, number, location and nature of vehicle access
points;
      (4)   Increasing the amount of street dedication, roadway width or
improvements within the street right-of-way;
      (5)   Designating the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing or
other improvements of a parking area or truck loading area;
      (6)   Limiting or otherwise designating the number, size, location,
height and lighting of signs;
      (7)   Limiting the location and intensity of outdoor lighting and
requiring shielding;
      (8)   Requiring diking, screening, landscaping or another facility to
protect adjacent or nearby property and designating standards for its
installation and maintenance;
      (9)   Designating the size, height, location and materials for a fence;
and
      (10)   Protecting and preserving existing trees, vegetation, water
resources, wildlife habitat or any other significant natural resources.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.131 PROCEDURE FOR TAKING ACTION ON A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   The procedure for taking action on a planned unit development proposal shall
be as follows.
   (A)   Any person proposing a planned unit development, or his or her
authorized agent or representative, may initiate an application for a planned
unit development as set forth in §§
155.040 and
155.124.
   (B)   Prior to submission to the Planning Commission, a proposal for a
planned unit development shall be submitted to the Subdivision Review Committee
and the affected city in accordance with §§
155.020 through
155.025.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
planned unit development and shall review the proposal in accordance with §
155.045 relative to the review of an outline development plan and a tentative
development plan and in accordance with §§
155.072 through
155.074 relative to the review of the final development plan.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.132 RECORDING OF FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   A developer of a planned unit development shall, without delay, proceed with
the recording of the final development plan following approval by the county in
accordance with the standards and requirements set forth by this chapter and
other applicable regulations for a standard subdivision.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.133 RESUBMISSION OF DENIED DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   If the outline development plan or preliminary development plan for a
proposed planned unit development is denied, resubmittal thereof shall not be
accepted by the county for a period of six months after the date of the final
action denying said plan.
   (B)   Resubmission shall require the applicant to consider all items for
which the prior denial was based, and the resubmission shall be accompanied by
a new filing fee.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
STREETS AND WAYS NOT PART OF A SUBDIVISION
§ 155.145 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to create a street or way not part of a
subdivision or partition shall make written application to the Planning
Department.
   (B)   Said application shall be made on prescribed form and shall be
accompanied by the required information and appropriate filing fee.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.146 CREATION OF STREETS OUTSIDE A SUBDIVISION.
   The creation of a street shall be in conformance with requirements for
subdivision except, however, the Planning Commission may approve the creation
of a street to be established by deed without full compliance with the
regulations applicable to subdivisions provided any of the following conditions
exist:
   (A)   The establishment of the street is initiated by a City Council or
Board of Commissioners and is declared essential for the purpose of general
traffic circulation and the partitioning of land is an incidental effect rather
than the primary objective of the street;
   (B)   The tract in which the street is to be dedicated is an isolated
ownership of one acre or less; or
   (C)   The tract in which the street is to be dedicated is an isolated
ownership of such size and condition as to make it impossible to develop more
than two lots.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.147 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of written application and appropriate filing fee for
street dedication, the Planning Director shall refer the proposal to the
Planning Commission, County Roadmaster and affected City Public Works
Department for review and recommendation. Two copies of the proposed
improvements shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission at least ten days
prior to a regularly scheduled meeting.
   (B)   Where access is to a city street, county road or state highway, the
necessary permits shall be obtained prior to approval by the County Commission.
   (C)   The Planning Commission, Roadmaster and affected City Public Works
Department shall report their findings to the Planning Director and give their
recommendations regarding the proposed dedication and improvements. The
Planning Commission shall also recommend a classification for the proposed
street.
   (D)   Upon receipt of written findings and recommendations from the Planning
Commission, Roadmaster and affected City Public Works Department, the proposal
shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners for preliminary review and
approval. Such submission shall be made at least ten days prior to a regularly
scheduled meeting.
   (E)   Upon preliminary approval by the Board of Commissioners, the
engineering and improvements design or the roadway conforming to the
requirements of this chapter and other applicable regulations shall be
submitted to the County Roadmaster and affected City Street Departments for
review and approval. Said engineer and improvements designs shall be prepared
and signed by a licensed engineer or surveyor.
   (F)   Following approval of the roadway engineering and design, the
applicant shall prepare a warranty deed dedicating said street to the public
and an improvement guarantee. Said documents shall be submitted to the District
Attorney for review and approval.
   (G)   Following receipt of the approval set forth in divisions (E) and (F)
above, the deed and improvements guarantee shall be submitted to the Board of
Commissioners for final approval.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.148 CREATION OF WAYS.
   (A)   Any easement of way providing access to property and which is created
in order to allow the partitioning of land for the purpose of transfer or
ownership or building development, whether immediate or future, shall be in the
form of a street, except that a private easement or way to be established by
deed without full compliance with these regulations may be approved by the
Planning Commission; provided, that it is the only reasonable method by which
the rear portion of an unusually deep lot large enough to warrant partitioning
into two parcels may be provided with access.
   (B)   A copy of the proposed document to create the easement shall be
submitted to the Planning Director at least ten days prior to the Planning
Commission meeting at which consideration is desired. The document and such
information as may be submitted shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission
and, if assurance of adequate utility and vehicular access is indicated, shall
be approved.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 155.160 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Any land division, whether by subdivision, creation of a street or other
right-of-way, partitioning or planned unit development, shall be in compliance
with the design standards set forth by this chapter.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.161 STREETS.
   (A)   General. The location, width and grade shall be considered in their
relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to
public convenience and safety and to the proposed use of land to be served by
the street. The street system shall assure an adequate traffic circulation
system with intersection angles, grades, tangents and curves appropriate for
the traffic to be carried considering the terrain. Streets shall be designed
and constructed in conformance with the basic cross-sections in the county TSP
update, with horizontal and vertical alignment geometry conforming to the
latest version of applicable ODOT and/or AASHTO standards.
   (B)   Design and construction approval. Any facility or improvement
conditioned to be constructed as part of private development activity and
subsequently dedicated to the county must first receive design approval by the
County Public Works Department. Design approval shall include all other
pertinent issues related to roadway construction and operations, including, but
not limited to, drainage, maintenance, serviceability and pavement design. Upon
request of an applicant, the county shall provide applicable design criteria
and the rationale for establishing the criteria. Street design plans submitted
for county approval shall be stamped by a registered professional engineer with
appropriate experience. The Public Works Department is responsible for
providing regular inspections throughout construction and performing final
inspection upon completion and prior to acceptance of the improvement as public
right-of-way. An equitable plan review and construction inspection fee shall be
determined at the initiation of plan review and charged to the developer.
   (C)   Minimum right-of-way and roadway width.
      (1)   Unless otherwise approved in the tentative plan, the street right-
of-way and roadway surfacing widths shall not be less than the minimum width in
feet set forth in the following table. Additional rights-of-way may be
necessary to conform to standards and specifications set forth in current
AASHTO and/or ODOT design standards and other applicable affected city
standards and specifications.
      (2)   Where conditions, particularly topography or the size and shape of
land parcels, make it impractical to provide buildable lots, narrower rights-
of-way may be accepted, ordinarily not less than 40 feet. Slope easements,
while generally undesirable, may be required in extreme cases.
      (3)   The roadway standards set forth in the following table shall be
observed unless a variance has been obtained.
Roadway Standards
Road           Right-of-Wa y Lane Width  Paved      Pavement   Average Daily
Classification (ft)          (ft)        Shoulder   Width (ft) Traffic (ADT)
                                         Width (ft)
Roadway Standards
Road           Right-of-Wa y Lane Width  Paved      Pavement   Average Daily
Classification (ft)          (ft)        Shoulder   Width (ft) Traffic (ADT)
                                         Width (ft)
Rural Access   60            9           1          20         100-200
I*
Rural Access   60            9           1          20         50-100
II*
Rural Arterial 60            12          4-8        32-40      > 700
I
Rural Arterial 60            12          3-6        32-40      300-700
II
Rural          60            12          3-4        30-32      300-500
Collector I
Rural          60            12          2          28         200-300
Collector II
Rural          60            12          1          26         100-200
Collector III
Rural Gravel   60            11          n/a        n/a        n/a
* Rural Access I and Rural Access II differ in the surface type; Rural
Access II is gravel.
 
   (D)   Reserve strips. Reserve strips or street plugs controlling the access
to streets will not be approved unless necessary for the protection of the
public welfare or of substantial property rights, and, in these cases, they may
be required.
   (E)   Alignment. All streets other than minor streets, as far as is
practical, shall be in alignment with existing streets by continuations of the
centerlines thereof. Staggered street alignment resulting in “T” intersections
shall, wherever practical, leave a minimum distance of 200 feet between the
centerlines of streets having approximately the same direction and, in no case,
shall be less than 100 feet. The streets and roads shall be laid out so as to
conform to the plat of subdivisions and maps of partitions already approved for
adjoining property as to width, improvements, general direction and in all
other respects, unless it is determined to be in the public interest to modify
the street or road pattern. Streets and roads shall be laid out in such a way
so as to connect to existing roads at the time of development or through
extension at a future date by creating dead end streets without turn-arounds.
   (F)   Future extension of streets. Where necessary to give access to or
permit a satisfactory future subdivision on adjoining land, streets shall be
extended to the boundary of the subdivision, and the resulting dead-end streets
may be approved without a turn-around. Reserve strips and street plugs may be
required to preserve the objectives of street extensions. Streets and
accessways are always required unless one or more of the following conditions
exists:
      (1)   Physical or topographic conditions make a street or accessway
connection impracticable. Such conditions include, but are not limited to,
freeways, railroads, steep slopes, wetlands or other bodies or water where a
connection could not reasonably be provided;
      (2)   Buildings or other existing development on adjacent lands
physically precludes a connection now or in the future considering the
potential for redevelopment; or
      (3)   Where streets or accessways would violate provisions of leases,
easements, covenants, restrictions or other agreements existing as of May 1,
1995, which preclude a required street or accessway connection.
   (G)   Intersection angles. Streets shall be laid out to intersect at angles
as near to right angles as practical, except where topography requires a lesser
angle. In no case shall the acute angle be less than 80 degrees unless there is
a special intersection design. An arterial or collector street intersecting
with another street shall have at least 100 feet of tangent adjacent to the
intersection unless topography requires a lesser distance. Other streets,
except alleys, shall have at least 50 feet of tangent adjacent to the
intersection unless topography requires a lesser distance. The intersection of
more than two streets at any one point will not be approved. Right-of-way lines
at street intersections shall have a minimum corner radius of 15 feet.
   (H)   Existing streets. Whenever existing streets, adjacent to or within a
tract, are of inadequate width, additional rights-of-way shall be provided at
the time of land division by the developer. During consideration of the
tentative plan for a subdivision, it shall be determined whether improvements
are required to existing streets, either adjacent to or within the tract. They
may require such improvements as a condition of approval of the tentative plan.
   (I)   Half streets. Half streets, while generally not acceptable, may be
approved where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision or
partition when in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations
and when it is found it will be practical to require the dedication of the
other half when the adjoining property is divided. Whenever a half street is
adjacent to a tract to be divided, the other half of the street shall be
provided within such tract. Reserve strips and street plugs may be required to
preserve the objectives of half streets.
   (J)   Cul-de-sac. A cul-de-sac, while not encouraged, may be used as part of
a development plan, consistent with other provisions of this section (refer to
division (E) above). A cul-de-sac shall be as short as possible and shall have
a maximum length of 400 feet and serve building sites for not more than nine
dwelling units unless approved otherwise by the Commission. A cul-de-sac shall
terminate with a circular turn-around.
   (K)   Street names. Except for extensions of existing streets, no street
name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the name of an
existing street in the city or county. Street names and numbers shall conform
to the established pattern in the affected city urban area and shall be subject
to the approval of the Planning Commission and/or Board of Commissioners.
   (L)   Installation of regulatory signs in county road right-of-way.
Developers are to install street name, posted speed and other traffic control
and/or regulatory signage required for private developments, per applicable
standards of the county and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD).
   (M)   Private signage within county road right-of-way. Residents may request
specific cautionary signage for individual resident(s) to be installed within
county right-of-way. All costs, including materials, installation, maintenance
and removal, shall be borne by the requestor.
   (N)   Grades and curves.
      (1)   Grades shall not exceed 8% on arterials, 10% on collector streets
or 12% on other streets except as otherwise provided for.
      (2)   Centerline radii of curves shall not be less than 500 feet on
arterials, 250 feet on collectors or 100 feet on other streets and shall be on
an even ten feet.
      (3)   Where existing conditions, particularly topography, make it
otherwise impractical to provide buildable sites, the Planning Commission may
accept steeper grades and sharper curves as specifically provided for in
current county design standards.
      (4)   In flat area, allowance shall be made for finished street grades
having a minimum slope, preferably of at least 0.5%.
   (O)   Streets adjacent to railroad right-of-way.
      (1)   Wherever the proposed land division contains or is adjacent to a
railroad right-of-way, provisions may be required for a street approximately
parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for
the appropriate use of land between the streets and railroad.
      (2)   The distance shall be determined with due consideration at cross
streets of the minimum distance required for approach grades to a future grade
separation and to provide sufficient depth to allow screen planting along the
railroad right-of-way.
   (P)   Marginal access streets. Where a land division abuts or contains an
existing or proposed arterial street, a decision may require marginal access
streets, reserve frontage lots with suitable depth, screen planting contained
in a non-access reservation along the rear or side property line or other
treatment necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic.
   (Q)   Alleys. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial
districts unless other permanent provisions for access to off-street parking
and loading facilities are approved.
   (R)   Curbs. Curbs shall be required on all urban area streets unless
otherwise approved by the county and affected city and shall be installed by
the developer in accordance with the standards set forth in current county
design and construction standards or other standards set forth by the affected
city and county.
   (S)   Proposed corridors. For land adjacent to or containing a proposed
corridor (see corridor map in the TSP), it may be required that the dedication
of a suitable right-of-way shall be provided at the time of land division.
   (T)   Access management.
      (1)   (a)   Applications for development with access onto state highways
shall be provided to ODOT for review, to ensure consistency with adopted ODOT
access management standards shown below. These standards apply only to
unsignalized access points. New traffic signals on state facilities shall meet
signal spacing standards in O.A.R. 734-020-0470 (desired minimum spacing for
new traffic signals on state highways is at least one-half mile from the
nearest existing or planned signal) or, if applicable, the standards in the
adopted Interchange Area Management Plan (IAMP).
         (b)   For approval of a new traffic signal on a county facility as
part of a condition of development approval, the applicant shall be required to
show, through an analysis prepared by a qualified professional engineer
registered in the state, that the signal is warranted to improve traffic
operations, address safety deficiencies or a combination.
 
Access Management Standards for County Non-Interstate Highways
                               Access Spacing Standards for Public or Private
Highway         Classification Unsignalized Access (ft) for Posted Speed
                               Indicated (mph)
                               >55 50  40 & 45 30 & 35 <25
OR 206, OR 207  District       700 550 500     400     400
U.S. 730, OR 74 Regional       990 830 750     600     450
   Source: O.A.R. 734-051 (2004)
 
      (2)   Access within the influence area of existing or proposed state
highway interchanges for which there is no adopted IAMP is regulated by
standards in O.A.R. 734-051. These standards do not retroactively apply to
interchanges existing prior to adoption of the 1999 State Highway Plan, except
or until any redevelopment, change of use or highway construction,
reconstruction or modernization project affecting these existing interchanges
occurs. It is the goal at that time to meet the appropriate spacing standards,
if possible, but, at the very least, to improve the current conditions by
moving in the direction of the spacing standard.
      (3)   Access within a mapped and adopted IAMP management area of an
existing or proposed state highway interchange is regulated by the adopted plan
associated with that interchange. In an IAMP management area, proposed access
shall be consistent with the associated Access Management Plan.
      (4)   (a)   The county also requires an access permit for land use
development proposing access onto a county road. Access permit requirements for
land use development are outlined in §
156.595, and development proposing access onto a county road is subject to
access spacing standards specified in the table below.
Recommended Access Management Standards for County Roadsa
                          Intersection
Functional Classification Public Road          Private Drive
                          Type Minimum Spacing Type Minimum Spacing
Recommended Access Management Standards for County Roadsa
Functional      Intersection
Classification  Public Road              Private Drive
                Type     Minimum Spacing Type             Minimum Spacing
Rural Arterial  At-grade 600 ft          Left/right turns 300 ft
Rural Collector At-grade 300 ft          Left/right turns 100 ft
Rural Local     At-grade 200 ft          Left/right turns Access to each lot
a. For most roadways, at-grade crossings are appropriate. Also, allowed
moves and spacing requirements may be more restrictive than those shown to
optimize capacity and safety. Any access to a state highway requires a
permit from the district office of ODOT and is subject to the access spacing
standards in the previous table in this section.
 
         (b)   Approval of a variance from the county access spacing standards
is subject to the following requirements.
            1.   The granting of a variance for access management standards
shall be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and shall
not be considered until every feasible option for meeting access standards is
employed.
            2.   Applicants for a variance from these standards must provide
proof of unique or special conditions that make strict application of the
provisions impractical. Applicants shall include proof that:
               a.   Indirect or restrict access cannot be obtained;
               b.   No engineering or construction solutions can be applied to
mitigate the condition; and
               c.   No alternative access is available from a street with a
lower functional classification than the primary roadway.
            3.   No variance shall be granted where such hardship is self-
created.
   (U)   Corner clearance. Corner clearance at intersections shall meet or
exceed the minimum connection spacing requirements for that roadway. New
connections shall not be permitted within the functional area of an
intersection or exchange as defined by the connection spacing standards of this
chapter, unless no other reasonable access to the property is available. Where
no other alternatives exist, the County Planning Department may allow
construction of an access connection along the property line farthest from the
intersection. In such cases, directional connections such as right-in/right-
out, right-in only or right-out only may be required.
   (V)   Driveways.
      (1)   Driveways onto state highways shall be consistent with ODOT access
management standards. Driveways onto county facilities, which require an access
permit from the County Department of Public Works, shall be consistent with
county access management standards and meet the following standards.
      (2)   All private access driveways shall meet the following standards.
Those that do not meet these standards shall require an access variance.
 
Land Use                  Minimum (feet) Maximum (feet)
Commercial                24             40
Industrial                30             40
Multi-family residential  24             30
Single-family residential 10             24
 
      (3)   Driveway approaches must be designed and located to provide an
exiting vehicle with an unobstructed view meeting county sight distance
requirements. Construction of driveways along acceleration or deceleration
lanes and tapers shall be avoided due to the potential for vehicular weaving
conflicts.
      (4)   The length of driveways shall be designed in accordance with the
anticipated storage length for entering and exiting vehicles to prevent
vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing
unsafe conflicts with on-site circulation.
      (5)   For unpaved driveways connecting to paved roadways, a paved
driveway apron must be provided per County Department of Public Works
standards.
   (W)   Easements and legal access. All lots must have access onto a public
right-of-way. This may be provided via direct frontage onto an existing public
road, a private roadway or an easement. Minimum easement requirements to
provide legal access shall be as follows:
      (1)   One thousand feet or less, an easement width of 20 feet;
      (2)   More than 1,000 feet, an easement width of 40 feet; and
      (3)   Parcels where three or more lots share an access (current or
potential), an easement of 60 feet.
   (X)   Joint and cross access.
      (1)   Adjacent commercial or office properties classified as major
traffic generators shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to
allow circulation between sites. These shall be established as a system
wherever feasible, including:
         (a)   A continuous service drive consistent with access management
standards; and
         (b)   Stub-outs or other design features to allow tie-ins to adjacent
properties.
      (2)   Pursuant to this section, property owners shall record an easement
allowing joint or cross access between parcels, record an easement on the deed
to dedicate access rights to the main roadway, and to close nonconforming
existing driveways, and to record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed
defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners.
   (Y)   Requirements for phased development plans. In the interest of
promoting unified access and circulation systems, development sites under the
same ownership or consolidated for the purposes of development and comprised of
more than one building site shall be reviewed as a single property in relation
to the access standards of this chapter. This shall also apply to phased
development plans.
   (Z)   Nonconforming access features. Legal access in place as of the date of
adoption that do not meet spacing and design standards shall be brought into
compliance with applicable standards when new access permits are requested or
when a change in land use or improvements occurs.
   (AA)   Reverse frontage. Lots that front on more than one street shall be
required to locate motor vehicle access on the street with the lower functional
classification.
   (BB)   Shared access. Subdivisions with frontage on the state highway system
shall be designed into shared access points to and from the highway. If access
to a lower classification street becomes available, then conversion to that
access is encouraged, along with closing the state highway access.
   (CC)   Connectivity.
      (1)   The street system of a proposed subdivision shall be designed to
coordinate with existing, proposed and planned streets outside of the
subdivision as provided in this section and in the local street plans of the
TSP. Whenever a proposed development abuts unplatted land or a future
development phase of the same development, street stubs shall be provided to
provide access to abutting properties or to locally extend the street system
into the surrounding area. All street stubs shall be provided with a temporary
turn-around unless specifically exempted by the Public Works Director, and the
restoration and extension of the street shall be the responsibility of any
future developer of the abutting land. Minor collector and local residential
access streets shall connect with surrounding streets to permit the convenient
movement of traffic between residential neighborhoods or facilitate emergency
access and evacuation. Connections shall be designed to avoid or minimize
through traffic on local streets.
      (2)   Appropriate traffic controls, such as traffic calming measures, are
preferred means of discouraging through traffic.
   (DD)   Private streets outside an urban growth boundary. All private streets
providing access from a public roadway to a proposed land division shall meet
the following standards.
      (1)   Private streets must have a minimum sight distance in compliance
with adopted county standards at any intersection with a public road.
Additional sight distance or advance warning signage or other devices may be
required where known safety hazards exist.
      (2)   For each private street, there shall be a legal recorded document
which includes:
         (a)   A legal description of the proposed easement;
         (b)   Ownership of the street;
         (c)   Use rights; and
         (d)   A maintenance and construction agreement which includes Fire
Marshal approved street specifications and turn around area (if required) and
the allocation and/or method of determining liability for maintenance.
      (3)   Where drainage conditions require it, a private street shall be
ditched in conformance with the county road standards.
      (4)   Private streets which access public or county roads shall be
located, designed and constructed (within the public right-of-way) in
accordance with adopted standards for county roads.
      (5)   Prior to establishing a private driveway or a private street, the
owner shall obtain an access permit for access to the intersecting public road.
As a condition of granting access to a public road, the county may require the
applicant to clean the ditch serving the parcel and remove sight-obstructing
vegetation in the vicinity of the access.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.162 BLOCKS.
   (A)   General. The length, width and shape of blocks shall take into account
the need for adequate building site size and street width and shall recognize
the limitations of the topography.
   (B)   Minimum block lengths.
      (1)   Minimum block lengths of 600 feet shall be established within urban
growth boundaries.
      (2)   A goal for areas outside of urban growth boundaries is a minimum of
1,200 feet.
      (3)   A block shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of
building site unless topography or the location of adjoining streets justifies
an exception.
   (C)   Easements.
      (1)   Utility lines. Easements for sewers, water mains, electric lines or
other public utilities shall be at least 12 feet wide and centered on lot or
parcel rear lot lines, except for utility pole tieback easements which may be
reduced to six feet in width.
      (2)   Watercourses. If a tract is traversed by a watercourse, such as a
drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the
watercourse, and such further widths as will be adequate for the purpose.
Streets or parkways parallel to the major watercourses may be required.
      (3)   Pedestrian and bicycle ways. When desirable for public convenience,
a pedestrian or bicycle way at least ten feet in width may be required to
connect to a cul-de-sac or to pass through an unusually long or oddly shaped
block or otherwise provide appropriate circulation.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.163 BUILDING SITES.
   (A)   Size and shape. The size, width, shape and orientation of building
sites shall be appropriate for the location of the land division and for the
type of development and use contemplated and shall be consistent with the
residential lot size provisions of Chapter 156 with the following exceptions.
      (1)   In areas that will not be served by a public sewer, minimum lot and
parcel sizes shall permit compliance with the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Quality and shall take into consideration problems of soil
structure and water table as related to sewage disposal by septic tank.
      (2)   Where property is zoned and planned for business or industrial use,
other widths and areas may be permitted with an authorized variance. Depth and
width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes
shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities
required by the type of use and development contemplated.
   (B)   Access. Each lot and parcel shall abut upon a street other than an
alley for a width of at least 50 feet.
   (C)   Through lots and parcels. Through lots and parcels shall be avoided
except where they are essential to provide separation of residential
development from major traffic arterials or adjacent nonresidential activities
or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting
screen easement at least ten feet wide and across which there shall be no right
of access may be required along the line of building sites abutting such a
traffic arterial or other incompatible uses.
   (D)   Lot and parcel side lines. The lines of lots and parcels, as far as it
is practicable, shall run at right angles to the street upon which they face,
except that on curved streets they shall be radical to the curve.
   (E)   Division by ROW, drainage ways. No lot shall be divided by the
boundary line of the county, city or other taxing or service district, or by
the right-of-way of a street utility line or drainage way, or by an easement
for utilities or other services.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.164 GRADING OF BUILDING SITES.
   Grading of building sites shall conform to the following standards unless
physical conditions demonstrate the priority of other standards.
   (A)   Cut slopes shall not exceed one foot vertically to one-half feet
horizontally.
   (B)   Fill slopes shall not exceed one foot vertically to two feet
horizontally.
   (C)   The character of coil for fill and the characteristics of lots and
parcels made usable by fill shall be suitable for the purpose intended.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.165 BUILDING LINES.
   If special building setback lines are to be established in a subdivision,
they shall be shown on the subdivision plat and included in the deed
restrictions.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.166 LARGE BUILDING SITES.
   In dividing tracts into large lots or parcels, which at some future time are
likely to be redivided, it may be required that the blocks be of such size and
shape, so that they may so be divided into building sites and contain such site
restrictions as will provide for extension and opening of streets at intervals
which will permit a subsequent division of any tract into lots or parcels of
smaller size.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.167 LAND FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES.
   (A)   If the county or affected city has as interest in acquiring a portion
of a proposed subdivision for a public purpose, or if the county has been
advised of such interest by a school district or other public agency, and there
is reasonable assurance that steps will be taken to acquire the land, then the
Planning Commission may require that those portions of the subdivision to be
reserved for public acquisition, for a period not to exceed one year.
   (B)   Within or adjacent to a subdivision, a parcel of land of not more than
5% of the gross area of the subdivision may be required to be set aside as and
dedicated to the public by the Planning Commission as being suitable and
adaptable for park and recreation uses. In the event no such area is suitable
for park and recreation purposes, the subdivider may be required, in lieu of
setting aside land, to pay into a public fund an amount equal to the value of
the area required for dedication above in the subdivision. If the nature of the
subdivision is being dedicated to the public for streets and other public uses,
the requirements of this section shall be reduced so that the total obligation
of the subdivider does not exceed 40%.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 155.180 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES.
   In addition to other requirements, improvements to be installed by a
subdivider, either as a requirement of this chapter or other applicable
regulations or at his or her own option, shall conform to the requirements of
this subchapter.
   (A)   Plan review and approval. Improvement work shall not be commenced
until plans therefor have been reviewed and approved by the county or a
designated representative thereof. Such review and approval shall be at the
expense of the developer. To the extent necessary for evaluation of a proposed
development, such improvement plans may be required before approval of the
tentative plan of a subdivision or the tentative development plan of a planned
unit development.
   (B)   Notification. Improvement work shall not commence until after the
county has been notified and approval thereof has been granted, and if work is
discontinued for any reason, it shall not be resumed until after the county is
notified and approval thereof granted. The cost of such inspections and
approvals shall be borne by the developer.
   (C)   Improvements as platted. Improvements shall be designed, installed and
constructed as platted and approved, and plans therefor shall be filed with the
final plat at the time of inspection.
   (D)   Inspection. Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and
approval of an inspector designated by the county. Expenses incurred thereof
shall be borne by the developer. The county, through said inspector, may
require changes in typical sections and details of improvements if unusual
conditions arise during construction to warrant such changes in the public
interest.
   (E)   Utilities. Underground utilities, including, but not limited to,
electric power, telephone, water mains, water service crossings, sanitary
sewers and stormwater drains, to be installed in streets shall be constructed
by the subdivider prior to the surfacing of the streets.
   (F)   As-built plans. A map showing public improvements as built shall be
filed with the affected city and county upon completion of the improvements and
a copy thereof shall be recorded with the final plat. Such map shall also be
provided in reproducible form (Mylar or comparable).
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.181 SPECIFICATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   See Appendix A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter for
specifications.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.182 IMPROVEMENTS IN SUBDIVISIONS.
   The following improvements shall be installed at the expense of the
subdivider:
   (A)   Streets.
      (1)   Streets, including alleys and curbs may be required, within the
subdivision, adjacent thereto, and those outside the subdivision may require to
be improved as a condition of subdivision approval and shall be improved to
affected city or county specifications set forth by this chapter and other
applicable affected city and county regulations. Catch basins shall be
installed and connected to drainage facilities in accordance with
specifications in this and other applicable regulations.
      (2)   Upon completion of street improvements, monuments shall be re-
established in accordance with this chapter and state statutes at every street
intersection and all points of curvature and points of tangency at their
centerlines.
   (B)   Surface and storm sewer system.
      (1)   Drainage facilities shall be provided as deemed necessary within
the subdivision and to connect the subdivision drainage to drainage ways or
storm sewers outside the subdivision.
      (2)   Design of drainage within the subdivision, as provided by
specifications of this chapter and other applicable standards, shall take into
account the capacity and grade necessary to maintain unrestricted flow from
drainage through the subdivision and allow extension of the system to serve
such areas.
   (C)   Sanitary sewers.
      (1)   Sanitary sewers as required shall be installed to serve the
subdivision and to connect the subdivision to existing mains.
      (2)   In the event it is not possible to connect the subdivision to an
affected city sewer system, the affected city and county may jointly authorize
the use of an interim system, if lot areas are of adequate, considering the
physical characteristics of the area and if sewer laterals designed for future
connection to a sewage disposal system are installed and sealed.
      (3)   Design shall take into account the capacity and grade to allow for
desirable extension beyond the subdivision.
   (D)   Water system. Water lines and fire hydrants serving each building site
in the subdivision and connecting the subdivision to the serving system as may
be required shall be installed by specifications required by the county and/or
affected city and serving water system surveyor. The design shall take into
account water provisions for extension beyond the subdivision.
   (E)   Pedestrian facilities. Site plans shall include a pedestrian
circulation plan for providing safe and convenient pedestrian access.
Pedestrian facilities, as may be required, shall be installed on at least one
side of a public street and in any special pedestrian facility or walkway
within the subdivision; in the case of primary or secondary arterials, special
type industrial districts or in rural areas, the Planning Commission may
approve a subdivision without appropriate pedestrian facilities, if alternative
pedestrian routes are available or if applicant can demonstrate that there is
no need for such facilities and, provided further, that in the case of streets
serving lots equivalent to two and one-half or less dwellings per gross acre,
the requirement of walkways shall not apply, provided there is no evidence of
special pedestrian activity along the streets involved. Walkways shall be
constructed to specifications set forth by the affected city or county
specifications.
   (F)   Bicycle facilities. Site plans shall include a bicycle circulation
plan. If appropriate to the extension of a system of bicycle routes, existing
or planned, the Planning Commission may require the installation of bikeways or
other bicycle facilities.
   (G)   Streets name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all street
intersections. One street sign shall be provided at the intersection of each
street. Two street signs shall be provided at four-way intersections.
   (H)   Street lights. Street lights may be required and if so required shall
be installed and shall be served from an underground source of supply.
   (I)   Curbs. Curbs may be required on urban area streets and, if so
required, shall be installed by the developer in accordance with standards set
forth by the affected city or county.
   (J)   Other. The developer shall make necessary arrangement with the utility
companies or other persons or corporations affected for the installation of
underground lines and facilities. Electrical lines and other wires, including,
but not limited to, communication, street lighting and cable televisions may be
required to be placed underground.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.183 IMPROVEMENTS IN PARTITIONS.
   The same improvements may be required for a partitioning and, if so, shall
be installed to serve each building site of a partition as required of a
subdivision.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.184 APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   All improvements shall be approved by the affected city and county
inspectors prior to acceptance by the county. All costs of inspection shall be
paid for by the developer.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.185 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Improvements shall receive preliminary acceptance after inspection at the
time the improvements are constructed. Final acceptance shall be considered by
the county within one year after construction is completed.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.186 BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permit shall be issued upon lots to receive and be served by
sanitary sewer and water service as improvements required pursuant to this
chapter unless such improvements are in place and serviceable or bonded for and
approved by the county. All improvements required and pursuant to this chapter
and other applicable regulations shall be completed, in service and approved by
the county prior to the sale and occupancy of any building unit erected upon a
lot within the subdivision, partition or planned unit development. Prior to
sale and occupancy, and as a condition of acceptance of improvements, the
county may require a one-year maintenance surety bond in an amount not to
exceed 10% of the value of all improvements to guaranteed maintenance of said
improvements for a period of not less than one year from the date of
acceptance.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE
§ 155.200 AGREEMENT FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   Prior to final approval of a subdivision plat or partition map by the
county, the subdivider shall either install required improvements and repair
existing streets and other public facilities damaged in development of the
property or execute and file with the county an agreement between himself or
herself and the county, specifying the period which required improvements and
repairs shall be completed and provided that, if the work is not completed
within the period specified, the county may complete the work and recover the
full cost and expense together with court costs and attorneys’ fees necessary
to collect said amounts from the land divider. The agreement shall also provide
for payment to the affected city and county for the cost of inspection by the
affected city and county.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.201 BOND.
   (A)   Type of security. The land divider shall file with the agreement, to
assure his or her full and faithful performance thereof, one of the following,
pursuant to approval and acceptance by the Board of Commissioners.
      (1)   A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact
business in the state in a form approved by the District Attorney.
      (2)   A personal bond co-signed by at least one additional person
together with evidence of financial responsibility and resources of those
signing the bond sufficient to provide reasonable assurance of ability to
proceed in accordance with the agreement.
      (3)   Such other security as may be deemed necessary by the Board of
Commissioners to adequately ensure completion of improvements pursuant to the
agreement.
      (4)   Such other security as may be deemed necessary by the Board of
Commissioners to adequately ensure completion of improvements pursuant to the
agreement.
   (B)   Amount required. Such assurance of full and faithful performance shall
be for a sum approved by the county sufficient to cover the cost of the
improvements and repairs, including related engineering and incidental expenses
and to cover the cost of affected city and county inspection.
   (C)   Default status.
      (1)   If a land divider fails to carry out provision of the agreement and
the county has unreimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the
county shall call on the bond or cash deposit for reimbursement.
      (2)   If the cost and expense incurred by the county exceed the amount of
the bond or cash deposit, the land divider shall be liable to the county for
the difference plus any attorneys’ fees and costs incurred.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
VARIANCE AND EXCEPTIONS
§ 155.215 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Variances or exceptions to requirements of this chapter may be
authorized in accordance with §§
156.645 through
156.655 and this section. Application for a variance or an exception shall be
made by a petition of the developer stating fully the grounds of the
application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. The petition shall be
filed with the tentative plan. A variance or exception may be granted only in
the event that all the following circumstances exist.
      (1)   Exceptional circumstances. Exceptional or extraordinary facts apply
to the property which do not apply generally to other properties in the same
vicinity and result from tract size or shape, topography or other circumstances
over which the owner of the property, since enactment of this chapter, has no
control.
      (2)   Preservation of property. The variance is necessary for the
preservation of a property right of the applicant substantially the same as
owners of other property in the same vicinity possess.
      (3)   Not detrimental. The variance would not be materially detrimental
to the purposes of this chapter, or to property in the same vicinity in which
the property is located, or otherwise conflict with the objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan or any other area plan or policy thereof.
      (4)   Minimum. The variance requested is the minimum which would
alleviate hardship.
   (B)   The granting of a variance shall be in harmony with the purpose and
intent of these regulations and shall not be considered until every feasible
option for meeting access standards is employed.
   (C)   Applicants for a variance from these standards must provide proof of
unique or special conditions that make strict application of the provisions
impractical.
   (D)   No variance shall be granted where such hardship is self-created.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.216 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION ON VARIANCE OR EXCEPTION.
   In granting or denying a variance or exception, a written record of findings
and the facts in connection with shall describe the variance or exception
granted and the conditions designated. The county shall keep the findings on
file as a matter of public record, and a copy of the variance or exception
granted and the conditions thereof shall be recorded together with the final
plat by the developer.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
ADMINISTRATION; APPEALS
§ 155.230 APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATIONS.
   Approval or denial of an application for land development shall be based
upon and accomplished by a brief statement that explains the criteria and
standards considered relevant to the decision, states the facts relied upon in
rendering the decision and explains the justification for the decision based on
the criteria, standards and facts set forth.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.231 APPEALS.
   A person may appeal to the Board of Commissioners a decision or requirement
made pursuant to this chapter by the Planning Commission. A person may appeal
to the Planning Commission from a written decision made by the Planning
Commission from a written decision made by the Planning Director or other
county official. Written notice of the appeal must be filed with the county
within 15 days after the decision is made. The notice of appeal shall state the
nature of the decision or requirement and the specific grounds for the appeal
setting forth the error and the basis of error sought to be reviewed.
   (A)   Appeal hearings will be administered in accordance with administrative
provisions of Chapter 156 and/or the standards set forth in this section.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners may review a lower decision upon its own
motion after giving ten days’ notice to the parties involved in the decision
and if such review is within 15 days of receipt of notice of said initiated
lower decision.
   (C)   In the case of an appeal to a Planning Commission action, the petition
for appeal shall be accompanied by the required fee plus a deposit to cover the
estimated costs of the transcript as specified by the Planning Director, which
deposit shall be paid within five days of such estimate by the Planning
Director. Within ten days of such notice of completion of a required
transcript, the party seeking review shall transmit the balance due of any
required transcript fee to the Planning Director and failure to do so may cause
dismissal of the appeal. Any deposit in excess shall be returned to the party.
   (D)   In the case of an appeal to a Planning Commission action, unless
otherwise provided by the Board of Commissioners in division (E) below, the
review of the initial action shall be confined to the record of the proceeding
below which shall include:
      (1)   All materials, pleadings, memoranda, stipulations and motions
submitted by any party to the proceeding and received or considered by the
Commission as evidence;
      (2)   All materials submitted by the Planning Director with respect to
the application;
      (3)   The transcript of the hearing below;
      (4)   The findings and action of the Commission and the petition of
appeal; and
      (5)   Argument (without introduction of new or additional evidence) by
the parties or their legal representative at the time of review before the
Board of Commissioners.
   (E)   The Board of Commissioners may, at its option, determine to admit
additional testimony and other evidence by all interested parties or parties of
record, to supplement the record of the proceedings held by the Commission.
Such consideration may be initiated by order of the Board of Commissioners or
upon written motion of a party of record or interested person. Such written
motion set forth with particularity to the basis for such request and the
nature of evidence sough to be introduced. Prior to making the determination of
whether to permit the record to be supplemented, the Board of Commissioners
shall provide an opportunity for all parties to be heard on the matter. The
Board of Commissioners may grant the opportunity to supplement the record if it
finds such necessary to:
      (1)   Prevent prejudice to parties; and
      (2)   To take into consideration the inconvenience of locating the
evidence at the time of initial hearing, with such inconvenience not being the
result of negligence or dilatory act by the moving party.
   (F)   Following the hearing, the Board of Commissioners may affirm, overrule
or modify any decision or requirement and shall set forth findings for such
decision.
   (G)   The procedure, public notice and type of hearing for an appeal or
review shall be in the same manner as for any application under this chapter.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
§ 155.232 FILING FEE.
   Application or filings required by this chapter shall be accompanied by a
filing fee in the amount established by this section and set forth in the Fee
Schedule Ordinance adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-05, passed 10-12-2005; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. ORD-2022-3, passed 9-21-2022)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Title
   
156.002   Purpose
   
156.003   Definitions
   
156.004   Compliance with chapter provisions
   
156.005   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
156.006   Administrative terminology and construction
Zone Designations
   
156.020   Establishment of Zones
   
156.021   Location of Zones
   
156.022   Zoning map
   
156.023   Zone boundaries
Exclusive Farm Use Zone (EFU)
   
156.035   Purpose
   
156.036   Uses permitted outright not subject to review
   
156.037   Uses permitted outright
   
156.038   Uses subject to administrative review
   
156.039   Conditional uses
   
156.040   Use standards
   
156.041   Dwellings customarily provided in conjunction with farm use
   
156.042   Accessory farm dwellings
   
156.043   Lot of record dwellings
   
156.044   Dwellings not in conjunction with farm use
   
156.045   Alteration, restoration or replacement of a lawfully-established
dwelling
   
156.046   Agri-tourism and other commercial events
   
156.047   Commercial facilities for generating power
   
156.048   Land divisions
   
156.049   Yards
   
156.050   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Resource-Related Industrial Zone (RRI)
   
156.060   Purpose
   
156.061   Uses permitted outright
   
156.062   Uses subject to administrative review
   
156.063   Conditional uses
   
156.064   Yards
   
156.065   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Forest Use Zone (FU)
   
156.080   Purpose
   
156.081   Uses permitted outright, not subject to review
   
156.082   Uses permitted outright
   
156.083   Uses subject to administrative review
   
156.084   Conditional uses
   
156.085   Use standards
   
156.086   Siting standards for dwellings and structures in Forest Zones
   
156.087   Fire siting standards for dwellings and structures
   
156.088   Land divisions
   
156.089   Development standards
   
156.090   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Rural Service Center Zone (RSC)
   
156.100   Purpose
   
156.101   Uses permitted outright
   
156.102   Conditional uses
   
156.103   Lot size
   
156.104   Dimensional standards
   
156.105   Yards
   
156.106   Off-street parking and loading
   
156.107   Signs
   
156.108   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Umatilla Depot Wildlife Habitat Zone (UDWH)
   
156.120   Purpose
   
156.121   Uses permitted with a zoning permit
   
156.122   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit
   
156.123   Dimensional standards
Rural Residential Zone (RR 1)
   
156.135   Purpose
   
156.136   Uses permitted outright
   
156.137   Conditional uses
   
156.138   Limitations on uses
   
156.139   Yard and setback requirements
   
156.140   Dimensional standards
   
156.141   Off-street parking and loading
   
156.142   Lot size
   
156.143   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Farm Residential Zone (FR-2)
   
156.155   Purpose
   
156.156   Uses permitted outright
   
156.157   Conditional uses
   
156.158   Limitations on uses
   
156.159   Yard and setback requirements
   
156.160   Dimensional standards
   
156.161   Off-street parking and loading
   
156.162   Lot size
   
156.163   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Rural Residential Ten Zone (RR-10)
   
156.175   Purpose
   
156.176   Uses permitted outright
   
156.177   Conditional uses
   
156.178   Limitations on uses
   
156.179   Yards and setback requirements
   
156.180   Dimensional standards
   
156.181   Lot size
   
156.182   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Suburban Residential Zone (SR)
   
156.195   Purpose
   
156.196   Uses permitted outright
   
156.197   Uses subject to administrative review
   
156.198   Conditional uses
   
156.199   Limitations on uses
   
156.200   Lot size
   
156.201   Dimensional standards and setback requirements
   
156.202   Off-street parking and loading
   
156.203   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Suburban Residential 2A Zone (SR-2A)
   
156.215   Procedures
   
156.216   Uses permitted outright
   
156.217   Uses subject to administrative review
   
156.218   Conditional uses
   
156.219   Limitations on uses
   
156.220   Lot size
   
156.221   Dimensional standards and setback requirements
   
156.222   Off-street parking and loading
   
156.223   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
General Commercial Zone (C-G)
   
156.235   Purpose
   
156.236   Uses permitted outright
   
156.237   Uses subject to administrative review
   
156.238   Conditional uses
   
156.239   Yards
   
156.240   Height of building
   
156.241   Lot coverage
   
156.242   Lot size
   
156.243   Use limitations
   
156.244   Sign limitations
   
156.245   Off-street parking and loading
   
156.246   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Tourist Commercial (TC)
   
156.260   Purpose
   
156.261   Uses permitted and conditional
   
156.262   Development standards
   
156.263   Lot size and frontage
   
156.264   Lot coverage
   
156.265   Building height
   
156.266   Design standards
   
156.267   Landscaping requirements
   
156.268   Pedestrian amenities
   
156.269   Special standards for certain uses
General Industrial Zone (M-G)
   
156.280   Purpose
   
156.281   Uses permitted outright
   
156.282   Uses subject to administrative review
   
156.283   Conditional uses
   
156.284   Use limitations
   
156.285   Dimension requirements
   
156.286   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Air/Industrial Park Zone (AI)
   
156.300   Purpose
   
156.301   Definitions
   
156.302   Uses permitted outright
   
156.303   Conditional uses
   
156.304   Dimensional standards
   
156.305   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Space Age Industrial Zone (SAI)
   
156.320   Purpose
   
156.321   Procedures
   
156.322   Uses permitted outright
   
156.323   Uses subject to administrative review
   
156.324   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit
   
156.325   Limitations on use in an SAI Zone
   
156.326   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Port Industrial Zone (PI)
   
156.340   Purpose
   
156.341   Uses permitted with a zoning permit
   
156.342   Uses subject to administrative review
   
156.343   Conditional uses
   
156.344   Limitations on uses
   
156.345   Dimension requirements
   
156.346   Interpretation
   
156.347   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Umatilla Army Depot Military Zone (UADM)
   
156.360   Purpose
   
156.361   Military uses allowed outright
   
156.362   Uses permitted with a zoning permit
   
156.363   Conditional uses
   
156.364   Dimensional standards
Rural Light Industrial Zone (RLI)
   
156.375   Purpose
   
156.376   Uses; permitted outright
   
156.377   Uses; permitted conditionally
   
156.378   Development standards
Airport Light Industrial Zone (ALI)
   
156.390   Purpose
   
156.391   Airport safety and compatibility
   
156.392   Notice required
   
156.393   Uses permitted outright
   
156.394   Uses subject to administrative review
   
156.395   Dimensional requirements
   
156.396   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Airport Approach Zone (AA)
   
156.410   Purpose
   
156.411   Uses permitted outright
   
156.412   Conditional uses
   
156.413   Use limitations
   
156.414   Dimensional standards
   
156.415   Sign limitations
   
156.416   Off-street parking and loading
   
156.417   Site design
   
156.418   Design and use criteria
   
156.419   Additional requirements
   
156.420   Transportation impacts; traffic impact analysis (TIA)
Airport Hazard Zone (AH)
   
156.435   Purpose
   
156.436   Definitions
   
156.437   Airport Zones
   
156.438   Airport Zone height limitations
   
156.439   Use restrictions
   
156.440   Nonconforming uses
   
156.441   Permits
   
156.442   Appeals
Airport Safety and Compatibility Overlay Zone (ASC)
   
156.455   Purpose
   
156.456   Definitions
   
156.457   Imaginary surface delineation
   
156.458   Notice of land use and permit applications
   
156.459   Height limitations
   
156.460   Procedures
   
156.461   Land use compatibility requirements
   
156.462   Prohibited uses
   
156.463   Nonconforming uses
Flood Hazard Overlay Zone (FP)
   
156.475   Purpose
   
156.476   Application
   
156.477   Definitions
   
156.478   General provisions
   
156.479   Administration
   
156.480   Variance procedure
   
156.481   Provisions for flood hazard reduction
Limited Use Overlay Zone (LU)
   
156.495   Purpose
   
156.496   Overlay Zone requirements
   
156.497   Official plan/zoning map
   
156.498   Site plan requirements
UMCD PI Limited Use Overlay Zone
   
156.510   Purpose
   
156.511   Uses permitted with a zoning permit
   
156.512   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit
   
156.513   Dimensional standards
Speedway Limited Use Overlay Zone (SO)
   
156.525   Purpose
   
156.526   Permitted uses
   
156.527   Health and safety plans required
   
156.528   Additional provisions
   
156.529   Transportation improvements
   
156.530   Phased development
   
156.531   Traffic monitoring
   
156.532   Speedway owner responsibility
   
156.533   Signage
   
156.534   Rest area facilities
   
156.535   Applications for conditional uses
   
156.536   County authority
   
156.537   Site development review
Parkland Overlay Zone (PO)
   
156.550   Purpose
   
156.551   Application
   
156.552   Permissible uses
   
156.553   Conditional use
   
156.554   Review process
Significant Resource Overlay Zone (SRO)
   
156.565   Purpose
   
156.566   Application
   
156.567   Categories
   
156.568   List of conflicting uses and activities
   
156.569   Responsible agency list
Historic Buildings and Sites
   
156.580   Alteration/demolition permits
   
156.581   Review procedure
   
156.582   Planning Commission action
   
156.583   Criteria
Supplementary Provisions
   
156.595   Access
   
156.596   Sight distance
   
156.597   Permit requirements for land use development
   
156.598   Off-street parking requirements
   
156.599   Bicycle parking requirement
   
156.600   Off-street parking and loading
   
156.601   Design and improvement standards
   
156.602   Sign limitations and regulations
   
156.603   Minimum standards for a manufactured home on individual lots as a
single-family dwelling
   
156.604   Standards for transportation improvements
Development Permits
   
156.610   Zoning permit
   
156.611   Site plan review
Conditional Uses
   
156.620   Authorization to grant or deny conditional uses
   
156.621   Requirements under a state energy facility site certificate
   
156.622   General criteria
   
156.623   Resource zone standards for approval
   
156.624   General conditions
   
156.625   Permit and improvements assurance
   
156.626   Standards governing conditional uses
   
156.627   Procedure for taking action on a conditional use application
   
156.628   Time limit on a permit for a conditional use
   
156.629   Length of permits, permit holder, renewal and revocation
   
156.630   Zoning permit
Dimensional Adjustments; Variances; Special or Temporary Use Permits;
Nonconforming Uses
   
156.645   Purpose
   
156.646   Intent
   
156.647   Dimensional adjustments
   
156.648   Variances
   
156.649   Medical hardship permits
   
156.650   Temporary uses
   
156.651   Nonconforming uses
   
156.652   Procedure for taking action on an application
   
156.653   Time limit to initiate a permit
   
156.654   Length of permits, permit holder, renewal and revocation
   
156.655   Occupancy permit
Amendments
   
156.670   Authorization to initiate amendments
   
156.671   Public hearings on amendments
   
156.672   Notice
   
156.673   Criteria
   
156.674   Limitations on reapplications
   
156.675   Final decision
Administrative Provisions
   
156.690   Administration
   
156.691   Appeals
   
156.692   Form of petitions, applications and appeals
   
156.693   Completeness review
   
156.694   Administrative review
   
156.695   Public hearings
   
156.696   Sewage disposal approval
   
156.697   Filing fees
   
156.698   Permit expiration and extensions
   
156.699   Revocation
   
156.700   Interpretation
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the County Zoning Ordinance of 1980, amended
March 6, 1985, and amended and readopted in its entirety on November 7, 2001,
and amended on January 8, 2025.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.002 PURPOSE.
   The intent and purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare and to carry out the Comprehensive Plan of the
county, the provisions of O.R.S. Chapter 215 and the Statewide Planning Goals,
being found at O.A.R. 660-015-0000 and adopted pursuant to O.R.S. Chapter 197.
Therefore, approvals granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be based on the following considerations among others: the characteristics of
the various areas in the county; the suitability of an area for particular land
uses; trends in land improvement; density of development; property values; the
needs of economic enterprises in the future development of an area; needed
access to particular sites in the county; natural resources and the need for
development or conservation thereof; and the public need for healthful, safe
and aesthetic surroundings and conditions.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCEPTED FARMING PRACTICE. A mode of operation that is common to farms of a
similar nature, necessary for the operation of such farms to obtain a profit in
money and customarily utilized in conjunction with farm use. As applied to
composting operations on high-value farmland, ACCEPTED FARMING PRACTICE
includes composting operations that either: compost only materials produced on
the subject tract; or compost materials brought from off-site and processed
alone or in conjunction with materials generated on the subject tract; and use
all on-site generated compost for on-farm production in conjunction with, and
auxiliary to, the farm use on the subject tract.
   ACCESS. The right to cross between public and private property allowing
pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling which is subordinate to and serves a
primary building and is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the primary
building and contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants
of the primary building, and is located on the same lot as the primary
building.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A detached structure, the use of which is customarily
incidental to that of the primary structure or the primary use of the land and
which is located on the same lot or parcel as the primary structure or use.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use incidental and subordinate to the main use of the
property and located on the same lot as the main use.
   AGRICULTURAL BUILDING. Any structure that is considered to be an
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING as defined in the state statutes on a lot or parcel that
is enrolled in a farm or forest deferral program with the County Assessor.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND. Lands classified by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service
(SCS) as predominately Class I-VI soils, and other lands in different soil
classes that are suitable for farm use taking into consideration soil
fertility, suitability for grazing and cropping, climatic conditions, existing
and future availability of water for farm irrigation purposes, existing land
use patterns, technological and energy inputs required and accepted farming
practices. Lands in other classes that are necessary to permit farm practices
to be undertaken on adjacent or nearby lands shall be included as AGRICULTURAL
LAND in any event.
   AGRI-TOURISM. A common, farm-dependent activity that promotes agriculture,
any income from which is incidental and subordinate to a working farm. Such
uses may include hay rides, corn mazes and other similar uses that are directly
related to on-site agriculture. Any assembly of persons shall be for the
purpose of taking part in agriculturally-based activities such as animal or
crop care, tasting farm products or learning about farm or ranch operations.
AGRI-TOURISM may include farm-to-plate meals. Except for small, farm-themed
parties, regularly occurring celebratory gatherings, weddings, parties or
similar uses are not AGRI-TOURISM.
   ALLEY. A street or right-of-way that affords only a secondary means of
access to property.
   ASSOCIATED TRANSMISSION LINES. Transmission lines constructed to connect an
energy facility to the first point of junction with either a power distribution
system or an interconnected primary transmission system or both or to the
Northwest Power Grid.
   AUTOMOBILE, BOAT, MANUFACTURED DWELLING, TRAILER AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
SALES. An open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental
of new or used automobiles, boats, manufactured dwellings, trailers or RVs and
also used for servicing such vehicles within an enclosed space.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A building or portion thereof or land used for
the retail sale of automobile fuel, oil and accessories and service.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. A premises used for the storage or sale of used
automobile or truck parts or for the storage, dismantling or abandonment of
junk, obsolete automobiles, trailers, recreational vehicles, trucks, machinery
or parts thereof. Outdoor storage of more than three unlicensed, inoperative
vehicles shall be considered a WRECKING YARD. For purposes of this chapter,
more than three unlicensed vehicles may be stored within a fully enclosed
building and will not be considered a WRECKING YARD. For purposes of this
chapter, the storage of farm equipment, vehicles, machinery and parts on land
zoned EFU, if not visible from outside the property boundaries, shall not be
considered a WRECKING YARD and shall be exempt from this definition.
   AUXILIARY. As used in the Forest Use Zone, a use or alteration of a
structure or land that provides help or is directly associated with the conduct
of a particular forest practice. An AUXILIARY STRUCTURE is located on site,
temporary in nature and not designed to remain for the forest’s entire growth
cycle from planting to harvesting. An AUXILIARY USE is removed when a
particular forest practice has concluded.
   AVERAGE ELECTRIC GENERATING CAPACITY. The peak generating capacity of the
facility divided by the factors for wind facilities, for geothermal energy
facilities or for all other energy facilities.
   BASEMENT. A story partly underground. A BASEMENT shall be counted as a story
in building height measurement when the floor level directly above is more than
six feet above the average level of the adjoining ground.
   BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY. An accessory use in a single-family dwelling in
which lodging and a morning meal for guests only are offered for compensation,
having no more than five sleeping rooms for this purpose. A BED AND BREAKFAST
FACILITY must be within the residence of the operator and be compliant with the
requirements of state administrative rules. A BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY may be
reviewed as either a home occupation or as a room and board operation.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building or portion thereof, other than a motel,
restaurant or hotel, where meals or lodging or both are provided for
compensation for more than four persons, other than a family.
   BUILDING. A structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
   CAMPER CABIN. A camp structure with no permanent foundations or plumbing,
located within a camping area and intended for occupancy by one to eight
persons.
   CAMPGROUND. An area devoted to overnight temporary use for vacation,
recreational or emergency purposes, but not for residential purposes and
established on a site or is contiguous to lands with a park or other outdoor
natural amenity that is accessible for recreational use by the occupants of the
campground.
   CARRYING CAPACITY. Level of use that can be accommodated and continued
without irreversible impairment of natural resources productivity, the
ecosystem and the quality of air, land and water resources.
   CHILDCARE CENTER. A childcare facility that cares for more than 16 children
and is certified under O.R.S. 329A.280.
   COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY IN CONJUNCTION WITH FARM USE. The processing, packaging,
treatment and wholesale distribution and storage of a product primarily derived
from farm activities in the local agricultural community. Also, retail sales of
products, supplies and services to the agricultural community that support the
production and harvesting of agricultural products.
   COMMERCIAL DAIRY FARM. A dairy operation in a resource zone that owns a
sufficient number of producing dairy animals capable of earning an income from
the sale of fluid milk.
   COMMERCIAL POWER GENERATING FACILITY. A facility for the production of
energy and its related or supporting facilities that:
      (1)   Generates energy using means such as solar power, wind power, fuel
cells, hydroelectric power, thermal power, geothermal power, landfill gas,
digester gas, waste, dedicated energy crops available on a renewable basis or
low-emission, nontoxic biomass based on solid organic fuels from wood, forest
or field residues but not including the production of biofuel as authorized by
O.R.S. 215.203(2)(b)(K) in all zones that allow farm use; and O.R.S. 215.283(1)
(r) and 215.283(2)(a) in the EFU Zone;
      (2)   Is intended to provide energy for sale; and
      (3)   Does not include a net metering project established consistent with
O.R.S. 757.300 and O.A.R. Chapter 860, division 39 or a feed-in-tariff project
established consistent with O.R.S. 757.365 and O.A.R. Chapter 860, division 84.
   COMMERCIAL TREE SPECIES. Trees recognized for commercial production under
rules adopted by the State Board of Forestry.
   COMMERCIAL TRUCK. A truck or tractor unit used for the transportation of
persons for compensation or profit; or is designed or used primarily for the
transportation of property.
   COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM. A sewage disposal system that serves or is designed
to serve more than ten single residences or other users for the purpose of
disposing of household liquid wastes, but is neither a municipal nor a public
utility sewage disposal system, and must be approved by the appropriate
government agency and must have legal and financial provisions for long-term
operation and maintenance.
   COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A domestic water supply source or distribution
system that serves or is designed to serve more than three single residences or
other users for the purpose of supplying water for household uses, but is
neither a municipal water supply system nor a public utility water supply
system, and must have legal financial provisions for long-term operation and
maintenance.
   CONTIGUOUS LAND. Parcels of land that abut each other or are connected in
such a manner as to form a single block of land.
   CUBIC FOOT PER ACRE. The average annual increase in cubic foot volume of
wood fiber per acre for fully stocked stands at the culmination of mean annual
increment as reported by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS)
soil survey.
   CUBIC FOOT PER TRACT PER YEAR. The average annual increase in cubic foot
volume of wood fiber per tract for fully stocked stands at the culmination of
mean annual increment as reported by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation
Service (NRCS) soil survey.
   DATA CENTER. A facility used to house computer systems and associated
components.
   DATE OF CREATION AND EXISTENCE. When a lot, parcel or tract is reconfigured
pursuant to applicable law after November 4, 1993, the effect of which is to
qualify a lot, parcel or tract for the siting of a dwelling, the date of the
reconfiguration is the date of creation or existence.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof, designed for
occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building containing one dwelling unit
and designed for occupancy by one family only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building containing two dwelling units and designed
for occupancy by two families.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a building designed for occupancy by one
family and having not more than one cooking facility.
   EASEMENT. A grant of the right to use a parcel of land or portion thereof
for specific purposes where ownership of the land or portion thereof is not
transferred.
   ENERGY GENERATION AREA. An area within which the effects of two or more
small generating plants may accumulate so the small generating plants have
effects of a magnitude similar to a single generating plant of 35 megawatts
average electric generating capacity or more. An ENERGY GENERATION AREA for
facilities using a geothermal resource and covered by a unit agreement, as
provided in O.R.S. 522.405 to 522.545 or by federal law, shall be defined in
that unit agreement. If no such unit agreement exists, an ENERGY GENERATION
AREA for facilities using a geothermal resource shall be the area that is
within two miles, measured from the electrical generating equipment of the
facility, of an existing or proposed geothermal electric power generating
plant, not including the site of any other such plant not owned or controlled
by the same person.
   EVENT, TEMPORARY. An event held primarily on or using public property that
has an expected attendance of more than 50, but no more than 500 people, that
will not continue for more than 72 hours in any three-month period and that
will be located in a rural or resource area. TEMPORARY EVENTS are permitted
through a ministerial process and are not considered outdoor mass gatherings,
as defined by O.R.S. 433.735, or agri-tourism events, as provided for by O.R.S.
215.283(4).
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage,
legal adoptions or legal guardianship, living together as one housekeeping unit
using one kitchen and providing meals or lodging to not more than three
additional unrelated persons, including servants; or a group of not more than
five unrelated persons living together as one housekeeping unit using one
kitchen.
   FAMILY CHILDCARE HOME. A registered or certified childcare facility in a
dwelling that cares for not more than 16 children, including children of the
provider, in accordance with O.R.S. Chapter 329A.
   FARM OPERATOR. A person who operates a farm, doing the work and making the
day-to-day decisions about such things as planting, harvesting, feeding and
marketing.
   FARM OR RANCH OPERATION. All lots or parcels of land in the same ownership
that are used by the farm or ranch operator for farm use as defined in this
subchapter.
   FARM STAND STRUCTURE. A structure that is designed and used for the sale of
farm crops and livestock as provided in the Exclusive Farm Use Zone. A food
stand is considered to be a FARM STAND STRUCTURE.
   FARM USE. The current employment of land, including the portion of such land
under buildings, for the primary purpose of obtaining a profit in money by
raising, harvesting and selling crops or by the feeding, breeding, management
and sale of or the produce of livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals or
honeybees, or for dairying and the sale of dairy products or any other
agricultural or horticultural use or animal husbandry or any combination
thereof. FARM USE includes the preparation, storage and disposal by marketing
or otherwise of the products or byproducts raised on such land for human or
animal use. FARM USE also includes the current employment of land for the
primary purpose of obtaining a profit in money by stabling or training equines,
including, but not limited to, providing riding lessons, training clinics and
schooling shows. FARM USE also includes the propagation, cultivation,
maintenance and harvesting of aquatic species and bird and animal species to
the extent allowed by the rules adopted by the State Fish and Wildlife
Commission. FARM USE includes the on-site construction and maintenance of
equipment and facilities used for the activities described in pertinent
sections of this chapter. FARM USE does not include the use of land subject to
the provisions of O.R.S. Chapter 321, except land used exclusively for growing
cultured Christmas trees. The terms FARM, FARMING and FARM USE shall be
interpreted and applied in a manner consistent with O.R.S. 215.203.
   FARMWORKER HOUSING. Housing limited to occupancy by farmworkers and their
immediate families, no dwelling unit of which is occupied by a relative of the
owner or operator of the FARMWORKER HOUSING.
   FEE-BASED ACTIVITY TO PROMOTE THE SALE OF FARM CROPS OR LIVESTOCK (AS
APPLIED TO FARM STANDS). An agri-tourism activity, as defined herein, that is
directly related to the sale of farm crops or livestock sold at the farm stand
and that meets the standards of the Exclusive Farm Use Zones.
   FIRE BREAK. A break in the ground cover fuels intended to prevent the spread
of fire as specified by the appropriate fire protection agency or the
Commission.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source,
mudslides that are proximately caused or precipitated by accumulations of water
on or under the ground and the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore
of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused
by waves or currents of water on or under the ground, and the collapse or
subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level
in a natural or human-made body of water accompanied by a severe storm or by
some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event that results in flooding as
defined herein above.
   FLOOD BASE. Inundation during periods of higher than normal stream flow,
high winds, high intensity storms or any combination thereof that has a 1%
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The relatively flat area or lowlands adjoining the
channel of a river, stream, other watercourse, lake or reservoir that has been
or may be covered by a base flood.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP. An official map of the community furnished by the
Federal Insurance Administration, labeled a FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP and
delineating the boundaries of the special hazard areas.
   FOREST LANDS. Lands composed of existing and potential forest lands, which
are suitable for commercial forest uses, including the production of trees and
the processing of forest products, other forested lands needed for watershed
protection, wildlife and fisheries habitat and recreation, lands where extreme
conditions of climate, soil and topography require the maintenance of
vegetative cover irrespective of use and other forested lands in urban and
agricultural areas that provide urban buffers, wind breaks, wildlife and
fisheries habitat, livestock habitat, scenic corridors and recreational use.
   FOREST LANDS. As defined in Goal 4, are those lands acknowledged as forest
lands or in the case of a plan amendment. FOREST LANDS shall include:
      (1)   Lands that are suitable for commercial forest uses, including
adjacent or nearby lands which are necessary to permit forest operations or
practices; and
      (2)   Other forested land that maintain soil, air, water and fish and
wildlife resources.
   FOREST OPERATION. Any commercial activity relating to the growing or
harvesting of any forest tree species.
   FOREST USE. Includes the production of trees and the processing of forest
products, open space, buffers from noise and visual separation of conflicting
uses, watershed protection and wildlife and fisheries habitat, soil protection
from wind and water, maintenance of clean air and water, outdoor recreational
activities and related support services and wilderness values compatible with
these uses, and grazing for livestock.
   FREIGHT DEPOT/TRUCK TERMINAL. An area and/or building where cargo is stored
or where trucks load and unload cargo on a regular basis and trucks and/or
trailers are parked when not in use.
   FRONTAGE. The portion of a property that abuts a public street.
   FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION. A system used to group public roadways into
classes according to their purpose in moving vehicles and providing access.
   GOLF COURSE. An area of land with highly maintained natural turf laid out
for the game of golf with a series of holes, each including a tee, a fairway, a
putting green and often one or more natural or artificial hazards.
   GRADE (GROUND LEVEL). The average of the finished ground elevation at the
centers of all walls of a building; in case walls are parallel to and within
five feet of a sidewalk, the sidewalk elevation nearest the center of the wall
shall constitute the ground elevation.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance from the grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to
the center height between the highest and lowest points on other types of
roofs.
   HIGH-VALUE FARMLAND.
      (1)   Land in a tract composed predominantly of soils that are:
         (a)   Irrigated and classified prime, unique, Class I or II; or
         (b)   Not irrigated and classified prime, unique, Class I or II.
      (2)   HIGH-VALUE FARMLAND includes tracts growing specified perennials as
demonstrated by the most recent aerial photography of the Agricultural
Stabilization and Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture
taken prior to November 4, 1993. For the purpose of this definition, SPECIFIED
PERENNIALS means perennials grown for market or research purposes, including,
but not limited to, nursery stock, berries, fruits, nuts, Christmas trees or
vineyards, but not including seed crops, hay, pasture or alfalfa.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A limited business activity that is accessory to a
residential use. HOME OCCUPATIONS are conducted primarily within a residence or
a building normally associated with uses permitted in the zone in which the
property is located and are operated by a resident or employee of a resident of
the property on which the business is located. Clerical or administrative
activity conducted not for the principal purpose of direct monetary gain, but
rather to support a business not located on the same site as the dwelling, does
not constitute a home occupation, e.g., transcription, bookkeeping or telephone
contact.
   IRRIGATED. Watered by an artificial or controlled means, such as sprinklers,
furrows, ditches or spreader dikes. An area or tract is IRRIGATED if it is
currently watered, or has established rights to use water for irrigation,
including such tracts that receive water for irrigation from a water or
Irrigation District or other provider. For the purposes of this chapter, an
area or tract within a water or Irrigation District that was once irrigated
shall continue to be considered IRRIGATED even if the irrigation water was
removed or transferred to another tract.
   KENNEL. A lot or building in which four or more dogs, cats or other animals
at least four months of age are kept commercially for board, propagation,
training or sale.
   LIVESTOCK. Domestic animals of types customarily raised or kept on farms for
profit or other purposes.
   LIVESTOCK FEEDING YARD (COMMERCIAL FEEDLOT). An enclosure designed for the
purpose of concentrated feeding or fattening of livestock for commercial
slaughter.
   LIVESTOCK SALES YARD. An enclosure or structure designed or used for holding
livestock for purposes of sale or transfer by auction, consignment or other
means.
   LIVING HISTORY MUSEUM. A facility designed to depict and interpret everyday
life and culture of some specific historic period using authentic buildings,
tools, equipment and people to simulate past activities and events.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space within a building or on the same lot with
a building, used for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle or truck
while loading or unloading merchandise or materials and having direct access to
a street or alley.
   LOT. A single unit of land created by a subdivision of land that is intended
as a unit for disposition, transfer of ownership or interest or for
development.
      (1)   LOT AREA. The total horizontal net area within the lot lines of a
lot to mean that square footage of a lot that is free from public and private
road rights-of-way or easements.
      (2)   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting on two or more streets, other than
alleys, at their intersection, provided the angle of intersection of the
abutting streets does not exceed 135 degrees.
      (3)   LOT DEPTH. The average horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
      (4)   LOT LINE. The property line bounding a lot.
      (5)   LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line separating a lot from a street other
than an alley and, in the case of a corner lot, the shortest lot line along a
street other than an alley.
      (6)   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line. In the case of an irregular, triangular or other odd shaped
lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line.
      (7)   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line
bounding a lot.
      (8)   LOT, THROUGH OR DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two
parallel or approximately parallel streets other than alleys.
      (9)   LOT WIDTH. The average horizontal distance between the side lot
lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the
front and rear lot lines.
   MEDICAL HARDSHIP. A temporary circumstance caused by serious illness or
infirmity and authorized by a licensed medical practitioner (medical doctor,
physicians assistant or nurse practitioner).
   MINING. All or any part of the process of mining minerals, including removal
of overburden and the extraction of natural mineral deposits by any method by
which more than 1,000 cubic yards of minerals are extracted on land planned for
farm use and 5,000 cubic yards of minerals are extracted on land planned for
forest or industrial use or by which at least one acre of land is affected
within a period of 12 consecutive months, including open-pit mining operations,
auger mining operations, processing, surface impacts of underground mining,
production of surface mining refuse and the construction of adjacent or off-
site borrow pits (except those constructed for use as access roads). SURFACE
MINING does not include:
      (1)   Excavations of sand, gravel, clay, rock or other similar materials
conducted by the landowner or tenant for the primary purpose of construction,
reconstruction or maintenance of access roads on the same parcel, or on an
adjacent parcel that is under the same ownership as the parcel that is being
excavated;
      (2)   Excavation or grading operations, reasonably necessary for farming;
      (3)   Non-surface effects of underground mining;
      (4)   Removal of rock, gravel, sand, silt or other similar substances
removed from the beds or banks of any waters of this state pursuant to a permit
issued under O.R.S. 196.800 through 196.900; or
      (5)   Excavations or reprocessing of aggregate material, or grading
operations, within the highway right-of-way reasonably necessary for the
construction reconstruction or maintenance of a highway as defined in O.R.S.
801.305.
   MOBILE HOME or MANUFACTURED DWELLING. Does not mean any building or
structure subject to Structural Specialty Code adopted pursuant to O.R.S.
455.100 through 455.450 and adopted by reference at O.A.R. 918-460-0010 through
918-460-0015. For the purpose of this definition, it shall be immaterial
whether such units or their components are placed on property for a temporary,
semi-permanent or permanent residence or that the wheels are removed and the
unit or component(s) are supported on posts, footings or a foundation. This
definition does not include recreational vehicles.
      (1)   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure constructed for movement on the
public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, is intended
for human occupancy, is being used for residential purposes and was constructed
in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety
standards regulations in effect at the time of construction.
      (2)   MOBILE HOUSE. A structure constructed for movement on the public
highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, is intended for
human occupancy, is being used for residential purposes, was constructed
between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and met the construction
requirements of the State Mobile Home Law, being O.A.R. Chapter 466, in effect
at the time of construction.
      (3)   RESIDENTIAL TRAILER. A structure constructed for movement on the
public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, is intended
for human occupancy, is being used for residential purposes and was constructed
before January 1, 1962.
   MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any place where two or more mobile or
manufactured homes are parked within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract or
parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to
rent space or keep space for rent to any person for a charge or fee paid or to
be paid for the rental or use of facilities or to offer space free in
connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person.
   MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A subdivision intended to be
occupied primarily or exclusively by mobile or manufactured homes.
   MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A domestic water supply source and
distribution system owned and operated by a city or a county, or owned and
operated by a special district or other public corporation that has independent
tax-levying powers to support the system.
   NATURAL HAZARD AREA. An area that is subject to natural events that are
known to result in death or endanger the works of humans, such as stream
flooding, groundwater, flash flooding, erosion and deposition, landslides,
earthquakes, weak foundation soils and other hazards unique to a local or
regional area.
   NET METERING POWER FACILITY. A facility for the production of energy that:
      (1)   Generates energy using means such as solar power, wind power, fuel
cells, hydroelectric power, landfill gas, digester gas, waste, dedicated energy
crops available on a renewable basis or low-emission, nontoxic biomass based on
solid organic fuels from wood, forest or field residues, but not including the
production of biofuel in all zones which allow farm use and in the Exclusive
Farm Use Zone;
      (2)   Is intended to offset part of the customer-generator’s requirements
for energy;
      (3)   Will operate in parallel with a utility’s existing transmission and
distribution facilities;
      (4)   Is consistent with generating capacity regulations as well as any
other applicable requirements; and
      (5)   Is located on the same tract as the use(s) to which it is accessory
and the power generating facility, tract and use(s) are all under common
ownership and management.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
   NON-COMMERCIAL/STAND ALONE POWER GENERATING FACILITY. A facility for the
production of energy that is similar to a net metering power facility except
facilities that:
      (1)   Are intended to provide all of the generator’s requirements for
energy for the tract or the specific lawful accessory use that it is connected
to; and
      (2)   Operate as standalone power generators not connected to a utility
grid.
   NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE (NRCS) WEB SOIL SURVEY. Official
source of certified soils data available online that identifies agricultural
land capability classes, developed and maintained by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
   NURSING HOME. Any home, institution or other structure maintained or
operating for the nursing and care of four or more ill or infirm adults not
requiring hospital care or hospital facilities.
   OPEN PLAY FIELD. A large, grassy area with no structural improvements
intended for outdoor games and activities by park visitors. The term does not
include developed ballfields, golf courses or courts for racquet sports.
   OPEN SPACE. Consists of lands used for agricultural or forest uses, and any
land area that would, if preserved and continued in its present use, conserve
and enhance natural or scenic resources; protect air or streams or water
supply; promote conservation of soils, wetlands, beaches or marshes; conserve
landscaped areas, such as public or private golf courses; that reduce pollution
and enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests,
wildlife preserves, nature reservations or other open space or geological and
archaeological sites; promote orderly urban development; and minimize farm and
non-farm conflicts.
   OUTDOOR MASS GATHERING. A gathering that is an actual or reasonably
anticipated assembly of more than 3,000 [more than 500] persons which continues
or can reasonably be expected to continue for more than 24 consecutive hours
but less than 120 hours within any three-month period and which is held
primarily in open spaces and not in any permanent structure. Any decision for a
permit to hold an outdoor mass gathering as defined by statute is not a land
use decision and is appealable to circuit court. OUTDOOR MASS GATHERINGS do not
include agri-tourism events and activities allowed under separate provisions.
   OWNER. The owner of the title to real property or the authorized agent
thereof, or the contract purchaser of real property of record as shown on the
last available complete tax assessment roll or County Recorder’s records.
   PARCEL. A single unit of land created by a partition plat governed by
Chapter 155. A parcel may also be a single unit of land described by deed and
created prior to the establishment of Chapter 155.
   PARKING SPACE. A clear, off-street area for the temporary parking or storage
of one automobile.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or
fraternal organization, corporation, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch
of government or any group or combination acting as a unit.
   PERSONAL USE AIRPORT. An airstrip restricted, except for aircraft
emergencies, to use by the owner and, on an infrequent and occasional basis, by
invited guests, and by commercial aviation activities in connection with
agricultural operations.
   PREPARATION. Includes, but is not limited to, the cleaning, treatment,
sorting or packaging of the products or byproducts.
   PRIMARY OR PRINCIPAL USE. The first use to which property is or may be
devoted, and to which all other uses on the premises are derived as accessory
or secondary uses. As used relative to dwelling units, the PRIMARY dwelling
would be the first dwelling unit to be located on a specific parcel or lot.
   PRIMARY PROCESSING OF FOREST PRODUCTS. The initial treatments of logs or
other forest plant or fungi materials to prepare them for shipment for further
processing or to market, including, but not limited to, debarking, peeling,
drying, cleaning, sorting, chipping, grinding, sawing, shaping, notching,
biofuels conversion or other similar methods of initial treatments.
   PRINCIPALLY ENGAGED IN FARM USE. As it refers to primary farm dwellings and
accessory farm dwellings, a person is PRINCIPALLY ENGAGED in the farm use of
the land when the amount of time that an occupant of the dwelling is engaged in
farm use of the property is similar to the average number of hours that is
typically required for a full-time employee of the relevant type of farm use,
whether that person is employed off the farm or not. Only one resident of a
household need meet the PRINCIPALLY ENGAGED test, or the test may be met
collectively by more than one household member.
   PRIVATE PARK. Land that is used for low impact, casual recreational uses
such as picnicking, boating, fishing, swimming, camping and hiking or nature-
oriented recreational uses, such as viewing and studying nature and wildlife
habitat, and may include play areas and accessory facilities that support the
activities listed above, but does not include tracks for motorized vehicles or
areas for target practice or the discharge of firearms.
   PROCESSED. As it applies to farm stands, processed crops and livestock, farm
products that have been converted into other products through canning, drying,
baking, freezing, pressing, butchering or other similar means of adding value
to the farm product, including the addition of incidental ingredients, but not
including the conversion of farm products into food items that are prepared on-
site or intended for on-site consumption.
   PROCESSING, MINERAL. As defined by O.R.S. 517.750, includes, but is not
limited to, crushing, washing, milling and screening as well as the batching
and blending of mineral aggregate into asphalt and Portland cement concrete
located within the operating permit area.
   PRODUCTS OR BYPRODUCTS RAISED ON SUCH LAND. The products or byproducts are
raised on the farm operation where the preparation occurs or on other farm land
provided the preparation is occurring only on land being used for the primary
purpose of obtaining a profit in money from the farm use of the land.
   PUBLIC OR SEMI-PUBLIC USE. A use owned or operated by a public, governmental
or nonprofit organization for the benefit of the public generally. This does
not include landfill sites, garbage dumps or utility facilities.
   PUBLIC PARK. A public area intended for open space and outdoor recreation
use that is owned and managed by a city, county, regional government, state or
federal agency or park district and that may be designated as a public park in
the County Comprehensive Plan and this chapter.
   RECONFIGURED. Any change in the boundary of the lot, parcel or tract.
   RECREATION FACILITY OR AREA. An indoor or outdoor area devoted to facilities
and equipment for recreational purposes, including swimming pools, tennis
courts, playgrounds and other similar uses, whether the use of such area is
limited to private membership or open to the public on payment of a fee, or an
area designated by the landowner for picnicking and offered to the general
public, whether or not a fee or charge is made for such accommodations.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A unit with or without motive power, that is
designed for human occupancy and is to be used temporarily for recreational,
seasonal or emergency purposes. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES include the following.
      (1)   CAMPING TRAILER. A vehicle unit mounted on wheels and constructed
with collapsible partial side walls which fold when the unit is towed by
another vehicle and unfold at the campsite to provide temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping or travel use.
      (2)   MOTOR HOME. A vehicular unit built on or permanently attached to a
self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or on a chassis cab or van which is an
integral part of the complete vehicle.
      (3)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular unit which has a roof, floor and sides
and is mounted on wheels, but which is not of such size or weight as to require
special highway movement permits when towed by a motorized vehicle.
      (4)   TRUCK CAMPER. A portable unit which has a roof, floor and sides and
is designed to be loaded on and off the bed of a truck or pick-up truck.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARK. An area or tract of land used or designed to
accommodate two or more recreational vehicles, tents or outfits, including
cabins, the primary purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to
any person for a charge or fee. RV PARKS could be occupied indefinitely if
certain conditions are met.
   RELATIVE. Child, parent, step-parent, grandchild, grandparent, step-
grandparent, sibling, step-sibling, niece, nephew or first cousin.
   RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY.
      (1)   A solar photovoltaic power generation facility;
      (2)   Geothermal energy at a single plant or within a single energy
generation area; and
      (3)   Wind energy at a single plant or within a single energy generation
area.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area between the boundary lines of a street, road or
easement.
   ROAD or STREET. A public or private way created to provide ingress or egress
for persons to one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land, excluding a
private way that is created to provide ingress or egress to such land in
conjunction with the use of such land for forestry, mining or agricultural
purposes.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street or road right-of-way developed for
vehicular traffic.
   SETBACK (YARD). An open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the ground
upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (1)   SETBACK, FRONT. A setback between side lot lines and measured
horizontally at right angles to the front lot line from the front lot line to
the nearest point of a building.
      (2)   SETBACK, REAR. A yard between side lot lines and measured
horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line to the
nearest point of a building.
      (3)   SETBACK, SIDE. A setback between the front and rear yards measured
horizontally and at right angles from the side lot line to the nearest point of
a building.
      (4)   SETBACK, STREET SIDE. A setback adjacent to a street between the
front setback and rear lot line measured horizontally and at right angles from
the side lot line to the nearest point of a building.
   SIGN. An identification, description, illustration or device that is affixed
to or represented, directly or indirectly, on a building, structure or land,
and that directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution
or business. Each display surface of a SIGN other than two surfaces parallel
and back to back on the same structure shall be considered a SIGN.
   SKIRTING. A weather resistant material used to enclose the space below the
manufactured structure.
   SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include
permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen
facilities but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling
unit are not SLEEPING UNITS.
   STABLE. A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned by the
occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration or profit, or such a
facility for the keeping of horses not owned by the occupants of the premises
whether or not a fee is charged.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The first placement of permanent construction of a
structure (other than a mobile or manufactured home) on a site, such as the
pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling. It does not include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a
structure (other than a mobile or manufactured home) without a basement or
poured footings, the START OF CONSTRUCTION includes the first permanent framing
or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundations.
For mobile or manufactured homes not within a mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision, START OF CONSTRUCTION means the affixing of the mobile home to its
permanent site. For mobile or manufactured homes within mobile home parks or
mobile home subdivisions, START OF CONSTRUCTION is the date on which the mobile
or manufactured home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads and installation of utilities) is completed.
   STORAGE STRUCTURES FOR EMERGENCY SUPPLIES. Structures to accommodate those
goods, materials and equipment required to meet the essential and immediate
needs of an affected population in a disaster. Such supplies include food,
clothing, temporary shelter materials, durable medical goods and
pharmaceuticals, electric generators, water purification gear, communication
equipment, tools and other similar emergency supplies.
   STRUCTURE. Something constructed or built and having a fixed base on, or
fixed connection to, the ground or another structure. Also anything
constructed, erected or air-inflated, permanent or temporary, which requires
location on the ground. Among other things, STRUCTURE includes buildings,
walls, fences, billboards, poster panels, food stands, in-ground swimming pools
and parking lots. Retaining walls less than four feet in height are not
considered STRUCTURES for the sake of general property line setbacks.
   TAX LOT. A unit of land assigned by the Department of Revenue for the sole
purpose of real estate taxation.
   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE OR USE. A non-permanent structure, or one used for a
limited time, or a use or activity that is of a limited duration.
   TRACT. One or more contiguous lots or parcels under the same ownership.
   TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA). A study conducted to identify the impacts
from a new development or increased use of an existing facility.
   TRAILER. Any portable unit designed and built to be towed on its own
chassis, consisting of frame and wheels and that does not fall within the
definitions of RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, RESIDENTIAL TRAILER, MOBILE HOUSE or
MANUFACTURED HOME. This definition includes boat trailers, bunk trailers,
portable schoolrooms and industrial, commercial or public offices and accessory
uses.
   TRAVELERS ACCOMMODATIONS. Any establishment having rooms or apartments
rented or kept for rent on a daily or weekly basis to travelers or transients
for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for rental or use of facilities.
   TRUCK STOP. Any building, premises or land in or on which the service of
dispensing motor fuel or other petroleum products directly into trucks or motor
vehicles is rendered. A TRUCK STOP may include the sale of accessories or
equipment for trucks or similar motor vehicles and may also include the
maintenance, servicing, storage or repair of commercially licensed trucks or
motor vehicles.
   USE. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged or
intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   UTILITY FACILITIES NECESSARY FOR PUBLIC SERVICE. Any facility owned or
operated by a public, private or cooperative company for the transmission,
distribution or processing of its products or for the disposal of cooling
water, waste or byproducts, and including major trunk pipelines, water towers ,
sewage lagoons, cell towers, electrical transmission facilities (except
transmission towers over 200 feet in height), including substations not
associated with a commercial power generating facility and other similar
facilities.
   UTILITY FACILITY SERVICE LINES. Utility lines of the necessary voltage to
serve the area, including those up to 230 kilovolts, and associated facilities
or structures that ultimately end at the point where the utility service is
received by the customer, and that are located on one or more of the following:
      (1)   A public right-of-way;
      (2)   Land immediately adjacent to a public right-of-way, provided the
written consent of all adjacent property owners has been obtained; or
      (3)   The property to be served by the utility.
   YOUTH CAMP. A facility either owned or leased, and operated by a state or
local government, or a nonprofit corporation, to provide an outdoor
recreational and educational experience primarily for the benefit of persons 21
years of age and younger. YOUTH CAMPS do not include any manner of juvenile
detention center or juvenile detention facility.
   YURT. A round, domed shelter of cloth or canvas on a collapsible frame with
no plumbing, sewage disposal hookup or internal cooking appliance.
   ZONING PERMIT. An authorization issued prior to the issuance of a building
permit, or commencement of a use that is allowed outright, or has received
prior land use approval, stating that the proposal is consistent with the clear
and objective requirements of the corresponding land use zone, and prior
approvals, if applicable.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-8-
98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed 9-
28-2005; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013;
Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-
2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03, passed 4-3-2024; Ord. ORD-2025-1,
passed 1-8-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Manufactured dwellings and structures, see O.R.S. 446.003(17)
§ 156.004 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER PROVISIONS.
   (A)   A lot may be used and a structure or part of a structure may be
constructed, reconstructed, altered, occupied or used only as this chapter
permits.
   (B)   No lot area, yard or other open space existing on or after the
effective date of this chapter shall be reduced below the minimum required for
it by this chapter.
   (C)   No lot area, yard or other open space that is required by this chapter
for one use shall be used as the required lot area, yard or open space for
another use.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.005 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restriction.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.006 ADMINISTRATIVE TERMINOLOGY AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Terminology. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      COUNTY. The County of Morrow, Oregon.
      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS and BOARD. The County Board of Commissioners.
      PLANNING COMMISSION and COMMISSION. The County Planning Commission of
Morrow County duly appointed by the County Board of Commissioners.
      PLANNING DIRECTOR, COUNTY ROADMASTER, COUNTY CLERK, COUNTY SURVEYOR, TAX
COLLECTOR AND ASSESSOR. The Planning Director, County Roadmaster, County Clerk,
County Surveyor, Tax Collector and Assessor of Morrow County, as applicable.
   (B)   Construction. Words used in the present tense include the future
tense; words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the
plural include the singular; the word SHALL is mandatory; the word MAY is
permissive; the masculine shall include the feminine and neutral.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
ZONE DESIGNATIONS
§ 156.020 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following zones are hereby identified.
Zone Designation Abbreviated Designation Code Section Effective Date
Zone Designation        Abbreviated Designation Code Section     Effective Date
Air/Industrial Park                             §§
Zone                    AI                      156.300 through  3-6-1985
                                                156.304
                                                §§
Airport Approach Zone   AA                      156.410 through  6-17-2016
                                                156.420
                                                §§
Airport Hazard Zone     AH                      156.435 through  6-17-2016
                                                156.442
Airport Light                                   §§
Industrial Zone         ALI                     156.390 through  6-17-2016
                                                156.396
Airport Safety and                              §§
Compatibility Overlay   ASC                     156.455 through  6-17-2016
Zone                                            156.463
                                                §§
Exclusive Farm Use Zone EFU                     156.035 through  8-1-2016
                                                156.050
                                                §§
Farm Residential Zone   FR-2                    156.155 through  9-28-2005
                                                156.163
Flood Hazard Overlay                            §§
Zone                    FP                      156.475 through  1-1-2011
                                                156.481
                                                §§
Forest Use Zone         FU                      156.080 through  8-1-2016
                                                156.090
                                                §§
General Commercial Zone C-G                     156.235 through  4-30-2015
                                                156.246
                                                §§
General Industrial Zone M-G                     156.280 through  1-1-2011
                                                156.286
Historic Buildings and                          §§
Sites                   (none)                  156.580 through  3-6-1985
                                                156.583
Limited Use Overlay                             §§
Zone                    LU                      156.495 through  3-6-1985
                                                156.498
                                                §§
Parkland Overlay Zone   PO                      156.550 through  4-1-2011
                                                156.554
                                                §§
Port Industrial Zone    PI                      156.340 through  2-1-2014
                                                156.347
Resource Related                                §§
Industrial Zone         RRI                     156.060 through  10-1-2013
                                                156.065
Rural Light Industrial                          §§
Zone                    RLI                     156.375 through  3-15-2006
                                                156.378
                                                §§
Rural Residential Zone  RR 1                    156.135 through  9-28-2005
                                                156.143
Rural Residential Ten                           §§
Zone                    RR-10                   156.175 through  7-15-2021
                                                156.182
Rural Service Center                            §§
Zone                    RSC                     156.100 through  1-1-2011
                                                156.108
Significant Resource                            §§
Overlay Zone            SRO                     156.565 through  10-1-2013
                                                156.569
Space Age Industrial                            §§
Zone                    SAI                     156.320 through  10-1-2013
                                                156.326
Speedway Limited Use                            §§
Overlay Zone            SO                      156.525 through  1-23-2008
                                                156.537
Suburban Residential 2A                         §§
Zone                    SR-2A                   156.215 through  10-28-2006
                                                156.223
Suburban Residential                            §§
Zone                    SR                      156.195 through  3-6-1985
                                                156.203
                                                §§
Tourist Commercial Zone TC                      156.260 through  3-15-2006
                                                156.269
Umatilla Army Depot                             §§
Military Zone           UADM                    156.360 through  11-1-2014
                                                156.364
Umatilla Depot Wildlife                         §§
Habitat Zone            UDWH                    156.120 through  11-1-2014
                                                156.123
UMCD PI Limited Use                             §§
Overlay Zone            (none)                  156.510 through  11-1-2014
                                                156.513
 
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-8-
2009, passed 12-23-2009; Ord. ORD-2017-3, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.021 LOCATION OF ZONES.
   The boundaries for the zone listed in this chapter are indicated on the
county zoning map which is hereby adopted by ordinance. The boundaries shall be
modified in accordance with zoning map amendments which shall be adopted by
ordinance.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-8-
2009, passed 12-23-2009; Ord. ORD-2017-3, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.022 ZONING MAP.
   A zoning map or zoning map amendment adopted by §
156.021 or by an amendment thereto shall be prepared by authority of the
Planning Commission or by a modification by the County Board of Commissioners
of a map amendment so prepared. The map or map amendment shall be dated with
the effective date of the ordinance that adopts the map or map amendment. A
certified print of the adopted map or map amendment shall be maintained in the
office of the County Clerk as long as this chapter remains in effect.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-8-
2009, passed 12-23-2009; Ord. ORD-2017-3, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.023 ZONE BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specified, zone boundaries are section lines,
subdivision lines, lot lines, centerlines of street or railroad rights-of-way,
watercourses, ridges or rimrocks or such lines extended.
   (B)   Whenever uncertainty exists as to the boundary of a zone as shown on
the zoning map, or amendment thereto, the following regulations shall control.
      (1)   Where a boundary line is indicated as following a street, alley,
canal or railroad right-of-way, it shall be construed as following the
centerline of such right-of-way.
      (2)   Where a boundary line follows or approximately coincides with a
section line, or division thereof, lot or property ownership line, it shall be
construed as following such line.
      (3)   If a zone boundary, as shown on the zoning map, divides a lot or
parcel between two zones, the entire lot or parcel shall be deemed to be in the
zone in which the greater area of the lot or parcel lies; provided, that this
adjustment involves a distance not exceeding 100 feet from the mapped zone
boundary.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-8-
2009, passed 12-23-2009; Ord. ORD-2017-3, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
EXCLUSIVE FARM USE ZONE (EFU)
§ 156.035 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the Exclusive Farm Use Zone is to preserve, protect and
maintain agricultural lands for farm use, consistent with historical, existing
and future needs, including economic needs, which pertain to the production of
agricultural products. The EFU Zone is also intended to allow other uses that
are compatible with agricultural activities, such as forest use, fish and
wildlife habitat, and to maintain, improve and utilize the quality of air,
water and land resources of the county. It is also the purpose of the EFU Zone
to qualify farms for farm use valuation under the provisions of O.R.S. Chapter
308.
   (B)   The EFU Zone has been applied to lands designated as agriculture in
the Comprehensive Plan (except for lands zoned Space Age Industrial). The
provisions of the EFU Zone reflect the agricultural policies of the
Comprehensive Plan as well as the requirements of O.R.S. Chapter 215 and O.A.R.
Chapter 660, division 33. The minimum parcel size and other standards
established by this Zone are intended to promote commercial agricultural
operation.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.036 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT NOT SUBJECT TO REVIEW.
   In the EFU zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
without a zoning permit:
   (A)   Farm use, as defined in O.R.S. 215.203, is allowed outright without
zoning permit review except dwellings and other buildings customarily provided
in conjunction with farm use referred to in O.R.S. 215.283(1). For the purpose
of this subchapter, farm use does not include customary accessory uses and
structures over 100 square feet (e.g., barns, sheds, maintenance buildings,
farm owned or personal use grain bins or elevators and chemical storage), which
are permitted subject to approval of a zoning permit;
   (B)   Propagation or harvesting of a forest product;
   (C)   On-site filming and activities accessory to on-site filming for 45
days or less as provided for in O.R.S. 215.306;
   (D)   Temporary public road and highway detours that will be abandoned and
restored to original condition or use at such time as no longer needed;
   (E)   Minor betterment of existing public road and highway related
facilities such as maintenance yards, weigh stations and rest areas, within
right-of-way existing as of July 1, 1987, and contiguous public-owned property
utilized to support the operation and maintenance of public roads and highways;
   (F)   Reconstruction or modification of public roads and highways, including
the placement of utility facilities overhead and in the subsurface of public
roads and highways along the public right-of- way, but not including the
addition of travel lanes, where no removal or displacement of buildings would
occur, or no new land parcels result;
   (G)   Climbing and passing lanes within the right-of-way existing as of July
1, 1987;
   (H)   Creation of, restoration of or enhancement of wetlands;
   (I)   Firearms training facility in existence on September 9, 1995;
   (J)   Parking of up to seven log trucks;
   (K)   Irrigation reservoirs, canals, delivery lines and those structures and
accessory operational facilities, not including parks or other recreational
structures and facilities, associated with a district as defined in O.R.S.
540.505;
   (L)   Utility facility service lines subject to §
156.040(I); and
   (M)   Operations for the exploration for and production of geothermal
resources as defined by O.R.S. 522.005 and oil and gas as defined by O.R.S.
520.005, including the placement and operation of compressors, separators and
other customary production equipment for an individual well adjacent to the
wellhead.
(Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.037 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In the EFU Zone, the following uses and activities and their accessory
buildings and uses are permitted subject to zoning permit approval in
accordance with §
156.610. Unless otherwise required by §
156.611, authorization of such uses does not require notice to adjacent
property owners or other interested parties and does not constitute a land use
decision pursuant to O.R.S. 197.015(10):
   (A)   Agricultural buildings customarily provided in conjunction with farm
use;
   (B)   Fire service facilities providing rural fire protection services;
   (C)   An expedited single-event agri-tourism or commercial event permit as
described in §
156.046(A) or (B);
   (D)   Operations for the exploration for minerals as defined by O.R.S.
517.750;
   (E)   Alteration, restoration or replacement of a lawfully established
dwelling subject to §§
156.040(Q) and
156.045;
   (F)   A site for the takeoff and landing of model aircraft subject to §
156.040(L).
(Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.038 USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   In the EFU Zone, the following uses and activities and their accessory
buildings and uses may be permitted outright through the site plan review
process provided in §
156.611, and subject to the provisions of this subchapter if determined by the
Planning Director to satisfy the applicable criteria and provisions of law.
Notice and an opportunity to file an appeal must be provided in the manner
described in O.R.S. 215.416. These uses may be referred to the Planning
Commission for review if deemed appropriate by the Planning Director:
   (A)   An outdoor mass gathering of more than 3,000 persons that is expected
to continue for more than 24 hours but less than 120 hours in any three-month
period, as provided in O.R.S. 433.735(2);
   (B)   A facility for the processing of farm crops, biofuel or poultry
subject to §
156.040(A);
   (C)   Dog training classes or testing trials subject to §
156.040(D);
   (D)   Farm stands subject to §
156.040(E);
   (E)   A winery subject to O.R.S. 215.452 through 215.456;
   (F)   A cider business as provided in O.R.S. 215.451;
   (G)   Agri-tourism and other commercial events or activities subject to §
156.046;
   (H)   Land application of reclaimed water, agricultural or industrial
process water or biosolids, or the on-site treatment of septage prior to the
land application of biosolids subject to §
156.040(H);
   (I)   Utility facilities necessary for public service, including associated
transmission lines as defined in §§
156.001 through
156.006 and wetland waste treatment systems, but not including commercial
facilities for the purpose of generating electrical power for public use by
sale or transmission towers over 200 feet in height as provided in §
156.040(J);
   (J)   Churches, and cemeteries in conjunction with churches, subject to §
156.0040(Q). This use is not permitted on high-value farmland except that
existing churches on high-value farmland may be expanded subject to §
156.040(S);
   (K)   Dwelling customarily provided in conjunction with farm use subject to
§§
156.040(R) and
156.041;
   (L)   A dwelling on property used for farm use located on the same lot or
parcel as the dwelling of the farm operator, and occupied by a relative of the
farm operator or farm operator’s spouse if the farm operator does, or will,
require the assistance of the relative in the management of the farm use
subject to §
156.040(C) and (R);
   (M)   Accessory farm dwellings for year-round and seasonal farm workers
subject to §§
156.040(R) and
156.042;
   (N)   One single-family lot of record dwelling on a lawfully created lot or
parcel subject to §§
156.040(R) and
156.043;
   (O)   Single-family residential dwelling, not provided in conjunction with
farm use subject to §§
156.040(R) and
156.044;
   (P)   Replacement dwelling to be used in conjunction with farm use if the
existing dwelling has been listed in a county inventory as historic property as
defined in O.R.S. 358.480 and listed on the National Register of Historic
Places subject to §
156.040(R);
   (Q)   Residential home as defined in O.R.S. 197.660, in existing dwellings,
subject to §
156.040(R);
   (R)   Room and board arrangements for a maximum of five unrelated persons in
existing residences subject to §
156.040(R);
   (S)   Confined animal feeding operation, as defined by the Oregon Department
of Agriculture, subject to §
156.040(T);
   (T)   Construction of additional passing and travel lanes requiring the
acquisition of right-of- way but not resulting in the creation of new land
parcels;
   (U)   Reconstruction or modification of public roads and highways involving
the removal or displacement of buildings but not resulting in the creation of
new land parcels;
   (V)   Improvement of public road and highway related facilities, such as
maintenance yards, weigh stations and rest areas, where additional property or
right-of-way is required but not resulting in the creation of new land parcels;
   (W)   Transportation improvements on rural lands allowed by and subject to
the requirements of O.A.R. 660-012-0065;
   (X)   On-site filming and activities accessory to on-site filming for more
than 45 days as provided for in O.R.S. 215.306; or
   (Y)   Alteration, restoration or replacement of a lawfully established
dwelling that has been destroyed, demolished or improperly removed subject to
§§
156.040(R) and
156.045.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03,
passed 4-3-2024; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.039 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following uses are permitted subject to county review, any specific
standards for the use set forth in §§
156.040,
156.620 through
156.630, the general standards for the zone and any other applicable standards
and review process in this chapter:
   (A)   A facility for the primary processing of forest products subject to §
156.040(B);
   (B)   The propagation, cultivation, maintenance and harvesting of aquatic
species that are not under the jurisdiction of the State Fish and Wildlife
Commission or insect species;
   (C)   Temporary hardship dwelling subject to §§
156.040(R) and §§
156.645 through
156.655;
   (D)   Home occupations as provided in §§
156.620 through
156.630;
   (E)   Commercial dog boarding kennels, as provided in §§
156.620 through
156.630, or dog training classes or testing trials that cannot be established
under §
156.038(C);
   (F)   A landscape contracting business, as defined in O.R.S. 671.520, or a
business providing landscape architecture services, as described in O.R.S.
671.318, if the business is pursued in conjunction with the growing and
marketing of nursery stock on the land that constitutes farm use;
   (G)   Commercial activities in conjunction with farm use, including the
processing of farm crops into biofuel not permitted under §
156.038(B), but excluding activities in conjunction with a marijuana crop, and
subject to §
156.040(F);
   (H)   Guest ranches subject to temporary provisions relating to guest
ranches in O.R.S. Chapter 215 and O.A.R. 660-033-0120;
   (I)   Operations conducted for mining and processing of geothermal
resources, as defined by O.R.S. 522.005 and oil and gas, as defined by O.R.S.
520.005 not otherwise permitted;
   (J)   Operations conducted for mining, crushing or stockpiling of aggregate
and other mineral and other subsurface resources subject to O.R.S. 215.298;
   (K)   Processing, as defined by O.R.S. 517.750, of aggregate into asphalt or
Portland cement;
   (L)   Processing of other mineral resources and other subsurface resources;
   (M)   Personal-use airports for airplanes and helicopter pads, including
associated hangar, maintenance and service facilities subject to §
156.040(G);
   (N)   Utility and transmission towers over 200 feet in height;
   (O)   Commercial utility facilities for the purpose of generating power for
public use by sale, not including wind power generation facilities or
photovoltaic solar power generation facilities subject to §
156.047(A);
   (P)   Wind power generation facilities as commercial utility facilities for
the purpose of generating power for public use by sale subject to §
156.047(B);
   (Q)   Photovoltaic solar power generation facilities as commercial utility
facilities for the purpose of generating power for public use by sale subject
to §
156.047(C);
   (R)   A site for the disposal of solid waste for which a permit has been
granted under O.R.S. 459.245 by the Department of Environmental Quality
together with equipment, facilities or buildings necessary for its operation.
This use is not permitted on high-value farmland except that existing
facilities on high-value farmland may be expanded subject to §§
156.040(S) and
156.620 through
156.630;
   (S)   Composting facilities for which a permit has been granted by the
Department of Environmental Quality under O.R.S. 459.245 and O.A.R. 340-093-
0050 and 340-096-0060 subject to §
156.040(K). This use is not permitted on high-value farmland except that
existing facilities on high-value farmland may be expanded subject to §
156.040(S);
   (T)   Living history museum and subject to §
156.040(M) and (P);
   (U)   Public parks and playgrounds subject to §
156.040(N) and (Q);
   (V)   Expansion of existing county fairgrounds and activities directly
relating to county fairgrounds governed by county fair boards established
pursuant to O.R.S. 565.210;
   (W)   Operations for the extraction and bottling of water;
   (X)   Public or private schools for kindergarten through grade 12, including
all buildings essential to the operation of a school, primarily for residents
of the rural area in which the school is located, subject to §
156.040(Q). This use is not permitted on high value farmland except that
existing schools on high value farmland may be expanded subject to §
156.040(Q);
   (Y)   Private parks, playgrounds, hunting and fishing preserves and
campgrounds subject to §
156.040(O) and (Q). This use is not permitted on high value farmland except
that existing private parks on high value farmland may be expanded subject to §
156.040(Q);
   (Z)   Golf courses subject to §
156.040(P) and (Q). This use is not permitted on high value farmland as defined
in O.R.S. 195.300, except that existing golf courses on high-value farmland may
be expanded subject to §
156.040(S); and
   (AA)   Any outdoor gathering of more than 3,000 persons that is anticipated
to continue for more than 120 hours in any three-month period is subject to
review by the Planning Commission under O.R.S. 433.763.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.040 USE STANDARDS.
   (A)   A farm on which a processing facility is located must provide at least
one-quarter of the farm crops processed at the facility. A farm may also be
used for an establishment for the slaughter, processing or selling of poultry
or poultry products pursuant to O.R.S. 603.038. If a building is established or
used for the processing facility or establishment, the farm operator may not
devote more than 10,000 square feet of floor area to the processing facility or
establishment, exclusive of the floor area designated for preparation, storage
or other farm use. A processing facility or establishment must comply with all
applicable siting standards, but the standards may not be applied in a manner
that prohibits the siting of the processing facility or establishment. A county
may not approve any division of a lot or parcel that separates a processing
facility or establishment from the farm operation on which it is located.
   (B)   A facility for the primary processing of forest products shall not
seriously interfere with accepted farming practices and shall be compatible
with farm uses, as defined in §
156.003. Such facility may be approved for a one-year period that is renewable
and is intended to be only portable or temporary in nature. For the purpose of
this division (B), the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FOREST PRODUCTS. Timber grown upon a tract where the primary processing
facility is located.
      PRIMARY PROCESSING OF A FOREST PRODUCT. The use of a portable chipper or
stud mill or other similar methods of initial treatment of a forest product in
order to enable its shipment to market.
   (C)   The following are requirements to qualify for a relative farm help
dwelling.
      (1)   A dwelling shall be occupied by relatives whose assistance in the
management and farm use of the existing commercial farming operation is
required by the farm operator. However, farming of a marijuana crop may not be
used to demonstrate compliance with the approval criteria for a relative farm
help dwelling. The farm operator shall continue to play the predominant role in
the management and farm use of the farm.
      (2)   A relative farm help dwelling must be located on the same lot or
parcel as the dwelling of the farm operator and must be on real property used
for farm use.
   (D)   Dog training classes or testing trials conducted outdoors, or in farm
buildings that existed on January 1, 2013, are limited as follows:
      (1)   The number of dogs participating in training does not exceed ten
per training class and the number of training classes to be held on-site does
not exceed six per day; and
      (2)   The number of dogs participating in a testing trial does not exceed
60, and the number of testing trials to be conducted on-site does not exceed
four per calendar year.
   (E)   (1)   A farm stand may be approved if:
         (a)   The structures are designed and used for sale of farm crops and
livestock grown on the farm operation, or grown on the farm operation and other
farm operations in the local agricultural area, including the sale of retail
incidental items and fee-based activity to promote the sale of farm crops or
livestock sold at the farm stand if the annual sales of the incidental items
and fees from promotional activity do not make up more than 25% of the total
annual sales of the farm stand; and
         (b)   The farm stand does not include structures designed for
occupancy as a residence or for activities other than the sale of farm crops
and livestock and does not include structures for banquets, public gatherings
or public entertainment.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (E), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         FARM CROPS OR LIVESTOCK. Includes both fresh and processed farm crops
and livestock grown on the farm operation, or grown on the farm operation and
other farm operations in the local agricultural area.
         LOCAL AGRICULTURAL AREA. Includes Oregon or an adjacent county in
Washington, Idaho, Nevada or California that borders the Oregon county in which
the farm stand is located.
         PROCESSED CROPS AND LIVESTOCK. Includes jams, syrups, apple cider,
animal products and other similar farm crops and livestock that have been
processed and converted into another product but not prepared food items.
      (3)   A farm stand may not be used for the sale or to promote the sale of
marijuana products or extracts.
      (4)   Farm stand development standards are as follows.
         (a)   Adequate off-street parking will be provided pursuant to the
requirements in §§
156.595 through
156.604.
         (b)   Roadways, driveway aprons, driveways and parking surfaces shall
be surfaces that prevent dust and may include paving, gravel, cinders or bark/
wood chips.
         (c)   All vehicle maneuvering will be conducted on site. No vehicle
backing or maneuvering shall occur within adjacent roads, streets or highways.
         (d)   No farm stand building or parking is permitted within the right-
of-way.
         (e)   Approval is required from County Public Works regarding adequate
egress and access. All egress and access points shall be clearly marked.
         (f)   Vision clearance areas at street intersections must be clear of
obstruction, consistent with the requirements in §§
156.595 through
156.604.
         (g)   All outdoor light fixtures shall be directed downward and have
full cutoff and full shielding to preserve views of the night sky and to
minimize excessive light spillover onto adjacent properties, roads and
highways.
         (h)   Signs are permitted where consistent with the requirements of §§
156.595 through
156.604.
      (5)   Permit approval is subject to compliance with the established
sanitation requirements, the Department of Agriculture requirements and the
development standards of this zone.
   (F)   Commercial activities in conjunction with farm use may be approved
when:
      (1)   The commercial activity is either exclusively or primarily a
customer or supplier of farm products;
      (2)   The commercial activity is limited to providing products and
services essential to the practice of agriculture by surrounding agricultural
operations that are sufficiently important to justify the resulting loss of
agricultural land to the commercial activity; or
      (3)   The commercial activity significantly enhances the farming
enterprises of the local agricultural community, of which the land housing the
commercial activity is a part. Retail sales of products or services to the
general public that take place on a parcel or tract that is different from the
parcel or tract on which agricultural product is processed, such as a tasting
room with no on-site winery, are not commercial activities in conjunction with
farm use.
   (G)   A personal-use airport, as used in this section, prohibits aircraft
other than those owned or controlled by the owner of the airstrip. Exceptions
to the activities allowed under this division (G) may be granted through waiver
action by the State Department of Aviation in specific instances. A personal-
use airport lawfully existing as of September 13, 1975, shall continue to be
allowed subject to any applicable rules of the State Department of Aviation.
   (H)   Agricultural process or industrial process water or biosolids, or the
on-site treatment of septage prior to the land application of biosolids for
agricultural, horticultural or silvicultural production or for irrigation in
connection with a use allowed in an EFU Zone is subject to the issuance of a
license, permit or other approval by the Department of Environmental Quality
under O.R.S. 454.695, 459.205, 468B.050, 468B.053 or 468B.055, or in compliance
with rules adopted under O.R.S. 468B.095, and with the requirements of O.R.S.
215.246, 215.247, 215.249 and 215.251. For the purposes of this section, on-
site treatment of septage prior to the land application of biosolids is limited
to the treatment using treatment facilities that are portable, temporary and
transportable by truck trailer, as defined in O.R.S. 801.580, during a period
of time within which land application of biosolids is authorized under the
license, permit or other approval.
   (I)   Utility facility service lines are utility lines and accessory
facilities or structures that end at the point where the utility service is
received by the customer and that are located on one or more of the following:
      (1)   A public right-of-way;
      (2)   Land immediately adjacent to a public right-of-way, provided the
written consent of all adjacent property owners has been obtained; or
      (3)   The property to be served by the utility.
   (J)   (1)   A utility facility is necessary for public service if the
facility must be sited in the Exclusive Farm Use Zone in order to provide the
service.
         (a)   To demonstrate that a utility facility is necessary, an
applicant must show that reasonable alternatives have been considered and that
the facility must be sited in an Exclusive Farm Use Zone due to one or more of
the following factors:
            1.   Technical and engineering feasibility;
            2.   The proposed facility is locationally-dependent. A utility
facility is locationally-dependent if it must cross land in one or more areas
zoned for exclusive farm use in order to achieve a reasonably direct route or
to meet unique geographical needs that cannot be satisfied on other lands;
            3.   Lack of available urban and non-resource lands;
            4.   Availability of existing rights-of-way;
            5.   Public health and safety; and
            6.   Other requirements of state and federal agencies.
         (b)   Costs associated with any of the factors listed in division (J)
(1)(a) above may be considered, but cost alone may not be the only
consideration in determining that a utility facility is necessary for public
service. Land costs shall not be included when considering alternative
locations for substantially similar utility facilities and the siting of
utility facilities that are not substantially similar.
         (c)   The owner of a utility facility approved under division (J)(1)
above shall be responsible for restoring, as nearly as possible, to its former
condition any agricultural land and associated improvements that are damaged or
otherwise disturbed by the siting, maintenance, repair or reconstruction of the
facility. Nothing in this division (J)(1)(c) shall prevent the owner of the
utility facility from requiring a bond or other security from a contractor or
otherwise imposing on a contractor the responsibility for restoration.
         (d)   The county shall impose clear and objective conditions on an
application for utility facility siting to mitigate and minimize the impacts of
the proposed facility, if any, on surrounding lands devoted to farm use in
order to prevent a significant change in accepted farm practices or a
significant increase in the cost of farm practices on surrounding farmlands.
         (e)   Utility facilities necessary for public service may include on-
site and off-site facilities for temporary workforce housing for workers
constructing a utility facility. Such facilities must be removed or converted
to an allowed use under the EFU Zone or other statute or rule when project
construction is complete. Off-site facilities allowed under this division (J)
(1)(e) are subject to §§
156.620 through
156.630. Temporary workforce housing facilities not included in the initial
approval may be considered through a minor amendment request. A minor amendment
request shall have no effect on the original approval.
         (f)   In addition to the provisions of divisions (J)(1)(a) through (J)
(1)(d) above, the establishment or extension of a sewer system as defined by
O.A.R. 660-011-0060(1)(f) shall be subject to the provisions of O.A.R. 660-011-
0060.
         (g)   The provisions of this division (J)(1) do not apply to
interstate natural gas pipelines and associated facilities authorized by and
subject to regulation by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
      (2)   An associated transmission line is necessary for public service
upon demonstration that the associated transmission line meets either the
following requirements of divisions (J)(2)(a) or (J)(2)(b) below.
         (a)   An applicant demonstrates that the entire route of the
associated transmission line meets at least one of the following requirements:
            1.   The associated transmission line is not located on high-value
farmland, as defined in O.R.S. 195.300, or on arable land;
            2.   The associated transmission line is co-located with an
existing transmission line;
            3.   The associated transmission line parallels an existing
transmission line corridor with the minimum separation necessary for safety; or
            4.   The associated transmission line is located within an existing
right-of-way for a linear facility, such as a transmission line, road or
railroad that is located above the surface of the ground.
         (b)   After an evaluation of reasonable alternatives, an applicant
demonstrates that the entire route of the associated transmission line meets,
subject to divisions (J)(2)(c) and (J)(2)(d) below, two or more of the
following criteria:
            1.   Technical and engineering feasibility;
            2.   The associated transmission line is locationally-dependent
because the associated transmission line must cross high-value farmland, as
defined in O.R.S. 195.300, or arable land to achieve a reasonably direct route
or to meet unique geographical needs that cannot be satisfied on other lands;
            3.   Lack of an available existing right-of-way for a linear
facility, such as a transmission line, road or railroad, that is located above
the surface of the ground;
            4.   Public health and safety; and/or
            5.   Other requirements of state or federal agencies.
         (c)   As pertains to division (J)(2)(b) above, the applicant shall
demonstrate how the applicant will mitigate and minimize the impacts, if any,
of the associated transmission line on surrounding lands devoted to farm use in
order to prevent a significant change in accepted farm practices or a
significant increase in the cost of farm practices on the surrounding farmland.
         (d)   The county may consider costs associated with any of the factors
listed in division (J)(2)(b) above, but consideration of cost may not be the
only consideration in determining whether the associated transmission line is
necessary for public service.
   (K)   Composting operations and facilities shall meet the performance and
permitting requirements of the Department of Environmental Quality under O.A.R.
340-093-0050 and 340-096-0060. Buildings and facilities used in conjunction
with the composting operation shall only be those required for the operation of
the subject facility. On-site sales shall be limited to bulk loads of at least
one unit (seven and one-half cubic yards) in size that are transported in one
vehicle. This use is not permitted on high value farmland except that existing
facilities on high value farmland may be expanded subject to division (S)
below.
      (1)   Compost facility operators must prepare, implement and maintain a
site-specific Odor Minimization Plan that:
         (a)   Meets the requirements of O.A.R. 340-096-0150;
         (b)   Identifies the distance of the proposed operation to the nearest
Residential Zone;
         (c)   Includes a complaint response protocol;
         (d)   Is submitted to the DEQ with the required permit application;
and
         (e)   May be subject to annual review by the county to determine if
any revisions are necessary.
      (2)   Compost operations subject to division (K)(1) above include:
         (a)   A new disposal site for composting that sells, or offers for
sale, resulting product; or
         (b)   An existing disposal site for composting that sells or offers
for sale resulting product that:
            1.   Accepts as feedstock nonvegetative materials, including dead
animals, meat, dairy products and mixed food waste (type three feedstock); or
            2.   Increases the permitted annual tonnage of feedstock used by
the disposal site by an amount that requires a new land use approval.
   (L)   Buildings and facilities associated with a site for the takeoff and
landing of model aircraft shall not be more than 500 square feet in floor area
or placed on a permanent foundation unless the building or facility preexisted
the use approved under this section. The site shall not include an aggregate
surface or hard surface area unless the surface preexisted the use approved
under this section. An owner of property used for the purpose authorized in
this section may charge a person operating the use on the property rent for the
property. An operator may charge users of the property a fee that does not
exceed the operator’s cost to maintain the property, buildings and facilities.
For the purpose of this section, MODEL AIRCRAFT means a small-scale version of
an airplane, glider, helicopter, dirigible or balloon that is used or intended
to be used for flight and is controlled by radio, lines or design by a person
on the ground.
   (M)   A living history museum shall be related to resource based activities
and shall be owned and operated by a governmental agency or a local historical
society. A living history museum may include limited commercial activities and
facilities that are directly related to the use and enjoyment of the museum and
located within authentic buildings of the depicted historic period or the
museum administration building, if areas other than an Exclusive Farm Use Zone
cannot accommodate the museum and related activities or if the museum
administration buildings and parking lot are located within one-quarter mile of
an urban growth boundary. For the purpose of this division (M), LOCAL
HISTORICAL SOCIETY means the local historical society, recognized as such by
the county governing body and organized under O.R.S. Chapter 65.
   (N)   Public parks may include:
      (1)   All outdoor recreation uses allowed under O.R.S. 215.213 or
215.283;
      (2)   The following uses, if authorized in a local or park master plan
that is adopted as part of the local Comprehensive Plan or, if authorized in a
State Park Master Plan that is adopted by OPRD:
         (a)   Campground areas: recreational vehicle sites; tent sites; camper
cabins; yurts; teepees; covered wagons; group shelters; campfire program areas;
and camp stores;
         (b)   Day use areas: picnic shelters; barbecue areas; swimming areas
(not swimming pools); open play fields; and play structures;
         (c)   Recreational trails: walking, hiking, biking, horse or motorized
off-road vehicle trails; and trail staging areas;
         (d)   Boating and fishing facilities: launch ramps and landings;
docks; moorage facilities; small boat storage; boating fuel stations; fish
cleaning stations; and boat sewage pump-out stations;
         (e)   Amenities related to park use intended only for park visitors
and employees: laundry facilities; recreation shops; snack shops not exceeding
1,500 square feet of floor area;
         (f)   Support facilities serving only the park lands wherein the
facility is located: water supply facilities; sewage collection and treatment
facilities; stormwater management facilities; electrical and communication
facilities; restrooms and showers; recycling and trash collection facilities;
registration buildings; roads and bridges; and parking areas and walkways;
         (g)   Park maintenance and management facilities located within a
park: maintenance shops and yards; fuel stations for park vehicles; storage for
park equipment and supplies; administrative offices; and staff lodging; and
         (h)   Natural and cultural resource interpretative, educational and
informational facilities in state parks: interpretative centers; information/
orientation centers; self-supporting interpretative and informational kiosks;
natural history or cultural resource museums; natural history or cultural
educational facilities; reconstructed historic structures for cultural resource
interpretation; and retail stores not exceeding 1,500 square feet for sale of
books and other materials that support park resource interpretation and
education.
      (3)   Visitor lodging and retreat facilities if authorized in a State
Park Master Plan that is adopted by OPRD: historic lodges; houses or inns; and
the following associated uses in a state park retreat area only:
         (a)   Meeting halls not exceeding 2,000 square feet of floor area; and
         (b)   Dining halls (not restaurants).
   (O)   Private campgrounds are subject to the following.
      (1)   Except on a lot or parcel contiguous to a lake or reservoir,
private campgrounds shall not be allowed within three miles of an urban growth
boundary unless an exception is approved pursuant to O.R.S. 197.732 and O.A.R.
Chapter 660, division 4. A campground shall be designed and integrated into the
rural agricultural and forest environment in a manner that protects the natural
amenities of the site and provides buffers of existing native trees and
vegetation or other natural features between campsites. Campgrounds shall not
include intensively developed recreational uses such as swimming pools, tennis
courts, retail stores or gas stations. Overnight, temporary use in the same
campground by a camper or camper’s vehicle shall not exceed a total of 30 days
during any consecutive six-month period.
      (2)   Campsites may be occupied by a tent, travel trailer, yurt or
recreational vehicle. Separate sewer, water or electric service hook-ups shall
not be provided to individual camp sites except that electrical service may be
provided to yurts allowed by division (O)(3) below.
      (3)   A private campground may provide yurts for overnight camping. No
more than one-third or a maximum of ten campsites, whichever is smaller, may
include a yurt. The yurt shall be located on the ground or on a wood floor with
no permanent foundation.
   (P)   Accessory uses provided as part of a golf course shall be limited
consistent with the following standards.
      (1)   An accessory use to a golf course is a facility or improvement that
is incidental to the operation of the golf course and is either necessary for
the operation and maintenance of the golf course or that provides goods or
services customarily provided to golfers at a golf course. An accessory use or
activity does not serve the needs of the non-golfing public. Accessory uses to
a golf course may include: parking; maintenance buildings; cart storage and
repair; practice range or driving range; clubhouse; restrooms; lockers and
showers; food and beverage service; pro shop; a practice or beginners course as
part of an 18 hole or larger golf course; or golf tournament. Accessory uses to
a golf course do not include: sporting facilities unrelated to golfing such as
tennis courts, swimming pools and weight rooms; wholesale or retail operations
oriented to the non-golfing public; or housing.
      (2)   Accessory uses shall be limited in size and orientation on the site
to serve the needs of persons and their guests who patronize the golf course to
golf. An accessory use that provides commercial services (e.g., pro shops and
the like) shall be located in the clubhouse rather than in separate buildings.
      (3)   Accessory uses may include one or more food and beverage service
facilities in addition to food and beverage service facilities located in a
clubhouse. Food and beverage service facilities must be part of and incidental
to the operation of the golf course and must be limited in size and orientation
on the site to serve only the needs of persons who patronize the golf course
and their guests. Accessory food and beverage service facilities shall not be
designed for or include structures for banquets, public gatherings or public
entertainment.
   (Q)   Three-mile setback uses are as follows.
      (1)   No enclosed structure with a design capacity greater than 100
people, or group of structures with a total design capacity of greater than 100
people, shall be approved in connection with the use within three miles of an
urban growth boundary, unless an exception is approved pursuant to O.R.S.
197.732 and O.A.R. Chapter 660, division 4, or unless the structure is
described in a master plan adopted under the provisions of O.A.R. Chapter 660,
division 34.
      (2)   Any enclosed structures or group of enclosed structures described
in division (Q)(1) above within a tract must be separated by at least one-half
mile. For the purpose of this division (Q), TRACT means a tract that is in
existence as of June 17, 2010.
      (3)   Existing facilities wholly within a Farm Use Zone may be
maintained, enhanced or expanded on the same tract, subject to other
requirements of law, but enclosed existing structures within a Farm Use Zone
within three miles of an urban growth boundary may not be expanded beyond the
requirements of this chapter.
   (R)   Single-family dwelling deeds shall conform to the following. The
landowner shall sign and record in the deed records for the county a document
binding the landowner, and the landowner’s successors in interest, prohibiting
them from pursuing a claim for relief or cause of action alleging injury from
farming or forest practices for which no action or claim is allowed under
O.R.S. 30.936 or 30.937.
   (S)   Expansion standards are as follows. Existing facilities wholly within
a Farm Use Zone may be maintained, enhanced or expanded on the same tract,
subject to other requirements of law. An existing course may be expanded
consistent with the requirements of §§
156.039(Z) and
156.620 through
156.630.
   (T)   Confined animal feeding operations. A confined animal feeding
operation may exist within a farm use zone if:
      (1)   A land use compatibility statement must be issued for the site; or
      (2)   A new large confined animal feeding operation, as defined by the
Oregon Department of Agriculture, is to include a setback or buffer, composed
of a natural or created vegetative barrier, berm or terrain, if the parcel of
land on which the new large confined animal feeding operation would be located
is adjacent to a parcel on which:
         (a)   A residential structure is lawfully sited; or
         (b)   A structure that was lawfully sited when constructed, but no
longer conforms with or is allowed under new or changed land use requirements,
is sited.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03,
passed 4-3-2024; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.041 DWELLINGS CUSTOMARILY PROVIDED IN CONJUNCTION WITH FARM USE.
   (A)   Large tract standards. On land not identified as high-value farmland
as defined in §
156.003, a dwelling may be considered customarily provided in conjunction with
farm use if:
      (1)   The parcel on which the dwelling will be located is at least:
         (a)   One hundred and sixty acres and not designated rangeland; or
         (b)   Three hundred and twenty acres and designated rangeland.
      (2)   The subject tract is currently employed for farm use;
      (3)   The dwelling will be occupied by a person or persons who will be
principally engaged in the farm use of the subject tract, such as planting,
harvesting, marketing or caring for livestock, at a commercial scale; and
      (4)   Except for seasonal farmworker housing approved prior to the year
2001, there is no other dwelling on the subject tract.
   (B)   Farm income standards (non-high value). On land not identified as
high-value farmland, a dwelling may be considered customarily provided in
conjunction with farm use if:
      (1)   The subject tract is currently employed for the farm use on which,
in each of the last two years or three of the last five years, or in an average
of three of the last five years, the farm operator earned the lower of the
following:
         (a)   At least $40,000 in gross annual income from the sale of farm
products; or
         (b)   Gross annual income of at least the midpoint of the median
income range of gross annual sales for farms in the county with gross annual
sales of $10,000 or more according to the 1992 State Census of Agriculture.
      (2)   Except for seasonal farmworker housing approved prior to 2001,
there is no other dwelling on lands designated for exclusive farm use pursuant
to O.R.S. Chapter 215 owned by the farm or ranch operator or on the farm or
ranch operation;
      (3)   The dwelling will be occupied by a person or persons who produced
the commodities that grossed the income in division (B)(1) above; and
      (4)   In determining the gross income required by division (B)(1) above:
         (a)   The cost of purchased livestock shall be deducted from the total
gross income attributed to the farm or ranch operation;
         (b)   Only gross income from land owned, not leased or rented, shall
be counted; and
         (c)   Gross farm income earned from a lot or parcel that has been used
previously to qualify another lot or parcel for the construction or siting of a
primary farm dwelling may not be used.
   (C)   Farm income standards (high-value). On land identified as high-value
farmland, a dwelling may be considered customarily provided in conjunction with
farm use if:
      (1)   The subject tract is currently employed for the farm use on which
the farm operator earned at least $80,000 in gross annual income from the sale
of farm products in each of the last two years or three of the last five years,
or in an average of three of the last five years;
      (2)   Except for seasonal farmworker housing approved prior to 2001,
there is no other dwelling on lands designated for exclusive farm use owned by
the farm or ranch operator or on the farm or ranch operation;
      (3)   The dwelling will be occupied by a person or persons who produced
the commodities that grossed the income in division (C)(1) above; and
      (4)   In determining the gross income required by division (C)(1) above:
         (a)   The cost of purchased livestock shall be deducted from the total
gross income attributed to the farm or ranch operation;
         (b)   Only gross income from land owned, not leased or rented, shall
be counted; and
         (c)   Gross farm income earned from a lot or parcel that has been used
previously to qualify another lot or parcel for the construction or siting of a
primary farm dwelling may not be used.
   (D)   Farm capability standards.
      (1)   On land not identified as high-value farmland, a dwelling may be
considered customarily provided in conjunction with farm use if:
         (a)   The subject tract is at least as large as the median size of
those commercial farm or ranch tracts capable of generating at least $10,000 in
annual gross sales that are located within a study area that includes all
tracts wholly or partially within one mile from the perimeter of the subject
tract;
         (b)   The subject tract is capable of producing at least the median
level of annual gross sales of county indicator crops as the same commercial
farm or ranch tracts used to calculate the tract size in division (D)(1)(a)
above;
         (c)   The subject tract is currently employed for a farm use at a
level capable of producing the annual gross sales required in division (D)(1)
(a) above;
         (d)   The subject lot or parcel on which the dwelling is proposed is
not less than 20 acres;
         (e)   Except for seasonal farmworker housing approved prior to 2001,
there is no other dwelling on the subject tract;
         (f)   The dwelling will be occupied by a person or persons who will be
principally engaged in the farm use of the subject tract, such as planting,
harvesting, marketing or caring for livestock, at a commercial scale; and
         (g)   If no farm use has been established at the time of application,
land use approval shall be subject to a condition that no building permit may
be issued prior to the establishment of the farm use required by division (D)
(1)(c) above.
      (2)   In determining the gross sales capability required by division (D)
(1)(c) above:
         (a)   The actual or potential cost of purchased livestock shall be
deducted from the total gross sales attributed to the farm or ranch tract;
         (b)   Only actual or potential sales from land owned, not leased or
rented, shall be counted; and
         (c)   Actual or potential gross farm sales earned from a lot or parcel
that has been used previously to qualify another lot or parcel for the
construction or siting of a primary farm dwelling may not be used.
      (3)   In order to identify the commercial farm or ranch tracts to be used
in division (D)(1)(a) above, the potential gross sales capability of each tract
in the study area, including the subject tract, must be determined, using the
gross sales figures prepared by the county pursuant to O.A.R. 660-033-0135(2)
(c).
   (E)   Additional farm income standards.
      (1)   For the purpose of divisions (B) or (C) above, noncontiguous lots
or parcels zoned for farm use in the same county or contiguous counties may be
used to meet the gross income requirements. Lots or parcels in eastern or
western parts of the state may not be used to qualify a dwelling in the other
part of the state.
      (2)   Prior to the final approval for a dwelling authorized by divisions
(B) and (C) above that requires one or more contiguous or non-contiguous lots
or parcels of a farm or ranch operation to comply with the gross farm income
requirements, the applicant shall complete and record with the County Clerk the
covenants, conditions and restrictions form provided by the county (Exhibit A
to O.A.R. Chapter 660 division 33). The covenants, conditions and restrictions
shall be recorded for each lot or parcel subject to the application for the
primary farm dwelling and shall preclude:
         (a)   All future rights to construct a dwelling except for accessory
farm dwellings, relative farm assistance dwellings, temporary hardship
dwellings or replacement dwellings allowed by O.R.S. Chapter 215; and
         (b)   The use of any gross farm income earned on the lots or parcels
to qualify another lot or parcel for a primary farm dwelling.
      (3)   The covenants, conditions and restrictions are irrevocable, unless
a statement of release is signed by an authorized representative of the county
or counties where the property subject to the covenants, conditions and
restrictions is located.
   (F)   Commercial dairy farm standards. A dwelling may be considered
customarily provided in conjunction with a commercial dairy farm and capable of
earning the gross annual income requirements by divisions (B) or (C) above,
subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   The subject tract will be employed as a commercial dairy as defined
in division (F)(7) below;
      (2)   The dwelling is sited on the same lot or parcel as the buildings
required by the commercial dairy;
      (3)   Except for seasonal farmworker housing approved prior to 2001,
there is no other dwelling on the subject tract;
      (4)   The dwelling will be occupied by a person or persons who will be
principally engaged in the operation of the commercial dairy farm, such as the
feeding, milking or pasturing of the dairy animals or other farm use activities
necessary to the operation of the commercial dairy farm;
      (5)   The building permits, if required, have been issued for and
construction has begun for the buildings and animal waste facilities required
for a commercial dairy farm;
      (6)   The State Department of Agriculture has approved the following:
         (a)   A permit for a confined animal feeding operation under O.R.S.
468B.050 and 468B.200 through 468B.230; and
         (b)   A producer license for the sale of dairy products under O.R.S.
621.072.
      (7)   For the purpose of this section, COMMERCIAL DAIRY FARM is a dairy
operation that owns a sufficient number of producing dairy animals capable of
earning the gross annual income required by divisions (B) and (C) above,
whichever is applicable, from the sale of fluid milk.
   (G)   Relocated farm operations. A dwelling may be considered customarily
provided in conjunction with farm use if:
      (1)   Within the previous two years, the applicant owned and operated a
different farm or ranch operation that earned the gross farm income in each of
the last five years or four of the last seven years as required by divisions
(B) or (C) above, whichever is applicable;
      (2)   The subject lot or parcel on which the dwelling will be located is:
         (a)   Currently employed for the farm use that produced in each of the
last two years or three of the last five years, or in an average of three of
the last five years the gross farm income required by divisions (B) or (C)
above, whichever is applicable; and
         (b)   At least the size of the applicable minimum lot size under §
156.046;
      (3)   Except for seasonal farmworker housing approved prior to 2001,
there is no other dwelling on the subject tract;
      (4)   The dwelling will be occupied by a person or persons who produced
the commodities that grossed the income in division (G)(1) above; and
      (5)   In determining the gross income required by divisions (G)(1) and
(G)(2) above, the cost of purchased livestock shall be deducted from the total
gross income attributed to the tract and only gross income from land owned, not
leased or rented, shall be counted.
   (H)   Marijuana farming. Farming of a marijuana crop and the gross sales
derived from selling a marijuana crop may not be used to demonstrate compliance
with the approval criteria for a primary farm dwelling.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.042 ACCESSORY FARM DWELLINGS.
   (A)   Accessory farm dwellings may be considered customarily provided in
conjunction with farm use if each accessory farm dwelling meets all the
following requirements.
      (1)   The accessory farm dwelling will be occupied by a person or persons
who will be principally engaged in the farm use of the land and whose seasonal
or year-round assistance in the management of the farm use, such as planting,
harvesting, marketing or caring for livestock, is or will be required by the
farm operator.
      (2)   The accessory farm dwelling will be located:
         (a)   On the same lot or parcel as the primary farm dwelling;
         (b)   On the same tract as the primary farm dwelling when the lot or
parcel on which the accessory farm dwelling will be sited is consolidated into
a single parcel with all other contiguous lots and parcels in the tract;
         (c)   On a lot or parcel on which the primary farm dwelling is not
located, when the accessory farm dwelling is limited to only a manufactured
dwelling with a deed restriction. The deed restriction shall be filed with the
County Clerk and require the manufactured dwelling to be removed when the lot
or parcel is conveyed to another party. The manufactured dwelling may remain if
it is reapproved under these provisions;
         (d)   On any lot or parcel, when the accessory farm dwelling is
limited to only attached multi-unit residential structures allowed by the
applicable State Building Code or similar types of farmworker housing as that
existing on farm or ranch operations registered with the State Department of
Consumer and Business Services, Occupational Safety and Health Division under
O.R.S. 658.750. A county shall require all accessory farm dwellings approved
under this division (A)(2) to be removed, demolished or converted to a
nonresidential use when farmworker housing is no longer required. For the
purpose of this division (A)(2)(d), FARMWORKER HOUSING shall have the meaning
set forth in O.R.S. 215.278 and not the meaning in O.R.S. 315.163; or
         (e)   On a lot or parcel on which the primary farm dwelling is not
located, when the accessory farm dwelling is located on a lot or parcel at
least the size of the applicable minimum lot size under O.R.S. 215.780 and the
lot or parcel complies with the gross farm income requirements in O.A.R. 660-
033-0135(3) or (4), whichever is applicable.
      (3)   There is no other dwelling on the lands designated for exclusive
farm use owned by the farm operator that is vacant or currently occupied by
persons not working on the subject farm or ranch and that could reasonably be
used as an accessory farm dwelling.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements in division (A) above, the primary
farm dwelling to which the proposed dwelling would be accessory, meets one of
the following:
      (1)   On land not identified as high-value farmland, the primary farm
dwelling is located on a farm or ranch operation that is currently employed for
farm use, as defined in O.R.S. 215.203, on which, in each of the last two years
or three of the last five years or in an average of three of the last five
years, the farm operator earned the lower of the following:
         (a)   At least $40,000 in gross annual income from the sale of farm
products. In determining the gross income, the cost of purchased livestock
shall be deducted from the total gross income attributed to the tract; or
         (b)   Gross annual income of at least the midpoint of the median
income range of gross annual sales for farms in the county with gross annual
sales of $10,000 or more according to the 1992 State Census of Agriculture. In
determining the gross income, the cost of purchased livestock shall be deducted
from the total gross income attributed to the tract;
      (2)   On land identified as high-value farmland, the primary farm
dwelling is located on a farm or ranch operation that is currently employed for
farm use, as defined in O.R.S. 215.203, on which the farm operator earned at
least $80,000 in gross annual income from the sale of farm products in each of
the last two years or three of the last five years or in an average of three of
the last five years. In determining the gross income, the cost of purchased
livestock shall be deducted from the total gross income attributed to the
tract; or
      (3)   It is located on a commercial dairy farm as defined in §
156.003 and:
         (a)   The building permits, if required, have been issued and
construction has begun or been completed for the buildings and animal waste
facilities required for a commercial dairy farm;
         (b)   The State Department of Agriculture has approved a permit for a
confined animal feeding operation under O.R.S. 468B.050 and 468B.200 through
468B.230; and
         (c)   A producer license for the sale of dairy products under O.R.S.
621.072.
   (C)   No division of a lot or parcel for an accessory farm dwelling shall be
approved pursuant to this section. If it is determined that an accessory farm
dwelling satisfies the requirements of this chapter, a parcel may be created
consistent with the minimum parcel size requirements in §
156.048(A).
   (D)   An accessory farm dwelling approved pursuant to this section cannot
later be used to satisfy the requirements for a dwelling not provided in
conjunction with farm use pursuant to §
156.038(O).
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, ACCESSORY FARM DWELLING includes all
types of residential structures allowed by the applicable State Building Code.
   (F)   Farming of a marijuana crop shall not be used to demonstrate
compliance with the approval criteria for an accessory farm dwelling.
   (G)   No accessory farm dwelling unit may be occupied by a relative of the
owner or operator of the farmworker housing. For the purpose of this division
(G), RELATIVE means a spouse of the owner or operator or an ancestor, lineal
descendant or whole or half sibling of the owner or operator or the spouse of
the owner or operator.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.043 LOT OF RECORD DWELLINGS.
   (A)   A lot of record dwelling may be approved on a pre-existing lot or
parcel if:
      (1)   The lot or parcel on which the dwelling will be sited was lawfully
created and was acquired and owned continuously by the present owner as defined
in division (E) below:
         (a)   Since prior to January 1, 1985; or
         (b)   By devise or by intestate succession from a person who acquired
and had owned continuously the lot or parcel since prior to January 1, 1985.
      (2)   The tract on which the dwelling will be sited does not include a
dwelling;
      (3)   The lot or parcel on which the dwelling will be sited was part of a
tract on November 4, 1993, no dwelling exists on another lot or parcel that was
part of that tract;
      (4)   The proposed dwelling is not prohibited by and will comply with the
requirements of the acknowledged Comprehensive Plan and land use regulations
and other provisions of law;
      (5)   The lot or parcel on which the dwelling will be sited is not high-
value farmland except as provided in divisions (C) and (D) below; and
      (6)   When the lot or parcel on which the dwelling will be sited lies
within an area designated in the Comprehensive Plan as habitat of big game, the
siting of the dwelling is consistent with the limitations on density upon which
the acknowledged Comprehensive Plan and land use regulations intended to
protect the habitat are based.
   (B)   When the lot or parcel on which the dwelling will be sited is part of
a tract, the remaining portions of the tract are consolidated into a single lot
or parcel when the dwelling is allowed.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the requirements of division (A)(5) above, a single-
family dwelling may be sited on high-value farmland if:
      (1)   It meets the other requirements of divisions (A) and (B) above;
      (2)   The lot or parcel is protected as high-value farmland as defined in
§
156.003; and
      (3)   The Planning Director determines that:
         (a)   The lot or parcel cannot practicably be managed for farm use, by
itself or in conjunction with other land, due to extraordinary circumstances
inherent in the land or its physical setting that do not apply generally to
other land in the vicinity:
            1.   For the purposes of this section, this criterion asks whether
the subject lot or parcel can be physically put to farm use without undue
hardship or difficulty because of extraordinary circumstances inherent in the
land or its physical setting. Neither size alone nor a parcel’s limited
economic potential demonstrates that a lot or parcel cannot be practicably
managed for farm use;
            2.   Examples of extraordinary circumstances inherent in the land
or its physical setting include very steep slopes, deep ravines, rivers,
streams, roads, railroad or utility lines or other similar natural or physical
barriers that by themselves or in combination separate the subject lot or
parcel from adjacent agricultural land and prevent it from being practicably
managed for farm use by itself or together with adjacent or nearby farms; and
            3.   A lot or parcel that has been put to farm use despite the
proximity of a natural barrier or since the placement of a physical barrier
shall be presumed manageable for farm use.
         (b)   The dwelling will comply with the provisions of §§
156.620 through
156.630; and
         (c)   The dwelling will not materially alter the stability of the
overall land use pattern in the area by applying the standards set forth in §
156.044(A).
   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the requirements of division (A)(5) above, a
single-family dwelling may be sited on high-value farmland if:
         (a)   It meets the other requirements of divisions (A) and (B) above;
         (b)   The tract on which the dwelling will be sited is not high-value
farmland, as defined in §
156.003 and 21 acres or less in size;
         (c)   The tract is bordered on at least 67% of its perimeter by tracts
that are smaller than 21 acres, and at least two such tracts had dwellings on
January 1, 1993;
         (d)   The tract is not a flag lot and is bordered on at least 25% of
its perimeter by tracts that are smaller than 21 acres, and at least four
dwellings existed on January 1, 1993, within one-quarter mile of the center of
the subject tract. Up to two of the four dwellings may lie within an urban
growth boundary, but only if the subject tract abuts an urban growth boundary;
or
         (e)   The tract is a flag lot and is bordered on at least 25% of its
perimeter by tracts that are smaller than 21 acres, and at least four dwellings
existed on January 1, 1993, within one-quarter mile of the center of the
subject tract and on the same side of the public road that provides access to
the subject tract. The governing body of a county must interpret the center of
the subject tract as the geographic center of the flag lot if the applicant
makes a written request for that interpretation and that interpretation does
not cause the center to be located outside the flag lot. Up to two of the four
dwellings may lie within an urban growth boundary, but only if the subject
tract abuts an urban growth boundary.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (D), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         FLAG LOT. A tract containing a narrow strip or panhandle of land
providing access from the public road to the rest of the tract.
         GEOGRAPHIC CENTER OF THE FLAG LOT. The point of intersection of two
perpendicular lines of which the first line crosses the midpoint of the longest
side of a flag lot at a 90 degree angle to the side and the second line crosses
the midpoint of the longest adjacent side of the flag lot.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, OWNER includes the wife, husband,
son, daughter, mother, father, brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law,
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece,
nephew, stepparent, stepchild, grandparent or grandchild of the owner or a
business entity owned by any one or a combination of these family members.
   (F)   The County Assessor shall be notified that the governing body intends
to allow the dwelling.
   (G)   An approved single-family dwelling under this section may be
transferred by a person who has qualified under this section to any other
person after the effective date of the land use decision.
   (H)   The county shall provide notice of all applications for lot of record
dwellings on high value farmland to the State Department of Agriculture. Notice
shall be provided in accordance with land use regulations and shall be mailed
at least 20 calendar days prior to the public hearing.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.044 DWELLINGS NOT IN CONJUNCTION WITH FARM USE.
   A non-farm dwelling is subject to the following requirements:
   (A)   The dwelling or activities associated with the dwelling will not force
a significant change in or significantly increase the cost of accepted farming
or forest practices on nearby lands devoted to farm or forest use;
   (B)   Non-farm dwelling suitability standards are as follows.
      (1)   The dwelling, including essential or accessory improvements or
structures, is situated upon a lot or parcel or, in the case of an existing lot
or parcel, upon a portion of a lot or parcel, that is generally unsuitable land
for the production of farm crops and livestock or merchantable tree species,
considering the terrain, adverse soil or land conditions, drainage and
flooding, vegetation, location and size of the tract. A new parcel or portion
of an existing lot or parcel shall not be considered unsuitable solely because
of size or location if it can reasonably be put to farm or forest use in
conjunction with other land.
      (2)   A new parcel or portion of an existing lot or parcel is not
generally unsuitable simply because it is too small to be farmed profitably by
itself. If a parcel or portion of a lot or parcel can be sold, leased, rented
or otherwise managed as a part of a commercial farm or ranch, then it is not
generally unsuitable. A new parcel or portion of an existing lot or parcel is
presumed to be suitable if it is composed predominantly of Class I-VI soils.
Just because a new parcel or portion of an existing lot or parcel is unsuitable
for one farm use does not mean it is not suitable for another farm use.
      (3)   If the lot or parcel is under forest assessment, the dwelling shall
be situated upon generally unsuitable land for the production of merchantable
tree species recognized by the forest practices rules, considering the terrain,
adverse soil or land conditions, drainage and flooding, vegetation, location
and size of the parcel. If a lot or parcel is under forest assessment, the area
is not generally unsuitable simply because it is too small to be managed for
forest production profitably by itself. If a lot or parcel under forest
assessment can be sold, leased, rented or otherwise managed as a part of a
forestry operation, it is not generally unsuitable. If a lot or parcel is under
forest assessment, it is presumed suitable if it is composed predominantly of
soils capable of producing 20 cubic feet of wood fiber per acre per year. If a
lot or parcel is under forest assessment, to be found compatible and not
seriously interfere with forest uses on surrounding land it must not force a
significant change in forest practices or significantly increase the cost of
those practices on the surrounding land.
   (C)   The dwelling will not materially alter the stability of the overall
land use pattern of the area. In determining whether a proposed non-farm
dwelling will alter the stability of the land use pattern in the area, a county
shall consider the cumulative impact of non-farm dwellings on other lots or
parcels in the area similarly situated by applying the standards set forth in
divisions (C)(1) through (C)(3) below. If the application involves the creation
of a new parcel for the non-farm dwelling, a county shall consider whether
creation of the parcel will lead to creation of other non-farm parcels, to the
detriment of agriculture in the area by applying the standards set forth in
divisions (C)(1) through (C)(3) below:
      (1)   Identify a study area for the cumulative impacts analysis. The
study area shall include at least 2,000 acres or a smaller area not less than
1,000 acres, if the smaller area is a distinct agricultural area based on
topography, soil types, land use pattern or the type of farm or ranch
operations or practices that distinguish it from other, adjacent agricultural
areas. Findings shall describe the study area, its boundaries, the location of
the subject parcel within this area, why the selected area is representative of
the land use pattern surrounding the subject parcel and is adequate to conduct
the analysis required by this standard. Lands zoned for rural residential or
other urban or non-resource uses shall not be included in the study area;
      (2)   Identify within the study area the broad types of farm uses
(irrigated or non-irrigated crops, pasture or grazing lands), the number,
location and type of existing dwellings (farm, non-farm, hardship and the like)
and the dwelling development trends since 1993. Determine the potential number
of non-farm/lot-of-record dwellings that could be approved under §
156.043(A) and this section, including identification of predominant soil
classifications, the parcels created prior to January 1, 1993 and the parcels
larger than the minimum lot size that may be divided to create new parcels for
non-farm dwellings under O.R.S. 215.263(4), 215.263(5) and 215.284(4). The
findings shall describe the existing land use pattern of the study area,
including the distribution and arrangement of existing uses and the land use
pattern that could result from approval of the possible non-farm dwellings
under this division (C); and
      (3)   Determine whether approval of the proposed non-farm/lot-of-record
dwellings together with existing non-farm dwellings will materially alter the
stability of the land use pattern in the area. The stability of the land use
pattern will be materially altered if the cumulative effect of existing and
potential non-farm dwellings will make it more difficult for the existing types
of farms in the area to continue operation due to diminished opportunities to
expand, purchase or lease farmland, acquire water rights or diminish the number
of tracts or acreage in farm use in a manner that will destabilize the overall
character of the study area.
   (D)   If a single-family dwelling is established on a lot or parcel as set
forth in §
156.038(O), no additional dwelling may later be sited under the provisions of
this section.
   (E)   Conversion of an existing farm related dwelling to a non-farm
dwelling. An existing farm related dwelling converted to a farmer retirement
dwelling or a non-farm dwelling shall be subject to the following criteria:
      (1)   Meets the non-farm dwelling criteria in this section except
division (B) above; and
      (2)   The provisions of §
156.048 are applicable if a non-farm parcel will be created for the non-farm
dwelling.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.045 ALTERATION, RESTORATION OR REPLACEMENT OF A LAWFULLY-ESTABLISHED
DWELLING.
   (A)   A lawfully established dwelling may be altered, restored or replaced
if, when an application for a permit is submitted, the permitting authority
finds to its satisfaction, based on substantial evidence that:
      (1)   The dwelling to be altered, restored or replaced has, or formerly
had:
         (a)   Intact exterior walls and roof structure;
         (b)   Indoor plumbing consisting of a kitchen sink, toilet and bathing
facilities connected to a sanitary waste disposal system;
         (c)   Interior wiring for interior lights;
         (d)   A heating system; and
         (e)   The dwelling was assessed as a dwelling for purposes of ad
valorem taxation for the previous five property tax years, or, if the dwelling
has existed for less than five years, from that time.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (A)(1)(e) above, if the value of the
dwelling was eliminated as a result of either of the following circumstances,
the dwelling was assessed as a dwelling until such time as the value of the
dwelling was eliminated:
         (a)   The destruction (i.e., by fire or natural hazard) or demolition
in the case of restoration, of the dwelling; or
         (b)   The applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the permitting
authority that the dwelling was improperly removed from the tax roll by a
person other than the current owner. For the purpose of this division (A)(2)
(b), IMPROPERLY REMOVED means that the dwelling has taxable value in its
present state, or had taxable value when the dwelling was first removed from
the tax roll or was destroyed by fire or natural hazard, and the county stopped
assessing the dwelling even though the current or former owner did not request
removal of the dwelling from the tax roll.
   (B)   For replacement of a lawfully established dwelling under §
156.037(H):
      (1)   The dwelling to be replaced must be removed, demolished or
converted to an allowable nonresidential use:
         (a)   Within one year after the date the replacement dwelling is
certified for occupancy pursuant to O.R.S. 455.055;
         (b)   If the dwelling to be replaced is, in the discretion of the
permitting authority, in such a state of disrepair that the structure is unsafe
for occupancy or constitutes an attractive nuisance, on or before a date set by
the permitting authority that is not less than 90 days after the replacement
permit is issued; and
         (c)   If a dwelling is removed by moving it off the subject parcel to
another location, the applicant must obtain approval from the permitting
authority for the new location.
      (2)   The applicant must cause to be recorded in the deed records of the
county a statement that the dwelling to be replaced has been removed,
demolished or converted.
      (3)   As a condition of approval, if the dwelling to be replaced is
located on a portion of the lot or parcel that is not zoned for exclusive farm
use, the applicant shall execute and cause to be recorded in the deed records
of the county in which the property is located a deed restriction prohibiting
the siting of another dwelling on that portion of the lot or parcel. The
restriction imposed is irrevocable unless the County Planning Director, or the
Director’s designee, places a statement of release in the deed records of the
county to the effect that the provisions of O.R.S. 215.283 and 215.291
regarding replacement dwellings have changed to allow the lawful siting of
another dwelling.
   (C)   A replacement dwelling must comply with applicable building codes,
plumbing codes, sanitation codes and other requirements relating to health and
safety or to siting at the time of construction. However, the standards may not
be applied in a manner that prohibits the siting of the replacement dwelling.
      (1)   The siting standards of division (C)(2) below apply when a dwelling
qualifies for replacement because the dwelling:
         (a)   Formerly had the features described in division (A)(1) above;
         (b)   Was removed from the tax roll as described in division (A)(2)
above; or
         (c)   Had a permit that expired as described under division (D)(3)
below.
      (2)   The replacement dwelling must be sited on the same lot or parcel:
         (a)   Using all or part of the footprint of the replaced dwelling or
near a road, ditch, river, property line, forest boundary or another natural
boundary of the lot or parcel; and
         (b)   If possible, for the purpose of minimizing the adverse impacts
on resource use of land in the area, within a concentration or cluster of
structures or within 500 yards of another structure.
      (3)   Replacement dwellings that currently have the features described in
division (A)(1) above and that have been on the tax roll as described in
division (A)(2) above may be sited on any part of the same lot or parcel.
   (D)   A replacement dwelling permit that is issued under §
156.037(H):
      (1)   Is a land use decision as defined in O.R.S. 197.015 where the
dwelling to be replaced:
         (a)   Formerly had the features described in division (A)(1) above; or
         (b)   Was removed from the tax roll as described in division (A)(2)
above;
      (2)   Is not subject to the time to act limits of O.R.S. 215.417; and
      (3)   If expired before January 1, 2014, shall be deemed to be valid and
effective if, before January 1, 2015, the holder of the permit:
         (a)   Removes, demolishes or converts to an allowable nonresidential
use the dwelling to be replaced; and
         (b)   Causes to be recorded in the deed records of the county a
statement that the dwelling to be replaced has been removed, demolished or
converted.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.046 AGRI-TOURISM AND OTHER COMMERCIAL EVENTS.
   The following agri-tourism and other commercial events or activities that
are related to and supportive of agriculture may be established.
   (A)   A single agri-tourism or other commercial event or activity on a tract
in a calendar year that is personal to the applicant and is not transferred by
or transferable with a conveyance of the tract, if the agri-tourism or other
commercial event or activity meets any local standards that apply and:
      (1)   The agri-tourism or other commercial event or activity is
incidental and subordinate to existing farm use on the tract;
      (2)   The duration of the agri-tourism or other commercial event or
activity does not exceed 72 consecutive hours;
      (3)   The maximum attendance at the agri-tourism or other commercial
event or activity does not exceed 500 people;
      (4)   The maximum number of motor vehicles parked at the site of the
agri-tourism or other commercial event or activity does not exceed 250
vehicles;
      (5)   The agri-tourism or other commercial event or activity complies
with the standards described in §
156.623(A);
      (6)   The agri-tourism or other commercial event or activity occurs
outdoors, in temporary structures or in existing permitted structures, subject
to health and fire and life safety requirements; and
      (7)   The agri-tourism or other commercial event or activity complies
with conditions established for:
         (a)   Planned hours of operation do not extend before 7:00 a.m. or
after 11:00 p.m.;
         (b)   Adequate off-street parking will be provided pursuant to the
requirements in §§
156.595 through
156.604;
         (c)   Roadways, driveway aprons, driveways and parking surfaces shall
be surfaces that prevent dust and may include paving, gravel, cinders or bark/
wood chips;
         (d)   All vehicle maneuvering will be conducted on site. No vehicle
backing or maneuvering shall occur within adjacent roads, streets or highways;
         (e)   No parking is permitted within the right-of-way;
         (f)   Approval is required from County Public Works regarding adequate
egress and access. All egress and access points shall be clearly marked;
         (g)   Vision clearance areas at street intersections must be clear of
obstruction, consistent with the requirements in §§
156.595 through
156.604; and
         (h)   Permit approval is subject to compliance with the established
sanitation requirements, the Department of Agriculture requirements and the
development standards of this zone.
   (B)   In the alternative to divisions (A) and (C) of this section, the
county may authorize, through an expedited, single-event license, a single
agri-tourism or other commercial event or activity on a tract in a calendar
year by an expedited, single-event license that is personal to the applicant
and is not transferred by, or transferable with, a conveyance of the tract. A
decision concerning an expedited, single-event license is not a land use
decision, as defined in O.R.S. 197.015. To approve an expedited, single-event
license, the governing body of a county or its designee must determine that the
proposed agri-tourism or other commercial event or activity meets any local
standards that apply, and the agri-tourism or other commercial event or
activity:
      (1)   Must be incidental and subordinate to existing farm use on the
tract;
      (2)   May not begin before 6:00 a.m. or end after 10:00 p.m.;
      (3)   May not involve more than 100 attendees or 50 vehicles;
      (4)   May not include the artificial amplification of music or voices
before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.;
      (5)   May not require or involve the construction or use of a new
permanent structure in connection with the agri-tourism or other commercial
event or activity;
      (6)   Must be located on a tract of at least ten acres unless the owners
or residents of adjoining properties consent, in writing, to the location; and
      (7)   Must comply with applicable health and fire and life safety
requirements.
   (C)   In the alternative to divisions (A) and (B) above, the county may
authorize up to six agri-tourism or other commercial events or activities on a
tract in a calendar year by a limited use permit that is personal to the
applicant and is not transferred by, or transferable with, a conveyance of the
tract. The agri-tourism or other commercial events or activities must meet any
local standards that apply, and the agri-tourism or other commercial events or
activities:
      (1)   Must be incidental and subordinate to existing farm use on the
tract;
      (2)   May not, individually, exceed a duration of 72 consecutive hours;
      (3)   May not require that a new permanent structure be built, used or
occupied in connection with the agri-tourism or other commercial events or
activities;
      (4)   Must comply with the standards described in §
156.623;
      (5)   May not, in combination with other agri-tourism or other commercial
events or activities authorized in the area, materially alter the stability of
the land use pattern in the area;
      (6)   Must comply with conditions established for:
         (a)   The types of agri-tourism or other commercial events or
activities that are authorized during each calendar year, including the number
and duration of the agri-tourism or other commercial events and activities, the
anticipated daily attendance and the hours of operation;
         (b)   The location of existing structures and the location of proposed
temporary structures to be used in connection with the agri-tourism or other
commercial events or activities;
         (c)   The location of access and egress and parking facilities to be
used in connection with the agri-tourism or other commercial events or
activities;
         (d)   Traffic management, including the projected number of vehicles
and any anticipated use of public roads;
         (f)   Sanitation and solid waste; and
         (g)   Must comply with the requirements of division (H) below.
      (7)   A permit authorized by this division (C) shall be valid for two
calendar years. When considering an application for renewal, the county shall
ensure compliance with the provisions of this division (C), any local standards
that apply and conditions that apply to the permit or to the agri-tourism or
other commercial events or activities authorized by the permit.
   (D)   In addition to divisions (A) through (C) above, the county may
authorize agri-tourism or other commercial events or activities that occur more
frequently or for a longer period or that do not otherwise comply with
divisions (A) through (C) above if the agri-tourism or other commercial events
or activities comply with any local standards that apply and the agri-tourism
or other commercial events or activities:
      (1)   Are incidental and subordinate to existing commercial farm use of
the tract and are necessary to support the commercial farm uses or the
commercial agricultural enterprises in the area;
      (2)   Comply with the requirements of divisions (C)(3) through (C)(6)
above;
      (3)   Occur on a lot or parcel that complies with the acknowledged
minimum lot or parcel size; and
      (4)   Do not exceed 18 events or activities in a calendar year.
   (E)   A holder of a permit authorized by a county under division (D) above
must request review of the permit at four-year intervals. Upon receipt of a
request for review, the county shall:
      (1)   Provide public notice and an opportunity for public comment as part
of the review process; and
      (2)   Limit its review to events and activities authorized by the permit,
conformance with conditions of approval required by the permit and the
standards established by division (D) above.
   (F)   Temporary structures established in connection with agri-tourism or
other commercial events or activities may be permitted. The temporary
structures must be removed at the end of the agri-tourism or other event or
activity. Alteration to the land in connection with an agri-tourism or other
commercial event or activity, including, but not limited to, grading, filling
or paving, are not permitted.
   (G)   The authorizations provided by division (C) above are in addition to
other authorizations that may be provided by law, except that “outdoor mass
gathering” and “other gathering,” as those terms are used in O.R.S. 197.015(10)
(d), do not include agri-tourism or other commercial events and activities.
   (H)   Agri-tourism and other commercial events permitted under divisions (C)
and (D) above are subject to the following standards and criteria.
      (1)   Permit application. A permit application for an agri-tourism or
other commercial event or activity shall include the following:
         (a)   A description of the type of agri-tourism or commercial events
or activities that are proposed, including the number and duration of the
events and activities, the anticipated daily attendance and the hours of
operation and, for events not held at wineries, how the agri-tourism and other
commercial events or activities will be related to and supportive of
agriculture and incidental and subordinate to the existing farm use of the
tract;
         (b)   The types and locations of all existing and proposed temporary
structures, access and egress, parking facilities, sanitation and solid waste
facilities to be used in connection with the agri-tourism or other commercial
events or activities; and
         (c)   Authorization to allow inspection of the event premises. The
applicant shall provide in writing a consent to allow law enforcement, public
health and fire control officers and code enforcement staff to come upon the
premises for which the permit has been granted for the purposes of inspection
and enforcement of the terms and conditions of the permit and the Exclusive
Farm Use Zone and any other applicable laws or ordinances.
      (2)   Approval criteria.
         (a)   The area in which the agri-tourism or other commercial events or
activities are located shall be setback at least 100 feet from the property
line.
         (b)   No more than two agri-tourism or commercial events or activities
may occur in one month.
         (c)   The maximum number of people shall not exceed 500 per calendar
day.
         (d)   Notification of agri-tourism and other commercial events or
activities shall be as follows.
            1.   The property owner shall submit in writing the list of
calendar days scheduled for all agri-tourism and other commercial events or
activities by April 1 of the subject calendar year or within 30 days of new or
renewed permits to County Planning Department.
            2.   The list of calendar dates for all agri-tourism, commercial
events and activities may be amended by submitting the amended list to the
Department at least ten days prior to any change in the date of approved dates.
            3.   The notification shall include a contact person or persons for
each agri-tourism and other commercial events or activities who shall be easily
accessible and who shall remain on site at all times, including the person’s
contact information.
         (e)   Hours of operation are as follows. No agri-tourism and other
commercial event or activity may begin before 7:00 a.m. or end after 11:00 p.m.
         (f)   Overnight camping is prohibited.
         (g)   Agri-tourism activities shall comply with the County Code
Enforcement Ordinance for the purpose of noise control.
         (h)   Transportation management provisions are as follows.
            1.   Roadways, driveway aprons, driveways and parking surfaces
shall be surfaces that prevent dust and may include paving, gravel, cinders or
bark/wood chips.
            2.   Driveways extending from paved roads shall have a paved apron,
requiring review and approval by the County Public Works.
            3.   The parcel, lot or tract must have direct access from a public
road or is accessed by an access easement or private road, whereby all
underlying property owners and property owners taking access between the
subject property and the public road consent in writing to the use of the road
for agri-tourism and other commercial events or activities at the time of
initial application.
            4.   Adequate traffic control must be provided by the property
owner and must include one traffic control person for each 250 persons expected
or reasonably expected to be in attendance at any time. All traffic control
personnel shall be certified by the state and shall comply with the current
edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
            5.   Adequate off-street parking will be provided pursuant to
provisions of §§
156.595 through
156.604.
         (i)   The following is required for health and safety compliance.
            1.   Sanitation facilities shall include, at a minimum, portable
restroom facilities and stand-alone hand washing stations.
            2.   All permanent and temporary structures and facilities are
subject to fire, health and life safety requirements and shall comply with all
requirements of Building Official and any other applicable federal, state and
local laws.
            3.   Compliance with the requirements of the Building Official
shall include meeting all building occupancy classification requirements of the
state’s adopted Building Code.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.047 COMMERCIAL FACILITIES FOR GENERATING POWER.
   (A)   Commercial power generating facility.
      (1)   (a)   Permanent features of a power generation facility shall not
preclude more than 12 acres from use as a commercial agricultural enterprise on
high value farmland unless an exception is taken pursuant to O.R.S. 197.732 and
O.A.R. Chapter 660, division 4; or 20 acres from use as a commercial
agricultural enterprise on land other than high-value farmland unless an
exception is taken pursuant to O.R.S. 197.732 and O.A.R. Chapter 660, division
4.
         (b)   A power generation facility may include on-site and off-site
facilities for temporary workforce housing for workers constructing a power
generation facility. Such facilities must be removed or converted to an allowed
use under O.A.R. 660-033-0130(19) or other statute or rule when project
construction is complete. Temporary workforce housing facilities not included
in the initial approval may be considered through a minor amendment request. A
minor amendment request shall be subject to O.A.R. 660-033-0130(5) and shall
have no effect on the original approval.
      (2)   A power generation facility must submit a plan for dismantling of
uncompleted construction and/or decommissioning and/or re-powering of the power
generation facility. Restoration of the site shall consist of the following:
         (a)   Dismantle all related aboveground equipment;
         (b)   Remove underground collection and communication cables, unless
said equipment is at a depth of three feet or greater. These cables at a depth
of three feet or greater can be abandoned in place if they are deemed not a
hazard and do not interfere with agricultural use or other resource uses of the
land;
         (c)   Gravel shall be removed;
         (d)   Private access road areas shall be restored by removing gravel
and restoring the surface grade and soil, unless the landowner directs
otherwise; and
         (e)   Roads, cleared pads, fences, gates and improvements may be left
in place if a letter from the land owner is submitted to the county indicating
said landowner will be responsible for, and will maintain said roads and/or
facilities for farm or other purposes as permitted under applicable zoning.
   (B)   Wind power generation facility.
      (1)   For the purpose of this chapter, a wind power generation facility
includes, but is not limited to, the following system components: all wind
turbine towers and concrete pads; permanent meteorological towers and wind
measurement devices; electrical cable collection systems connecting wind
turbine towers with the relevant power substation; new or expanded private
roads (whether temporary or permanent) constructed to serve the wind power
generation facility; office and operation and maintenance buildings; temporary
lay-down areas; and all other necessary appurtenances, including, but not
limited to, on-site and off-site facilities for temporary workforce housing for
workers constructing a wind power generation facility.
         (a)   Temporary workforce housing described in division (A)(2) above
must be removed or converted to an allowed use under O.A.R. 660-033-0130(19) or
other statute or rule when project construction is complete.
         (b)   Temporary workforce housing facilities not included in the
initial approval may be considered through a minor amendment request filed
after a decision to approve a power generation facility. A minor amendment
request shall be subject to O.A.R. 660-033-0130(5) and shall have no effect on
the original approval.
      (2)   For wind power generation facility proposals on high-value farmland
soils, as described at O.R.S. 195.300(10), the governing body or its designate
must find that all of the following are satisfied:
         (a)   Reasonable alternatives have been considered to show that siting
the wind power generation facility or component thereof on high-value farmland
soils is necessary for the facility or component to function properly or if a
road system or turbine string must be placed on such soils to achieve a
reasonably direct route considering the following factors:
            1.   Technical and engineering feasibility;
            2.   Availability of existing rights-of-way; and
            3.   The long-term environmental, economic, social and energy
consequences of siting the facility or component on alternative sites, as
determined under division (B) above.
         (b)   The long-term environmental, economic, social and energy
consequences resulting from the wind power generation facility or any
components thereof at the proposed site with measures designed to reduce
adverse impacts are not significantly more adverse than would typically result
from the same proposal being located on other agricultural lands that do not
include high-value farmland soils;
         (c)   Costs associated with any of the factors listed in division (A)
above may be considered, but costs alone may not be the only consideration in
determining that siting any component of a wind power generation facility on
high-value farmland soils is necessary;
         (d)   The owner of a wind power generation facility approved under
this division (B)(2) shall be responsible for restoring, as nearly as possible,
to its former condition any agricultural land and associated improvements that
are damaged or otherwise disturbed by the siting, maintenance, repair or
reconstruction of the facility. Nothing in this division (B)(2) shall prevent
the owner of the facility from requiring a bond or other security from a
contractor or otherwise imposing on a contractor the responsibility for
restoration; and
         (e)   The criteria of division (C) below are satisfied.
      (3)   For wind power generation facility proposals on arable lands,
meaning lands that are cultivated or suitable for cultivation, including high-
value farmland soils described at O.R.S. 195.300(10), the governing body or its
designate must find that:
         (a)   The proposed wind power facility will not create unnecessary
negative impacts on agricultural operations conducted on the subject property.
Negative impacts could include, but are not limited to, the unnecessary
construction of roads, dividing a field or multiple fields in such a way that
creates small or isolated pieces of property that are more difficult to farm
and placing wind farm components such as meteorological towers on lands in a
manner that could disrupt common and accepted farming practices;
         (b)   The presence of a proposed wind power facility will not result
in unnecessary soil erosion or loss that could limit agricultural productivity
on the subject property. This provision may be satisfied by the submittal and
county approval of a soil and erosion control plan prepared by an adequately
qualified individual, showing how unnecessary soil erosion will be avoided or
remedied and how topsoil will be stripped, stockpiled and clearly marked. The
approved plan shall be attached to the decision as a condition of approval;
         (c)   Construction or maintenance activities will not result in
unnecessary soil compaction that reduces the productivity of soil for crop
production. This provision may be satisfied by the submittal and county
approval of a plan prepared by an adequately qualified individual, showing how
unnecessary soil compaction will be avoided or remedied in a timely manner
through deep soil decompaction or other appropriate practices. The approved
plan shall be attached to the decision as a condition of approval; and
         (d)   Construction or maintenance activities will not result in the
unabated introduction or spread of noxious weeds and other undesirable weeds
species. This provision may be satisfied by the submittal and county approval
of a weed control plan prepared by an adequately qualified individual that
includes a long-term maintenance agreement. The approved plan shall be attached
to the decision as a condition of approval.
      (4)   For wind power generation facility proposals on nonarable lands,
meaning lands that are not suitable for cultivation, the requirements of
division (B)(3)(d) above are satisfied.
      (5)   In the event that a wind power generation facility is proposed on a
combination of arable and nonarable lands as described in divisions (B)(3) and
(B)(4) above, the approval criteria of division (B)(3) above shall apply to the
entire project.
   (C)   Photovoltaic solar power generation facility.
      (1)   A proposal to site a photovoltaic solar power generation facility
shall be subject to the following definitions and provisions.
         (a)   ARABLE LAND. Land in a tract that is predominantly cultivated
or, if not currently cultivated, predominantly comprised of arable soils.
         (b)   ARABLE SOILS. Soils that are suitable for cultivation as
determined by the governing body or its designate based on substantial evidence
in the record of a local land use application, but ARABLE SOILS does not
include high-value farmland soils described at O.R.S. 195.300(10) unless
otherwise stated.
         (c)   NONARABLE LAND. Land in a tract that is predominantly not
cultivated and predominantly comprised of nonarable soils.
         (d)   NONARABLE SOILS. Soils that are not suitable for cultivation.
Soils with an NRCS agricultural capability Class V-VIII, and no history of
irrigation shall be considered nonarable in all cases. The governing body or
its designate may determine other soils, including soils with a past history of
irrigation, to be nonarable based on substantial evidence in the record of a
local land use application.
         (e)   PHOTOVOLTAIC SOLAR POWER GENERATION FACILITY. Includes, but is
not limited to, an assembly of equipment that converts sunlight into
electricity and then stores, transfers or both, that electricity. This includes
photovoltaic modules, mounting and solar tracking equipment, foundations,
inverters, wiring, storage devices and other components. PHOTOVOLTAIC SOLAR
POWER GENERATION FACILITIES also include electrical cable collection systems
connecting the photovoltaic solar generation facility to a transmission line,
all necessary grid integration equipment, new or expanded private roads
constructed to serve the PHOTOVOLTAIC SOLAR POWER GENERATION FACILITY, office,
operation and maintenance buildings, staging areas and all other necessary
appurtenances. For purposes of applying the acreage standards of this section,
a PHOTOVOLTAIC SOLAR POWER GENERATION FACILITY includes all existing and
proposed facilities on a single tract, as well as any existing and proposed
facilities determined to be under common ownership on lands with fewer than
1,320 feet of separation from the tract on which the new facility is proposed
to be sited. Projects connected to the same parent company or individuals shall
be considered to be in common ownership, regardless of the operating business
structure. A PHOTOVOLTAIC SOLAR POWER GENERATION FACILITY does not include a
net metering project established consistent with O.R.S. 757.300 and O.A.R.
Chapter 860, division 39 or a feed-in-tariff project established consistent
with O.R.S. 757.365 and O.A.R. Chapter 860, division 84.
      (2)   For high-value farmland described at O.R.S. 195.300(10), a
photovoltaic solar power generation facility shall not preclude more than 12
acres from use as a commercial agricultural enterprise unless an exception is
taken pursuant to O.R.S. 197.732 and O.A.R. Chapter 660, division 4 or the
requirements of division (C)(2)(g) below are met. The governing body or its
designate must find that:
         (a)   The proposed photovoltaic solar power generation facility will
not create unnecessary negative impacts on agricultural operations conducted on
any portion of the subject property not occupied by project components.
Negative impacts could include, but are not limited to, the unnecessary
construction of roads dividing a field or multiple fields in such a way that
creates small or isolated pieces of property that are more difficult to farm,
and placing photovoltaic solar power generation facility project components on
lands in a manner that could disrupt common and accepted farming practices;
         (b)   The presence of a photovoltaic solar power generation facility
will not result in unnecessary soil erosion or loss that could limit
agricultural productivity on the subject property. This provision may be
satisfied by the submittal and county approval of a soil and erosion control
plan prepared by an adequately qualified individual, showing how unnecessary
soil erosion will be avoided or remedied and how topsoil will be stripped,
stockpiled and clearly marked. The approved plan shall be attached to the
decision as a condition of approval;
         (c)   Construction or maintenance activities will not result in
unnecessary soil compaction that reduces the productivity of soil for crop
production. This provision may be satisfied by the submittal and county
approval of a plan prepared by an adequately qualified individual, showing how
unnecessary soil compaction will be avoided or remedied in a timely manner
through deep soil decompaction or other appropriate practices. The approved
plan shall be attached to the decision as a condition of approval;
         (d)   Construction or maintenance activities will not result in the
unabated introduction or spread of noxious weeds and other undesirable weed
species. This provision may be satisfied by the submittal and county approval
of a weed control plan prepared by an adequately qualified individual that
includes a long-term maintenance agreement. The approved plan shall be attached
to the decision as a condition of approval;
         (e)   The project is not located on high-value farmland soils unless
it can be demonstrated that:
            1.   Non-high-value farmland soils are not available on the subject
tract;
            2.   Siting the project on non high-value farmland soils present on
the subject tract would significantly reduce the project’s ability to operate
successfully; or
            3.   The proposed site is better suited to allow continuation of an
existing commercial farm or ranching operation on the subject tract than other
possible sites also located on the subject tract, including those comprised of
non-high-value farmland soils.
         (f)   A study area consisting of lands zoned for exclusive farm use
located within one mile measured from the center of the proposed project shall
be established and:
            1.   If fewer than 48 acres of photovoltaic solar power generation
facilities have been constructed or received land use approvals and obtained
building permits within the study area, no further action is necessary; and
            2.   When at least 48 acres of photovoltaic solar power generation
have been constructed or received land use approvals and obtained building
permits, either as a single project or as multiple facilities within the study
area, the local government or its designate must find that the photovoltaic
solar energy generation facility will not materially alter the stability of the
overall land use pattern of the area. The stability of the land use pattern
will be materially altered if the overall effect of existing and potential
photovoltaic solar energy generation facilities will make it more difficult for
the existing farms and ranches in the area to continue operation due to
diminished opportunities to expand, purchase or lease farmland or acquire water
rights, or will reduce the number of tracts or acreage in farm use in a manner
that will destabilize the overall character of the study area.
         (g)   A photovoltaic solar generation facility may be sited on more
than 12 acres of high-value farmland described in O.R.S. 195.300(10)(f)(C)
without taking an exception pursuant to O.R.S. 197.732 and O.A.R. Chapter 660,
division 4, provided the land:
            1.   Is not located within the boundaries of an Irrigation
District;
            2.   Is not at the time of the facility’s establishment and was not
at any time during the 20 years immediately preceding the facility’s
establishment, the place of use of a water right permit, certificate, decree,
transfer order or groundwater registration authorizing the use of water for the
purpose of irrigation;
            3.   Is located within the service area of an electric utility
described in O.R.S. 469A.052(2);
            4.   Does not exceed the acreage the electric utility reasonably
anticipates to be necessary to achieve the applicable renewable portfolio
standard described in O.R.S. 469A.052(3); and
            5.   Does not qualify as high-value farmland under any other
provision of law.
      (3)   For arable lands, a photovoltaic solar power generation facility
shall not preclude more than 20 acres from use as a commercial agricultural
enterprise unless an exception is taken pursuant to O.R.S. 197.732 and O.A.R.
Chapter 660, division 4. The governing body or its designate must find that:
         (a)   The project is not located on high-value farmland soils or
arable soils unless it can be demonstrated that:
            1.   Nonarable soils are not available on the subject tract;
            2.   Siting the project on nonarable soils present on the subject
tract would significantly reduce the project’s ability to operate successfully;
or
            3.   The proposed site is better suited to allow continuation of an
existing commercial farm or ranching operation on the subject tract than other
possible sites also located on the subject tract, including those comprised of
nonarable soils.
         (b)   No more than 12 acres of the project will be sited on high-value
farmland soils described at O.R.S. 195.300(10) unless an exception is taken
pursuant to O.R.S. 197.732 and O.A.R. Chapter 660, division 4;
         (c)   A study area consisting of lands zoned for exclusive farm use
located within one mile measured from the center of the proposed project shall
be established and:
            1.   If fewer than 80 acres of photovoltaic solar power generation
facilities have been constructed or received land use approvals and obtained
building permits within the study area no further action is necessary; and
            2.   When at least 80 acres of photovoltaic solar power generation
have been constructed or received land use approvals and obtained building
permits, either as a single project or as multiple facilities, within the study
area the local government or its designate must find that the photovoltaic
solar energy generation facility will not materially alter the stability of the
overall land use pattern of the area. The stability of the land use pattern
will be materially altered if the overall effect of existing and potential
photovoltaic solar energy generation facilities will make it more difficult for
the existing farms and ranches in the area to continue operation due to
diminished opportunities to expand, purchase or lease farmland, acquire water
rights or diminish the number of tracts or acreage in farm use in a manner that
will destabilize the overall character of the study area.
         (d)   The requirements of divisions (C)(2)(a) through (C)(2)(d) above
are satisfied.
      (4)   For nonarable lands, a photovoltaic solar power generation facility
shall not preclude more than 320 acres from use as a commercial agricultural
enterprise unless an exception is taken pursuant to O.R.S. 197.732 and O.A.R.
Chapter 660, division 4. The governing body or its designate must find that:
         (a)   The project is not located on high-value farmland soils or
arable soils unless it can be demonstrated that:
            1.   Siting the project on nonarable soils present on the subject
tract would significantly reduce the project’s ability to operate successfully;
or
            2.   The proposed site is better suited to allow continuation of an
existing commercial farm or ranching operation on the subject tract as compared
to other possible sites also located on the subject tract, including sites that
are comprised of nonarable soils.
         (b)   No more than 12 acres of the project will be sited on high-value
farmland soils described at O.R.S. 195.300(10);
         (c)   No more than 20 acres of the project will be sited on arable
soils unless an exception is taken pursuant to O.R.S. 197.732 and O.A.R.
Chapter 660, division 4;
         (d)   The requirements of division (C)(2)(d) above are satisfied; and
         (e)   If a photovoltaic solar power generation facility is proposed to
be developed on lands that contain a Goal 5 resource protected under the
county’s Comprehensive Plan, and the Plan does not address conflicts between
energy facility development and the resource, the applicant and the county,
together with any state or federal agency responsible for protecting the
resource or habitat supporting the resource, will cooperatively develop a
specific resource management plan to mitigate potential development conflicts.
If there is no program present to protect the listed Goal 5 resource(s) present
in the local Comprehensive Plan or implementing ordinances and the applicant
and the appropriate resource management agency(ies) cannot successfully agree
on a cooperative resource management plan, the county is responsible for
determining appropriate mitigation measures.
      (5)   The project owner shall sign and record in the deed records for the
county a document binding the project owner and the project owner’s successors
in interest, prohibiting them from pursuing a claim for relief or cause of
action alleging injury from farming or forest practices as defined in O.R.S.
30.930(2) and (4).
      (6)   Nothing in this definition shall prevent the county from requiring
a bond or other security from a developer or otherwise imposing on a developer
the responsibility for retiring the photovoltaic solar power generation
facility.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03,
passed 4-3-2024; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.048 LAND DIVISIONS.
   (A)   The minimum size for creation of a new parcel shall be 160 acres.
   (B)   A division of land to accommodate certain uses permitted by §§
156.036 and
156.037, except a residential use, smaller than 160 acres, may be approved if
the parcel for the non-farm use is not larger than the minimum size necessary
for the use as allowed in O.R.S. 215.263.
   (C)   A division of land to create up to two new parcels smaller than the
minimum size established under division (A) above, each to contain a dwelling
not provided in conjunction with farm use, may be permitted if:
      (1)   The non-farm dwellings have been approved under §
156.044;
      (2)   The parcels for the non-farm dwellings are divided from a lot or
parcel that was lawfully created prior to July 1, 2001;
      (3)   The parcels for the non-farm dwellings are divided from a lot or
parcel that complies with the minimum size in division (A) above; and
      (4)   The remainder of the original lot or parcel that does not contain
the non-farm dwellings complies with the minimum size established under
division (A) above.
   (D)   A division of land to divide a lot or parcel into two parcels, each to
contain one dwelling not provided in conjunction with farm use, may be
permitted if:
      (1)   The non-farm dwellings have been approved under §
156.044;
      (2)   The parcels for the non-farm dwellings are divided from a lot or
parcel that was lawfully created prior to July 1, 2001;
      (3)   The parcels for the non-farm dwellings are divided from a lot or
parcel that is equal to or smaller than the minimum size in division (A) above
but equal to or larger than 40 acres;
      (4)   The parcels for the non-farm dwellings are:
         (a)   Not capable of producing more than at least 20 cubic feet per
acre per year of wood fiber; and
         (b)   Either composed of at least 90% Class VII and VIII soils, or
composed of at least 90% Class VI through VIII soils and are not capable of
producing adequate herbaceous forage for grazing livestock. The Land
Conservation and Development Commission, in cooperation with the State
Department of Agriculture and other interested persons, may establish by rule
objective criteria for identifying units of land that are not capable of
producing adequate herbaceous forage for grazing livestock. In developing the
criteria, the Commission shall use the latest information from the United
States Natural Resources Conservation Service and consider costs required to
utilize grazing lands that differ in acreage and productivity level.
      (5)   The parcels for the non-farm dwellings do not have established
water rights for irrigation.
   (E)   This section does not apply to the creation or sale of cemetery lots,
if a cemetery is within the boundaries designated for a Farm Use Zone at the
time the Zone is established.
   (F)   This section does not apply to divisions of land resulting from lien
foreclosures or divisions of land resulting from foreclosure of recorded
contracts for the sale of real property.
   (G)   This section does not allow a division or a property line adjustment
of a lot or parcel that separates a use described in §§
156.038(L),
156.039(D) from the lot or parcel on which the primary residential use exists.
   (H)   This section does not allow a division or a property line adjustment
of a lot or parcel that separates a processing facility from the farm operation
specified in §
156.038(B).
   (I)   A division of land may be permitted to create a parcel with an
existing dwelling to be used:
      (1)   As a residential home as described in O.R.S. 197.660(2) only if the
dwelling has been approved under §
156.042; and
      (2)   For historic property that meets the requirements of §
156.038(P).
   (J)   Notwithstanding the minimum lot or parcel size described in division
(A) above:
      (1)   A division of land may be approved, provided:
         (a)   The land division is for the purpose of allowing a provider of
public parks or open space, or a not-for-profit land conservation organization,
to purchase at least one of the resulting parcels; and
         (b)   A parcel created by the land division that contains a dwelling
is large enough to support continued residential use of the parcel.
      (2)   A parcel created pursuant to this division (J) that does not
contain a dwelling:
         (a)   Is not eligible for siting a dwelling, except as may be
authorized under O.R.S. 195.120;
         (b)   May not be considered in approving or denying an application for
siting any other dwelling;
         (c)   May not be considered in approving a redesignation or rezoning
of forestlands except for a redesignation or rezoning to allow a public park,
open space or other natural resource use; and
         (d)   May not be smaller than 25 acres unless the purpose of the land
division is to facilitate the creation of a wildlife or pedestrian corridor or
the implementation of a wildlife habitat protection plan or to allow a
transaction in which at least one party is a public park or open space
provider, or a not-for-profit land conservation organization, that has
cumulative ownership of at least 2,000 acres of open space or park property.
   (K)   A division of land smaller than the minimum lot or parcel size in
division (A) above may be approved provided:
      (1)   The division is for the purpose of establishing a church, including
cemeteries in conjunction with the church;
      (2)   The church has been approved under §
156.038(J);
      (3)   The newly created lot or parcel is not larger than five acres; and
      (4)   The remaining lot or parcel, not including the church, meets the
minimum lot or parcel size described in division (A) above either by itself or
after it is consolidated with another lot or parcel.
   (L)   Notwithstanding the minimum lot or parcel size described division (A)
above, a division for the non-farm uses other than non-farm dwellings, may be
approved if the parcel for the non-farm use is not larger than the minimum size
necessary for the use.
   (M)   The governing body of a county may not approve a division of land for
non-farm use under divisions (B) through (D) or (J) through (L) above unless
any additional tax imposed for the change in use has been paid.
   (N)   Parcels used or to be used for training or stabling facilities may not
be considered appropriate to maintain the existing commercial agricultural
enterprise in an area where other types of agriculture occur.
   (O)   A division of a lawfully established unit of land may occur along an
urban growth boundary where the parcel remaining outside the urban growth
boundary is zoned for agricultural uses and is smaller than the minimum parcel
size; provided, that:
      (1)   If the parcel contains a dwelling, the parcel must be large enough
to support the continued residential use; and
      (2)   If the parcel does not contain a dwelling, it:
         (a)   Is not eligible for siting a dwelling, except as may be
authorized in O.R.S. 195.120;
         (b)   May not be considered in approving or denying an application for
any other dwelling; and
         (c)   May not be considered in approving a redesignation or rezoning
of agricultural lands, except to allow a public park, open space or other
natural resource use.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03,
passed 4-3-2024; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.049 YARDS.
   In an EFU Zone, the minimum yard setback requirements shall be as follows.
   (A)   The front yard setback from the property line shall be 20 feet for
property fronting on a local minor collector or marginal access street ROW, 30
feet from a property line fronting on a major collector ROW and 80 feet from an
arterial ROW unless other provisions for combining accesses are provided and
approved by the county.
   (B)   Each side yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet except that on corner
lots or parcels the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of 30 feet.
   (C)   Rear yards shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
   (D)   Stream setback shall be as follows.
      (1)   All sewage disposal installations such as outhouses, septic tank
and drainfield systems shall be set back from the high-water line or mark along
all streams and lakes a minimum of 100 feet, measured at right angles to the
high-water line or mark.
      (2)   All structures, buildings or similar permanent fixtures shall be
set back from the high-water line or mark along all streams or lakes a minimum
of 100 feet measured at right angles to the high-water line or mark.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-9-
98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed
9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014;
Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.050 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-2-90, passed 12-5-1990; Ord. MC-C-8-
98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-9-98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed
11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013;
Ord. ORD-2014-4, passed 7-9-2014; Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-
2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
RESOURCE-RELATED INDUSTRIAL ZONE (RRI)
§ 156.060 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the intent and purpose of the Resource Related Industrial Zone
(RRI) to be utilized in areas of the county included in zones designated for
farm use that have a strong potential for the extraction and processing of
agricultural and other resource related commodities.
   (B)   It is further the intent and purpose of the RRI Zone to support
commercial farm and forest activities while increasing family wage and above
family wage employment opportunities in the county. In an RRI Zone, the
following regulations shall apply.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2008, passed 1-9-2008; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
§ 156.061 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In the RRI Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright. While some uses may prompt an inquiry to and/or action by the
Planning Director, authorization of such uses does not require notice to
adjacent property owners or other interested parties and does not constitute a
land use decision pursuant to O.R.S. 197.015(10):
   (A)   Farm use (other than the establishment of new structures, this use
does not require zoning permit approval;
   (B)   Operations for the exploration of geothermal resources, as defined by
O.R.S. 522.005, including the placement and operation of compressors,
separators and other customary production equipment for an individual well
adjacent to the wellhead. Any activities or construction relating to such
operations shall not be a basis for an exception under O.R.S. 197.732(1)(a) or
(b);
   (C)   The propagation or harvesting of a forest product;
   (D)   Minor betterment of existing public roads and highway related
facilities such as maintenance yards, weight stations and rest areas within the
right-of-way existing as of July 1, 1987, and contiguous public-owned property
utilized to support the operation and maintenance of public roads and highways;
   (E)   Fire service facilities providing rural fire protection services;
   (F)   Mining less than 1,000 cubic yards of aggregate material or excavation
of less than one acre of land annually;
   (G)   Excavations conducted by the landowner or tenant on the landowner or
tenant’s property for the purpose of operations reasonably necessary for
construction, reconstruction or maintenance of access roads on the same parcel
or on an adjacent parcel that is under the same ownership as the parcel being
excavated reasonably necessary for farming; and
   (H)   Other uses required by O.R.S. 215.283(1) as interpreted by O.A.R.
Chapter 660, division 33.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2008, passed 1-9-2008; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
§ 156.062 USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   In the RRI Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may be
permitted outright through the site plan review process provided in §
156.611, and subject to the provisions of this section if determined by the
Planning Director to satisfy the applicable criteria and provisions of law.
Notice and an opportunity to file an appeal must be provided in the manner
described in O.R.S. 215.416. These uses may be referred to the Planning
Commission for review if deemed appropriate by the Planning Director:
   (A)   A facility for the primary processing of forest products pursuant to
O.A.R. 660-033-0130(6);
   (B)   A facility for the processing of farm crops pursuant to O.R.S. 215.283
(1)(u);
   (C)   A commercial activity in conjunction with farm use, including, but not
limited to, uses with an industrial emphasis such as processing hybrid poplar
trees into lumber or secondary processing, fabrication or shipping of materials
or goods produced at facilities located at the site or surrounding lands.
Approval of this use is subject to the review criteria of §
156.063;
   (D)   Operations conducted for the mining and processing of geothermal
resources, as defined in O.R.S. 522.005, or exploration, mining and processing
of aggregate and other mineral resources or other subsurface resources and oil
and gas, as defined by O.R.S. 520.005 not otherwise permitted under §
156.061(B). Approval of this use is subject to the review criteria of §
156.063;
   (E)   Dwellings pursuant to O.A.R. 660-033-0135(7); and
   (F)   Other uses required by O.R.S. 215.283(1) as interpreted by O.A.R.
Chapter 660, division 33.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2008, passed 1-9-2008; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
§ 156.063 CONDITIONAL USES.
   In the RRI Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may be
permitted if determined by the Planning Commission during a public hearing to
satisfy the applicable criteria and provisions of law. The appropriate review
criteria are identified for each use:
   (A)   Operations conducted for the mining, stockpiling or processing of
mineral, aggregate and other mineral and other subsurface resources not to
exceed 500,000 tons subject to §§
156.620 through
156.630 and provisions within the Comprehensive Plan which requires a
significance determination;
   (B)   A site for the disposal of solid waste approved by the governing body
of a city or county or both and for which a permit has been granted under
O.R.S. 459.245 by the Department of Environmental Quality together with
equipment, facilities or buildings necessary for its operation. Approval of
this use is subject to the standards and criteria of §
156.039 and any other applicable criteria or provisions of law;
   (C)   Commercial utility facilities for the purpose of generating power for
public use by sale. Approval of this use is subject to the standards and
criteria of § 156.0039 and any other applicable criteria or provisions of law;
   (D)   Operations for the extraction and bottling of water. Approval of this
use is subject to the review standards and criteria of §
156.039 and any other applicable criteria or provisions of law;
   (E)   Utility facilities necessary for public service subject to the
provisions of O.R.S. 215.275 and O.A.R. 660-033-0130(16). No local legislative
criteria shall be applied for consideration of establishing a utility facility
necessary for public service;
   (F)   Composting facilities for which a permit has been granted by the
Department of Environmental Quality under O.R.S. 459.245 and O.A.R. 340-096-
0060. Approval of this use is subject to the review criteria of §
156.039 and any other applicable criteria or provisions of law; and
   (G)   The land application of reclaimed water, agricultural process or
industrial process water or biosolids for agricultural, horticultural or
silvicultural production, or for irrigation in connection with a use allowed in
the EFU Zone pursuant to the provisions of O.R.S. 215.246 through 215.251 and
215.283(1)(Y).
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2008, passed 1-9-2008; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
§ 156.064 YARDS.
   In an RRI Zone, the minimum yard setback requirements shall be as follows.
   (A)   The front yard setback from the property line shall be a minimum of
100 feet if the property line is adjacent to an intensive agricultural use
except as approved by the Planning Director; otherwise, front yards shall be 20
feet for property fronting on a local minor collector or marginal access street
ROW, 30 feet from a property line fronting on a major collector ROW and 80 feet
from an arterial ROW unless other provisions for combining accesses are
provided and approved by the county.
   (B)   Each side yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet except that on corner
lots or parcels the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of 30 feet,
and for parcels or lots with side yards adjacent to an intensive agricultural
use the adjacent side yard shall be a minimum of 100 feet, except as approved
by the Planning Director.
   (C)   Rear yards shall be a minimum of 25 feet, except for parcels or lots
with rear yards adjacent to an intensive agricultural use rear yards shall be a
minimum of 100 feet, except as approved by the Planning Director.
   (D)   Stream setback shall be as follows.
      (1)   All sewage disposal installations such as outhouses, septic tank
and drainfield systems shall be set back from the high-water line or mark along
all streams and lakes a minimum of 100 feet, measured at right angles to the
high-water line or mark.
      (2)   All structures, buildings or similar permanent fixtures shall be
set back from the high-water line or mark along all streams or lakes a minimum
of 100 feet measured at right angles to the high-water line or mark.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2008, passed 1-9-2008; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
§ 156.065 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01,
passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-2008, passed 1-9-2008; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-
2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021;
Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
FOREST USE ZONE (FU)
§ 156.080 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the Forest Use Zone (FU) is to protect and maintain
forest lands for grazing, and rangeland use and forest use, consistent with
existing and future needs for agricultural and forest products. The FU Zone is
also intended to allow other uses that are compatible with agricultural and
forest activities, to protect scenic resources and fish and wildlife habitat
and to maintain and improve the quality of air, water and land resources of the
county.
   (B)   The FU Zone has been applied to lands designated as forest in the
Comprehensive Plan. The provisions of the FU Zone reflect the forest land
policies of the Comprehensive Plan as well as the requirements of O.R.S.
Chapter 215 and O.A.R. Chapter 660, division 006. The minimum parcel size and
other standards established by this Zone are intended to promote commercial
forest operations.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-9-98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed
7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021;
Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.081 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT, NOT SUBJECT TO REVIEW.
   In the Forest Zone, the following uses and activities and their accessory
buildings and uses are permitted without a zoning permit:
   (A)   Forest operations or forest practices, including, but not limited to,
reforestation of forest land, road construction and maintenance, harvesting of
a forest tree species, application of chemicals and disposal of slash;
   (B)   Temporary on-site structures that are auxiliary to and used during the
term of a particular forest operation;
   (C)   Physical alterations to the land auxiliary to forest practices,
including, but not limited to, those made for purposes of exploration, mining,
commercial gravel extraction and processing, landfills, dams, reservoirs, road
construction or recreational facilities;
   (D)   Uses to conserve soil, air and water quality and to provide for
wildlife and fisheries resources;
   (E)   Farm use, as defined in O.R.S. 215.203, is allowed outright without
zoning permit review except dwellings and other buildings customarily provided
in conjunction with farm use referred to in O.R.S. 215.283(1). For the purpose
of this subchapter, FARM USE does not include customary accessory uses and
structures over 100 square feet (e.g., barns, sheds, maintenance buildings,
farm owned or personal use grain bins or elevators and chemical storage), which
may be permitted subject to approval of a zoning permit;
   (F)   Climbing and passing lanes within the right-of-way existing as of July
1, 1987;
   (G)   Reconstruction or modification of public roads and highways, including
the placement of utility facilities overhead and in the subsurface of public
roads and highways along the public right-of-way, but not including the
addition of travel lanes, where no removal or displacement of buildings would
occur or no new land parcels result;
   (H)   Temporary public road and highway detours that will be abandoned and
restored to original condition or use at such time as no longer needed;
   (I)   Minor betterment of existing public road and highway related
facilities such as maintenance yards, weigh stations and rest areas, within
rights-of-way existing as of July 1, 1987, and contiguous public-owned property
utilized to support the operation and maintenance of public roads and highways;
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-9-98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed
7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021;
Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.082 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In the Forest Zone, the following uses and activities and their accessory
buildings and uses are permitted subject to zoning permit approval in
accordance with §
156.610. Unless otherwise mandated by §
156.610, authorization of such uses does not require notice to adjacent
property owners or other interested parties and does not constitute a land use
decision pursuant to O.R.S. 197.015(10).
   (A)   An agricultural building, as defined in O.R.S. 455.315, customarily
provided in conjunction with farm use or forest use larger than 100 square
feet. A person may not convert an agricultural building authorized by this
section to another use;
   (B)   Local distribution lines (e.g., electric, telephone or natural gas)
and accessory equipment (e.g., electric distribution transformers, poles, meter
cabinets, terminal boxes or pedestals), or equipment that provides service
hookups, including water service hookups;
   (C)   Temporary portable facility for the primary processing of forest
products;
   (D)   Exploration for mineral and aggregate resources, as defined in O.R.S.
Chapter 517;
   (E)   Exploration for and production of geothermal, gas, oil and other
associated hydrocarbons, including the placement and operation of compressors,
separators and other customary production equipment for an individual well
adjacent to the wellhead;
   (F)   Private hunting and fishing operations without any lodging
accommodations;
   (G)   Towers and fire stations for forest fire protection;
   (H)   Water intake facilities, canals and distribution lines for farm
irrigation and ponds;
   (I)   Uninhabitable structures accessory to fish and wildlife enhancement;
   (J)   Temporary forest labor camps; or
   (K)   An outdoor mass gathering of more than 3,000 persons that is not
anticipated to continue for more than 120 hours in any three-month period, as
provided in O.R.S. 433.735.
(Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.083 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In the FU Zone, the following uses and activities and their accessory
buildings and uses may be permitted outright through the site plan review
process provided in §
156.611, and subject to the provisions of this subchapter if determined by the
Planning Director to satisfy the applicable criteria and provisions of law.
Notice and an opportunity to file an appeal must be provided in the manner
described in O.R.S. 215.416. These uses may be referred to the Planning
Commission for review if deemed appropriate by the Planning Director:
   (A)   An outdoor mass gathering of more than 3,000 persons that is not
anticipated to continue for more than 120 hours in any three-month period, as
provided in O.R.S. 433.735;
   (B)   Destination resorts, subject to O.R.S. 197.435 to 197.467 and Goal 8;
   (C)   Youth camps subject to O.A.R. 660-006-0031;
   (D)   Caretaker residences for public parks and public fish hatcheries
subject to §
156.085(K);
   (E)   A large tract forest dwelling subject to §
156.085(A) and (K);
   (F)   Lot of record dwelling subject to §
156.085(B) and (K);
   (G)   A template dwelling subject to §
156.085(C) and (K); and
   (H)   Alteration, restoration or replacement of a lawfully established
dwelling subject to §
156.085(D) and (K).
(Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.084 CONDITIONAL USES.
   In the Forest Zone, the following uses and their accessory buildings and
uses are permitted subject to county review, any specific standards for the use
set forth in §§
156.085, 156.620 through 156.630 and the general standards for the Zone:
   (A)   Log scaling and weigh stations;
   (B)   Forest management research and experimentation facilities as defined
by O.R.S. 526.215 or where accessory to forest operations;
   (C)   A manufactured dwelling or recreational vehicle, or the temporary
residential use of an existing building, in conjunction with an existing
dwelling as a temporary use for the term of a hardship suffered by the existing
resident or a relative subject to §§
156.085(K) and
156.645 through
156.655;
   (D)   Parking of up to seven dump trucks and seven trailers;
   (E)   Home occupations subject to §§
156.620 through
156.630;
   (F)   Permanent facility for the primary processing of forest products
subject to §
156.085(L);
   (G)   Permanent logging equipment repair and storage;
   (H)   Private seasonal accommodations for fee hunting operations subject to
§
156.085(E);
   (I)   Private accommodations for fishing occupied on a temporary basis may
be allowed subject to §
156.085(F);
   (J)   Mining and processing of oil, gas or other subsurface resources, as
defined in O.R.S. Chapter 520, and not otherwise permitted under this section
(e.g., compressors, separators and storage serving multiple wells) and mining
and processing of aggregate and mineral resources, as defined in O.R.S. Chapter
517;
   (K)   Temporary asphalt and concrete batch plants as accessory uses to
specific highway projects;
   (L)   Transportation improvements on rural lands allowed by and subject to
the requirements of O.A.R. 660-012-0065;
   (M)   Construction of additional passing and travel lanes requiring the
acquisition of right-of-way but not resulting in the creation of new parcels;
   (N)   Reconstruction or modification of public roads and highways involving
the removal or displacement of buildings but not resulting in the creation of
new parcels;
   (O)   Improvement of public road and highway related facilities, such as
maintenance yards, weigh stations and rest areas, where additional property or
right-of-way is required but not resulting in the creation of new land parcels;
   (P)   Expansion of existing airports;
   (Q)   Television, microwave and radio communication facilities and
transmission towers;
   (R)   New electric transmission lines with right-of-way widths of up to 100
feet as specified in O.R.S. 772.210. New distribution lines (e.g., gas, oil,
geothermal, telephone, fiber optic cable) with rights-of-way 50 feet or less in
width;
   (S)   Water intake facilities, related treatment facilities, pumping
stations and distribution lines;
   (T)   Reservoirs and water impoundments;
   (U)   Disposal site for solid waste approved by the governing body of a city
or county or both and for which the State Department of Environmental Quality
has granted a permit under O.R.S. 459.245, together with equipment, facilities
or buildings necessary for its operation;
   (V)   Commercial utility facilities for the purpose of generating power
subject to §
156.085(G);
   (W)   Aids to navigation and aviation;
   (X)   Firearms training facility as provided in O.R.S. 197.770(2);
   (Y)   Fire stations for rural fire protection;
   (Z)   Cemeteries;
   (AA)   Public parks subject to §
156.085(I);
   (BB)   Private parks and campgrounds subject to §
156.085(J); and
   (CC)   Any outdoor gathering of more than 3,000 persons that is expected to
continue for more than 120 hours in any three-month period is subject to review
by the Planning Commission under O.R.S. 433.763.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-9-98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed
7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021;
Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.085 USE STANDARDS.
   (A)   A large tract forest dwelling authorized under O.R.S. 215.740 may be
allowed on land zoned for forest use if it is sited on a tract that does not
include a dwelling and complies with other provisions of law, including the
following.
      (1)   The tract is at least 240 contiguous acres or 320 acres in one
ownership that are not contiguous but are in the same county or adjacent
counties and zoned for forest use. A deed restriction shall be filed pursuant
to division (A)(3) below for all tracts that are used to meet the acreage
requirements of this division (A).
      (2)   A tract shall not be considered to consist of less than 240 acres
because it is crossed by a public road or a waterway.
      (3)   Where one or more lots or parcels are required to meet minimum
acreage requirements.
         (a)   The applicant shall provide evidence that the covenants,
conditions and restrictions form adopted as “Exhibit A” in O.A.R. Chapter 660,
division 6 has been recorded with the Clerk of the county or counties where the
property subject to the covenants, conditions and restrictions is located.
         (b)   The covenants, conditions and restrictions are irrevocable,
unless a statement of release is signed by an authorized representative of the
county or counties where the property subject to the covenants, conditions and
restrictions is located.
   (B)   Lot of record dwelling shall comply with the following.
      (1)   The lot or parcel on which the dwelling will be sited was lawfully
created and was acquired and owned continuously by the present owner as defined
in division (B)(4) below:
         (a)   Since prior to January 1, 1985; or
         (b)   By devise or by intestate succession from a person who acquired
and had owned continuously the lot or parcel since prior to January 1, 1985.
      (2)   The tract on which the dwelling will be sited does not include a
dwelling.
      (3)   The lot or parcel on which the dwelling will be sited was part of a
tract on November 4, 1993, no dwelling exists on another lot or parcel that was
part of that tract.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, OWNER includes the wife, husband,
son, daughter, mother, father, brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law,
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece,
nephew, stepparent, stepchild, grandparent or grandchild of the owner or a
business entity owned by any one or combination of these family members.
      (5)   The dwelling must be located on a tract that is composed of soils
not capable of producing 4,000 cubic feet per year of commercial tree species
and is located within 1,500 feet of a public road as defined under O.R.S.
368.001 that provides or will provide access to the subject tract. The road
shall be maintained and either paved or surfaced with rock and shall not be:
         (a)   A United States Bureau of Land Management road; or
         (b)   A United States Forest Service road unless the road is paved to
a minimum width of 18 feet, there is at least one defined lane in each
direction and a maintenance agreement exists between the United States Forest
Service and landowners adjacent to the road, a local government or a state
agency.
      (6)   When the lot or parcel on which the dwelling will be sited lies
within an area designated in an acknowledged Comprehensive Plan as habitat of
big game, the siting of the dwelling shall be consistent with the limitations
on density upon which the acknowledged Comprehensive Plan and land use
regulations intended to protect the habitat are based.
      (7)   When the lot or parcel on which the dwelling will be sited is part
of a tract, the remaining portions of the tract shall be consolidated into a
single lot or parcel when the dwelling is allowed.
   (C)   (1)   A single-family “template” dwelling authorized under O.R.S.
215.750 on a lot or parcel located within a Forest Zone if the lot or parcel is
predominantly composed of soils that are:
         (a)   Capable of producing zero to 20 cubic feet per acre per year of
wood fiber if:
            1.   All or part of at least three other lots or parcels that
existed on January 1, 1993, are within a 160-acre square centered on the center
of the subject tract; and
            2.   At least three dwellings existed on January 1, 1993, and
continue to exist on the other lots or parcels.
         (b)   Capable of producing 21 to 50 cubic feet per acre per year of
wood fiber if:
            1.   All or part of at least seven other lots or parcels that
existed on January 1, 1993, are within a 160-acre square centered on the center
of the subject tract; and
            2.   At least three dwellings existed on January 1, 1993, and
continue to exist on the other lots or parcels.
         (c)   Capable of producing more than 50 cubic feet per acre per year
of wood fiber if:
            1.   All or part of at least 11 other lots or parcels that existed
on January 1, 1993, are within a 160-acre square centered on the center of the
subject tract; and
            2.   At least three dwellings existed on January 1, 1993, and
continue to exist on the other lots or parcels.
      (2)   Lots or parcels within urban growth boundaries shall not be used to
satisfy eligibility requirements.
      (3)   A dwelling is in the 160-acre template if any part of the dwelling
is in the 160-acre template.
      (4)   Except as provided by division (C)(5) below, if the subject tract
abuts a road that existed on January 1, 1993, the measurement may be made by
creating a 160-acre rectangle that is one mile long and one-quarter mile wide
centered on the center of the subject tract and that is to the maximum extent
possible, aligned with the road.
      (5)   The following applies where a tract 60 acres or larger abuts a road
or perennial stream.
         (a)   The measurement shall be made in accordance with division (C)(4)
above. However, one of the three required dwellings shall be on the same side
of the road or stream as the tract, and:
            1.   Be located within a 160-acre rectangle that is one mile long
and one-quarter mile wide centered on the center of the subject tract and that
is, to the maximum extent possible, aligned with the road or stream; or
            2.   Be within one-quarter mile from the edge of the subject tract
but not outside the length of the 160-acre rectangle, and on the same side of
the road or stream as the tract.
         (b)   If a road crosses the tract on which the dwelling will be
located, at least one of the three required dwellings shall be on the same side
of the road as the proposed dwelling.
      (6)   A proposed “template” dwelling under this chapter is not allowed:
         (a)   If it is prohibited by or will not comply with the requirements
of an acknowledged Comprehensive Plan, acknowledged land use regulations or
other provisions of law;
         (b)   Unless it complies with the requirements of §§
156.086 and
156.087;
         (c)   Unless no dwellings are allowed on other lots or parcels that
make up the tract and deed restrictions established under division (A)(3) above
for the other lots or parcels that make up the tract are met; or
         (d)   If the tract on which the dwelling will be sited includes a
dwelling.
      (7)   Where other lots or parcels that make up a tract in division (C)(6)
above:
         (a)   The applicant shall provide evidence that the covenants,
conditions and restrictions form adopted as “Exhibit A” in O.A.R. Chapter 660,
division 6 has been recorded with the Clerk of the county or counties where the
property subject to the covenants, conditions and restrictions is located; and
         (b)   The covenants, conditions and restrictions are irrevocable,
unless a statement of release is signed by an authorized representative of the
county or counties where the property subject to the covenants, conditions and
restrictions is located.
   (D)   Alteration, restoration or replacement of a lawfully established
dwelling as described n O.R.S. 215.291:
      (1)   Alteration or restoration of a lawfully established dwelling that
has or formally had:
         (a)   Has intact exterior walls and roof structures;
         (b)   Has indoor plumbing consisting of a kitchen sink, toilet and
bathing facilities connected to a sanitary waste disposal system;
         (c)   Has interior wiring for interior lights; and
         (d)   Has a heating system.
      (2)   In the case of replacement, previous dwelling is removed,
demolished or converted to an allowable nonresidential use within three months
of the completion of the replacement dwelling.
   (E)   Private seasonal accommodations for fee hunting operations are subject
to the following requirements:
      (1)   Accommodations are limited to no more than 15 guest rooms, as that
term is defined in the State Structural Specialty Code;
      (2)   Only minor incidental and accessory retail sales are permitted; and
      (3)   Accommodations are occupied temporarily for the purpose of hunting
during either or both game bird or big game hunting seasons authorized by the
State Fish and Wildlife Commission.
   (F)   Private accommodations for fishing occupied on a temporary basis are
subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Accommodations limited to no more than 15 guest rooms as that term
is defined in the State Structural Specialty Code;
      (2)   Only minor incidental and accessory retail sales are permitted;
      (3)   Accommodations occupied temporarily for the purpose of fishing
during fishing seasons authorized by the State Fish and Wildlife Commission;
and
      (4)   Accommodations must be located within one-quarter mile of fish-
bearing Class I waters.
   (G)   A commercial utility facility for the purpose of generating power
shall not preclude more than ten acres from use as a commercial forest
operation.
   (H)   Solid waste disposal facilities shall meet the performance and
permitting requirements of the Department of Environmental Quality under O.R.S.
459.245 shall meet the requirements of §§
156.620 through
156.630 and shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   The facility shall be designed to minimize conflicts with existing
and permitted uses allowed under plan designations for adjacent parcels as
outlined in policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   The facility must be of a size and design to minimize noise or
other detrimental effects when located adjacent to farm, forest and grazing
dwellings(s) or a Residential Zone.
      (3)   The facility shall be fenced when the site is located adjacent to
dwelling(s) or a Residential Zone and landscaping, buffering and/or screening
shall be provided.
      (4)   If located in a forested area, the county shall condition approval
to ensure that minimum fire safety measures will be taken, including, but not
limited to, requiring that the area surrounding the facility is kept free from
litter and debris.
      (5)   Access roads or easements for the facility shall be improved to the
county’s Transportation System Plan standards and comply with grades
recommended by the Public Works Director.
      (6)   The county may limit hours of operation for the facility to be
compatible with adjacent uses.
      (7)   The facility shall comply with other conditions deemed necessary.
   (I)   Public parks may include:
      (1)   All uses allowed under Statewide Planning Goal 4;
      (2)   The following uses, if authorized in a local or park master plan
that is adopted as part of the local Comprehensive Plan, or if authorized in a
State Park Master Plan that is adopted by OPRD:
         (a)   Campground areas: recreational vehicle sites; tent sites; camper
cabins; yurts; teepees; covered wagons; group shelters; campfire program areas;
camp stores;
         (b)   Day use areas: picnic shelters; barbecue areas; swimming areas
(not swimming pools); open play fields; and play structures;
         (c)   Recreational trails: walking, hiking, biking, horse or motorized
off-road vehicle trails; and trail staging areas;
         (d)   Boating and fishing facilities: launch ramps and landings;
docks; moorage facilities; small boat storage; boating fuel stations; fish
cleaning stations; and boat sewage pump-out stations;
         (e)   Amenities related to park use intended only for park visitors
and employees: laundry facilities; recreation shops; snack shops not exceeding
1,500 square feet of floor area;
         (f)   Support facilities serving only the park lands wherein the
facility is located: water supply facilities; sewage collection and treatment
facilities; stormwater management facilities; electrical and communication
facilities; restrooms and showers; recycling and trash collection facilities;
registration buildings; roads and bridges; and parking areas and walkways;
         (g)   Park maintenance and management facilities located within a
park: maintenance shops and yards; fuel stations for park vehicles; storage for
park equipment and supplies; administrative offices; and staff lodging; and
         (h)   Natural and cultural resource interpretative, educational and
informational facilities in state parks: interpretative centers; information/
orientation centers; self-supporting interpretative and informational kiosks;
natural history or cultural resource museums; natural history or cultural
educational facilities; reconstructed historic structures for cultural resource
interpretation; and retail stores not exceeding 1,500 square feet for sale of
books and other materials that support park resource interpretation and
education.
      (3)   Visitor lodging and retreat facilities if authorized in a State
Park Master Plan that is adopted by OPRD: historic lodges, houses or inns and
the following associated uses in a state park retreat area only:
         (a)   Meeting halls not exceeding 2,000 square feet of floor area; and
         (b)   Dining halls (not restaurants).
   (J)   Provisions for private campgrounds and campsites are as follows.
      (1)   Campgrounds in private parks may be permitted, subject to the
following.
         (a)   Except on a lot or parcel contiguous to a lake or reservoir,
campgrounds shall not be allowed within three miles of an urban growth boundary
unless an exception is approved pursuant to O.R.S. 197.732 and O.A.R. Chapter
660, division 4.
         (b)   A campground shall be designed and integrated into the rural
agricultural and forest environment in a manner that protects the natural
amenities of the site and provides buffers of existing native trees and
vegetation or other natural features between campsites.
         (c)   Campgrounds authorized by this rule shall not include
intensively developed recreational uses, such as swimming pools, tennis courts,
retail stores or gas stations.
         (d)   Overnight temporary use in the same campground by a camper or
camper’s vehicle shall not exceed a total of 30 days during any consecutive
six-month period.
      (2)   Campsites within campgrounds meeting the requirement of division
(J)(1) above and permitted pursuant to §§
156.620 through
156.630 must comply with the following.
         (a)   Allowed uses include tent, travel trailer or recreational
vehicle; yurts are also allowed uses, subject to division (J)(1)(c) above.
         (b)   Separate sewer, water or electric service hook-ups shall not be
provided to individual camp sites except that electrical service may be
provided to yurts.
         (c)   No more than one-third or a maximum of ten campsites, whichever
is smaller, may include a yurt. The yurt shall be located on the ground or on a
wood floor with no permanent foundation.
   (K)   For single-family dwellings, the landowner shall sign and record in
the deed records for the county a document binding the landowner, and the
landowner’s successors in interest, prohibiting them from pursuing a claim for
relief or cause of action alleging injury from farming or forest practices for
which no action or claim is allowed under O.R.S. 30.936 or 30.937.
   (L)   Permanent facility for the primary processing of forest products that
is:
      (1)   Located in a building or buildings that do not exceed 10,000 square
feet in total floor area;
      (2)   Located in an outdoor area that does not exceed one acre excluding
laydown and storage yards;
      (3)   Located in a combination of indoor and outdoor areas described in
divisions (L)(1) and (L)(2) above; and/or
      (4)   Adequately separated from surrounding properties to reasonably
mitigate noise, odor and other impacts generated by the facility that adversely
affect forest management and other existing uses, as determined by the
governing body.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-9-98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed
7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021;
Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03, passed 4-3-2024; Ord. ORD-
2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.086 SITING STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS AND STRUCTURES IN FOREST ZONES.
   The following siting criteria or their equivalent shall apply to all new
dwellings and structures in Forest Zones. These criteria are designed to make
such uses compatible with forest operations, to minimize wildfire hazards and
risks and to conserve values found on forest lands. A governing body shall
consider the criteria in this section together with the requirements of §
156.087 to identify the building site.
   (A)   Dwellings and structures shall be sited on the parcel so that:
      (1)   They have the least impact on nearby or adjoining forest or
agricultural lands;
      (2)   The siting ensures that adverse impacts on forest operations and
accepted farming practices on the tract will be minimized;
      (3)   The amount of forest lands used to site access roads, service
corridors, the dwelling and structures is minimized; and
      (4)   The risks associated with wildfire are minimized.
   (B)   Siting criteria satisfying division (A) above may include setbacks
from adjoining properties, clustering near or among existing structures, siting
close to existing roads and siting on that portion of the parcel least suited
for growing trees.
   (C)   The applicant shall provide evidence to the governing body that the
domestic water supply is from a source authorized in accordance with the Water
Resources Department’s administrative rules for the appropriation of
groundwater or surface water and not from a Class II stream, as defined in the
forest practices rules (O.A.R. Chapter 629). For the purpose of this division
(C), EVIDENCE OF A DOMESTIC WATER SUPPLY means:
      (1)   Verification from a water purveyor that the use described in the
application will be served by the purveyor under the purveyor’s rights to
appropriate water;
      (2)   A water use permit issued by the Water Resources Department for the
use described in the application; or
      (3)   Verification from the Water Resources Department that a water use
permit is not required for the use described in the application. If the
proposed water supply is from a well and is exempt from permitting requirements
under O.R.S. 537.545, the applicant shall submit the well constructor’s report
to the county upon completion of the well.
   (D)   As a condition of approval, if road access to the dwelling is by a
road owned and maintained by a private party or by the State Department of
Forestry, the U.S. Bureau of Land Management or the U.S. Forest Service, then
the applicant shall provide proof of a long-term road access use permit or
agreement. The road use permit may require the applicant to agree to accept
responsibility for road maintenance.
   (E)   Approval of a dwelling shall be subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Approval of a dwelling requires the owner of the tract to plant a
sufficient number of trees on the tract to demonstrate that the tract is
reasonably expected to meet Department of Forestry stocking requirements at the
time specified in Department of Forestry administrative rules;
      (2)   The Planning Department shall notify the County Assessor of the
above condition at the time the dwelling is approved;
      (3)   Stocking survey report:
         (a)   If the lot or parcel is more than 30 acres, the property owner
shall submit a stocking survey report to the County Assessor and the Assessor
will verify that the minimum stocking requirements have been met by the time
required by Department of Forestry rules; and
         (b)   Upon notification by the Assessor, the Department of Forestry
will determine whether the tract meets minimum stocking requirements of the
Forest Practices Act, being O.R.S. 527.610 et seq. If that Department
determines that the tract does not meet those requirements, that Department
will notify the owner and the Assessor that the land is not being managed as
forest land. The Assessor will then remove the forest land designation pursuant
to O.R.S. 321.359 and impose the additional tax.
      (4)   The county governing body or its designate shall require as a
condition of approval of a single-family dwelling under O.R.S. 215.213, 215.283
or 215.284 or otherwise in a Farm or Forest Zone, that the landowner for the
dwelling sign and record in the deed records for the county a document binding
the landowner, and the landowner’s successors in interest, prohibiting them
from pursuing a claim for relief or cause of action alleging injury from
farming or forest practices for which no action or claim is allowed under
O.R.S. 30.936 or 30.937.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-9-98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed
7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021;
Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.087 FIRE SITING STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   The following fire-siting standards or their equivalent shall apply to all
new dwelling or structures in a Forest Zone.
   (A)   (1)   The dwelling shall be located upon a parcel within a Fire
Protection District or shall be provided with residential fire protection by
contract.
      (2)   If the dwelling is not within a Fire Protection District, the
applicant shall provide evidence that the applicant has asked to be included
within the nearest such District.
      (3)   If the governing body determines that inclusion within a Fire
Protection District or contracting for residential fire protection is
impracticable, the governing body may provide an alternative means for
protecting the dwelling from fire hazards that shall comply with the following:
         (a)   The means selected may include a fire sprinkling system, on-site
equipment and water storage or other methods that are reasonable, given the
site conditions;
         (b)   If a water supply is required for fire protection, it shall be a
swimming pool, pond, lake or similar body of water that at all times contains
at least 4,000 gallons or a stream that has a continuous year round flow of at
least one cubic foot per second;
         (c)   The applicant shall provide verification from the Water
Resources Department that any permits or registrations required for water
diversion or storage have been obtained or that permits or registrations are
not required for the use; and
         (d)   Road access shall be provided to within 15 feet of the water’s
edge for firefighting pumping units. The road access shall accommodate the
turnaround of firefighting equipment during the fire season. Permanent signs
shall be posted along the access route to indicate the location of the
emergency water source.
   (B)   Road access to the dwelling shall meet road design standards described
in O.A.R. 660-006-0040.
   (C)   The owners of the dwellings and structures shall maintain a primary
fuel-free break area surrounding all structures and clear and maintain a
secondary fuel-free break area on land surrounding the dwelling that is owned
or controlled by the owner in accordance with the provisions in Recommended
Fire Siting Standards for Dwellings and Structures and Fire Safety Design
Standards for Roads dated March 1, 1991, and published by the State Department
of Forestry and shall demonstrate compliance with
Table 156.087.
 
Table 156.087 Minimum Primary Safety Zone
Slope Feet of Primary Safety Zone Feet of Additional Primary Safety Zone Down
                                  Slope
0%    30                          0
10%   30                          50
20%   30                          75
25%   30                          100
40%   30                          150
 
Figure 156.087
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35e8b7a669b5acb892f245aebd6615cd59ce190b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1638.png]
   (D)   The dwelling shall have a fire-retardant roof.
   (E)   The dwelling shall not be sited on a slope of greater than 40%.
   (F)   If the dwelling has a chimney or chimneys, each chimney shall have a
spark arrester.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-9-98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed
7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021;
Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.088 LAND DIVISIONS.
   (A)   The minimum parcel size for new forest parcels is 80 acres.
   (B)   New land divisions less than the parcel size in division (A) above may
be approved for any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   For the uses listed in this division (B)(1); provided, that such
uses have been approved pursuant to §§
156.620 through
156.630 and the parcel created from the division is the minimum size necessary
for the use:
         (a)   Exploration for and production of geothermal, gas, oil and other
associated hydrocarbons, including the placement and operation of compressors,
separators and other customary production equipment for an individual well
adjacent to the wellhead;
         (b)   Destination resorts, subject to O.R.S. 197.435 through 197.467
and Goal 8;
         (c)   Log scaling and weigh stations;
         (d)   Permanent facility for the primary processing of forest products
subject to §
156.085(L);
         (e)   Permanent logging equipment repair and storage;
         (f)   Mining and processing of oil, gas or other subsurface resources,
as defined in O.R.S. Chapter 520, and not otherwise permitted under §
156.081(D) (e.g., compressors, separators and storage serving multiple wells),
and mining and processing of aggregate and mineral resources, as defined in
O.R.S. Chapter 517;
         (g)   Television, microwave and radio communication facilities and
transmission towers;
         (h)   Water intake facilities, related treatment facilities, pumping
stations and distribution lines;
         (i)   Reservoirs and water impoundments;
         (j)   Disposal site for solid waste approved by the governing body of
a city or county or both and for which the State Department of Environmental
Quality has granted a permit under O.R.S. 459.245, together with equipment,
facilities or buildings necessary for its operation;
         (k)   Commercial utility facilities for the purpose of generating
power subject to §
156.085(G);
         (l)   Aids to navigation and aviation;
         (m)   Firearms training facility as provided in O.R.S. 197.770(2);
         (n)   Fire stations for rural fire protection;
         (o)   Cemeteries;
         (p)   Public parks subject to §
156.085(I); and
         (q)   Private parks and campgrounds subject to §
156.085(J).
      (2)   For the establishment of a parcel for a dwelling that has existed
since before June 1, 1995, subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   The parcel established may not be larger than five acres, except
as necessary to recognize physical factors such as roads or streams, in which
case the parcel shall not be larger than ten acres; and
         (b)   The parcel that does not contain the dwelling is not entitled to
a dwelling unless subsequently authorized by law or goal and the parcel either:
            1.   Meets the minimum land division standards of the zone; or
            2.   Is consolidated with another parcel, and together the parcels
meet the minimum land division standards of the zone.
      (3)   To allow a division of forest land to facilitate a forest practice
as defined in O.R.S. 527.620 that results in a parcel that does not meet the
minimum area requirements of division (A) above. Approvals shall be based on
findings that demonstrate that there are unique property specific
characteristics present in the proposed parcel that require an amount of land
smaller than the minimum area requirements of division (A) above in order to
conduct the forest practice. Parcels created pursuant to this division (B)(3):
         (a)   Are not eligible for siting of a new dwelling;
         (b)   May not serve as the justification for the siting of a future
dwelling on other lots or parcels;
         (c)   May not, as a result of the land division, be used to justify
redesignation or rezoning of resource lands; and
         (d)   May not result in a parcel of less than 35 acres, unless the
purpose of the land division is to:
               1.   Facilitate an exchange of lands involving a governmental
agency; or
               2.   Allow transactions in which at least one participant is a
person with a cumulative ownership of at least 2,000 acres of forest land.
      (4)   To allow a division of a lot or parcel zoned for forest use if:
         (a)   At least two dwellings lawfully existed on the lot or parcel
prior to November 4, 1993;
         (b)   Each dwelling complies with the criteria for a replacement
dwelling under §
156.085(D)(1);
         (c)   Except for one parcel, each parcel created under this division
(B)(4) is between two and five acres in size;
         (d)   At least one dwelling is located on each parcel created under
this division (B)(4); and
         (e)   The landowner of a parcel created under this division (B)(4)
provides evidence that a restriction prohibiting the landowner and the
landowner’s successors in interest from further dividing the parcel has been
recorded with the Clerk of the county in which the parcel is located. A
restriction imposed under this division (B)(4) shall be irrevocable unless a
statement of release is signed by the County Planning Director of the county in
which the parcel is located indicating that the Comprehensive Plan or land use
regulations applicable to the parcel have been changed so that the parcel is no
longer subject to statewide planning goals protecting forestland or unless the
land division is subsequently authorized by law or by a change in a statewide
planning goal for land zoned for forest use.
      (5)   To allow a proposed division of land to preserve open space or
parks, as provided in O.R.S. 215.783.
   (C)   A lot or parcel may not be divided under division (B)(4) above if an
existing dwelling on the lot or parcel was approved under a statute, an
administrative rule or a land use regulation, as defined in O.R.S. 197.015,
that required removal of the dwelling or that prohibited subsequent division of
the lot or parcel.
   (D)   Restrictions under this section are as follows.
      (1)   An applicant for the creation of a parcel pursuant to division (B)
(2) above shall provide evidence that a restriction on the remaining parcel,
not containing the dwelling, has been recorded with the County Clerk. The
restriction shall allow no dwellings unless authorized by law or goal on land
zoned for forest use except as permitted under division (B) above.
      (2)   A restriction imposed under this division (D) shall be irrevocable
unless a statement of release is signed by the County Planning Director of the
county where the property is located indicating that the Comprehensive Plan or
land use regulations applicable to the property have been changed in such a
manner that the parcel is no longer subject to statewide planning goals
pertaining to agricultural land or forest land.
   (E)   A landowner allowed a land division under division (B) above shall
sign a statement that shall be recorded with the Clerk of the county in which
the property is located, declaring that the landowner will not in the future
complain about accepted farming or forest practices on nearby lands devoted to
farm or forest use.
   (F)   The county governing body or its designate may not approve a property
line adjustment of a lot or parcel in a manner that separates a temporary
hardship dwelling or home occupation from the parcel on which the primary
residential use exists.
   (G)   A division of a lawfully established unit of land may occur along an
urban growth boundary where the parcel remaining outside the urban growth
boundary is zoned for forest use and is smaller than the minimum parcel size;
provided, that:
      (1)   If the parcel contains a dwelling, it must be large enough to
support continued residential use; or
      (2)   If the parcel does not contain a dwelling:
         (a)   It is not eligible for siting a dwelling, except as may be
authorized under O.R.S. 195.120;
         (b)   It may not be considered in approving a redesignation or
rezoning of forest lands, except to allow a public park, open space or other
natural resource use; and
         (c)   The owner of the parcel shall record with the County Clerk an
irrevocable deed restriction prohibiting the owner and all successors in
interest from pursuing a cause of action or claim of relief alleging injury
from farming or forest practices for which a claim or action is not allowed
under O.R.S. 30.936 or 30.937.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-9-98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed
7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021;
Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.089 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   All dwellings and structures approved pursuant to this subchapter shall be
sited in accordance with this section.
   (A)   Lot size standards. Lot size shall be consistent with the requirements
of §
156.088.
   (B)   Setbacks.
      (1)   The front yard setback from the property line shall be 20 feet for
property on a local street and 40 feet on a minor collector, 60 feet from a
property line fronting on a major collector ROW and 100 feet from a property
line fronting on an arterial.
      (2)   Each side yard setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
      (3)   Rear yards shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
      (4)   Stream setback shall be as follows. All sewage disposal
installations such as outhouses, septic tank and drainfield systems shall be
set back from the high-water line or mark along all streams and lakes a minimum
of 100 feet, measured at right angles to the high-water line or mark. All
structures, buildings or similar permanent fixtures shall be set back from the
high-water line or mark along all streams or lakes a minimum of 100 feet
measured at right angles to the high-water line or mark.
      (5)   Big game range restrictions are as follows. Standards found in §§
156.565 through
156.569 for the Significant Resource Overlay Zone apply.
   (C)   Height.
      (1)   Dwellings shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
      (2)   Nonresidential structures shall not exceed a height of 35 feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-9-98, passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed
7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021;
Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.090 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-9-98,
passed 12-23-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-
4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017;
Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-
2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
RURAL SERVICE CENTER ZONE (RSC)
§ 156.100 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the RSC Zone is to provide for a limited number of commercial
service centers located in rural areas that serve the more immediate needs of
residents from the surrounding countryside. Farm related commercial and
industrial uses, such as fertilizer bulk stations and grain elevators, also
need to be located in close proximity to their service areas. In an RSC Zone,
the following regulations shall apply.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.101 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an RSC Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright:
   (A)   Farming, excluding commercial livestock feedlot, livestock sales yard,
hog farms and mink farms, and subject to the restrictions on animals in §
156.103;
   (B)   Non-farm single-family residence, including a mobile home subject to
the requirements set forth in §
156.603;
   (C)   Retail store, office or service establishment;
   (D)   Automobile service station;
   (E)   Agriculturally oriented commercial use;
   (F)   Park, playground or community building;
   (G)   Church, school and cemetery;
   (H)   Utility facility; and
   (I)   Television or radio station, transmitter or tower.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.102 CONDITIONAL USES.
   In an RSC Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
when authorized in accordance with the requirements set forth in §§
156.620 through
156.630:
   (A)   Commercial residential use;
   (B)   Multi-family dwelling;
   (C)   Tourist or travelers accommodations;
   (D)   Mobile home park and recreational vehicle park;
   (E)   Manufacturing or warehousing;
   (F)   Kennel or animal hospital;
   (G)   Automobile wrecking yard and/or repair garage;
   (H)   Commercial amusement or recreation establishment;
   (I)   Water supply and treatment facility;
   (J)   Sewage disposal and treatment facility;
   (K)   Agriculturally oriented industrial use; and
   (L)   Other buildings and uses similar to the list above which shall not
have any different or more detrimental effect upon the adjoining areas or
districts than the buildings and uses specifically listed, shall only be
incidental and directly related to the operation of permitted Rural Service
Center uses.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.103 LOT SIZE.
   In an RSC Zone, the following lot sizes shall apply.
   (A)   The minimum average width of lots served by an approved community,
municipal or public water system and an approved community or public sewerage
system shall not be less than 50 feet and an area of not less than 6,000 square
feet.
   (B)   The minimum average width of lots served by either an approved
community, municipal or public water system or an approved community or public
sewerage system, but not served by both, shall not be less than 100 feet and an
area of not less than 20,000 square feet.
   (C)   The minimum average width of lots not served by an approved community,
municipal or public water system or by an approved community or public sewerage
system shall be 150 feet and shall have a lot area of not less than one acre
(43,560 square feet).
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.104 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   The following dimensional standards shall apply in an RSC Zone.
   (A)   Percent of coverage. The main building and accessory buildings located
on any building site or lot shall not cover in excess of 30% of the total lot
area.
   (B)   Building height. No residential building or structure nor the
enlargement of any such building or structure shall be hereafter erected to
exceed two stories or more than 25 feet in height, except split-level
buildings, which may be increased in height to 30 feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.105 YARDS.
   In an RSC Zone, the following yard requirements shall apply.
   (A)   The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet.
   (B)   The minimum side yard shall be ten feet, except on the street side of
a corner lot, it shall be 20 feet.
   (C)   The minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet.
   (D)   The minimum lot frontage on a public street or private roadway shall
be 50 feet, except that a flag lot frontage may be reduced to the width of a
required driveway but not less than 20 feet and except for a cul-de-sac, where
the frontage may be reduced to 30 feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.106 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   In an RSC Zone, off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of §§
156.595 through
156.604.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.107 SIGNS.
   Signs for the various uses permitted in an RSC Zone shall conform to the
standards specified under comparable zones of this chapter.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.108 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-8-
98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed
11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-
2021)
UMATILLA DEPOT WILDLIFE HABITAT ZONE (UDWH)
§ 156.120 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the (UDWH) Umatilla Depot Wildlife Habitat Zone is to provide
a dedicated zoning classification to preserve the natural shrub-steppe desert
landscape and contribute to the preservation of wildlife and wildlife habitat.
It is also designed to retain a natural landscape and open space resource of
regional significance, and to provide for low impact recreation, natural and
historic heritage interpretation and environmental education opportunities.
Uses are limited to those that will provide for the protection, restoration and
management of wildlife and wildlife habitat resources within the Zone.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.121 USES PERMITTED WITH A ZONING PERMIT.
   Uses permitted with a zoning permit and subject to the provisions of this
section and the provisions of §
156.604 are as follows:
   (A)   Ecotype preserve/wildlife refuge/open space preserve and associated
accessory uses, including, but not limited to, wildlife observation facilities,
plant propagation facilities for on-site restoration, natural heritage
interpretive displays and public restrooms;
   (B)   Interpretive/visitor center not to exceed 15,000 square feet (larger
facilities require conditional use approval). Said uses can include facilities,
such as natural and historic heritage displays, exhibit areas, gallery, small
theater, administrative offices, classrooms, dining areas/café, planetarium,
subsidiary gift/book shop, public conveniences and associated parking;
   (C)   Low impact recreation facilities, including, but not limited to, non-
motorized uses such as hiking trails, bicycling paths, equestrian trails and
picnic facilities;
   (D)   Observatory;
   (E)   Utility facilities and roads, including the construction and
maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines, gas and water
distribution lines, sewage collection lines, road development and maintenance,
construction and maintenance of railroad lines and related facilities, but
excluding commercial facilities for the purpose of generating power for public
use; and
   (F)   Commercial storage in existing structures with existing access. Use
shall be limited to igloos that have direct access to a roadway.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.122 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit are subject to applicable
provisions within this section and §§
156.620 through
156.630. Also required will be findings that the proposed use: complies with
the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance and other relevant county policies;
will serve a useful purpose to the area and to the purpose of the UDWH Zone as
stated herein; and will be designed and built so as to reduce potential
negative impacts to both neighboring parcels and the primary purpose of the
UDWH Zone. All conditional use applications associated with an established UDWH
Zone shall submit as part of the application a general land-use plan schematic
for the refuge/preserve indicating the longer range management and facilities
vision for the Zone, and a more detailed site plan for the specific conditional
use request sufficient to evaluate design and land-use considerations
associated with the permit request. A zoning permit will be issued following
final approval of a conditional use:
   (A)   Interpretive/visitor center with accessory uses, not including
parking, in excess of 15,000 square feet;
   (B)   Commercial operations conducted for the mining and processing of
geothermal resources, aggregate and other mineral resources or other subsurface
resources;
   (C)   Short-term stay (14 days or less) commercial campground with
associated support facilities;
   (D)   Farm use that provides a net benefit to the wildlife habitat,
excluding livestock feedlots and sale yards and hog and poultry farms;
   (E)   The propagation or harvesting of a forest product;
   (F)   Commercial solar power generation for sale for public use; and
   (G)   Private cemetery or burial site.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.123 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   In the UDWH Zone, the following dimensional standards shall apply.
   (A)   Minimum parcel. The minimum lot size shall be one acre unless written
proof from the Department of Environmental Quality is provided which shows that
an approvable subsurface disposal system can be permitted, or the minimum lot
size shall be the minimum necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the
proposed use and is also consistent with the purpose and intent of the UDWH
Zone.
   (B)   Setback. No building shall be located closer than 20 feet from a
property line, street or road.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE (RR 1)
§ 156.135 PURPOSE.
   The Rural Residential Zone recognizes the existence of smaller lots outside
of urban growth boundaries and allows the continuation of single-family
dwellings on small lots in areas where this development has been established.
However, state policy discourages the expansion of small lot development
outside of urban growth boundaries, and effective October 4, 2000, increased
the minimum lot area for rural residential development to two acres. In an RR
Zone, the following regulations shall apply.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.136 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an RR 1 Zone, the following uses and their accessory structures and uses
are permitted outright subject to zoning permit approval in accordance with §
156.610. Unless otherwise mandated by §
156.611, authorization of such uses does not require notice to adjacent
property owners or other interested parties and does not constitute a land use
decision pursuant to O.R.S. 197.015(10).
   (A)   Single-family dwelling on an individual lot, including a mobile home
subject to requirements set forth in §
156.603;
   (B)   Farming, subject to the restrictions on animals set forth in §
156.138, and excluding hog or mink farms, livestock feed or sales yard and
slaughterhouses. Other than the establishment of new structures, this use does
not require zoning permit approval;
   (C)   Utility facility necessary for public service;
   (D)   Public park, recreation area, community or neighborhood center;
   (E)   Other public uses or buildings necessary to serve the rural
residential needs for the area; and
   (F)   Family childcare home.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.137 CONDITIONAL USES.
   In an RR 1 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
when authorized in accordance with the requirements set forth by this section
and §§
156.620 through
156.630:
   (A)   Golf course;
   (B)   Water supply and treatment facility;
   (C)   Sewage disposal and treatment facility;
   (D)   Solid waste disposal site and facility;
   (E)   Two-family dwelling (duplex); and
   (F)   Home occupations subject to the limitations set forth in §§
156.620 through
156.630.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.138 LIMITATIONS ON USES.
   (A)   In Rural Residential One Acre Zone (RR 1), the number of livestock
and/or animals, including cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine, poultry or fur-
bearing animals is subject to the density limitations listed in this section.
      (1)   The primary intended use for properties zoned RR 1 is residential.
The raising of livestock and/or animals in these zones shall be incidental to
the primary use.
      (2)   Livestock and/or animal densities are as follows:
         (a)   Cattle: two per acre;
         (b)   Horses, mules, donkeys, llamas: two animals per acre;
         (c)   Sheep or goats: six animals per acre;
         (d)   Emu: eight ratites per acre;
         (e)   Ostrich: four ratites per acre;
         (f)   Miniature cows, horses, mules and donkeys: four per acre; and
         (g)   Swine: four swine per acre.
      (3)   Cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, llamas, sheep, goats, emu and
ostriches cannot be kept on a site having an area of less than one-half acre.
      (4)   All swine shall be confined to an area not less than 500 feet from
any adjacent residential dwelling (not the property of the owner of the swine).
      (5)   Animal density listed above for livestock, including cattle,
horses, mules, donkeys, llamas, sheep, goats, emu and ostrich, also allows two
offspring up to six months of age, per animal.
      (6)   The number of colonies of bees allowed on a property shall be
limited to one colony for each 1,000 square feet of lot area.
      (7)   Density for poultry is as follows: 20 fowl per acre; and density
for fur-bearing animals (rabbits, mink, chinchillas and the like): 20 animals
per acre.
   (B)   In Rural Residential One Acre (RR 1) Zone, commercial trucks and
trucking businesses are not an allowed use. A landowner may be allowed to use a
truck or tractor unit as personal transportation to the resident parcel. No
more than one truck or tractor unit is allowed per parcel.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-5-98, passed 7-22-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03, passed 4-3-
2024; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.139 YARD AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   In an RR 1 Zone, the following yards and setbacks shall be maintained:
   (A)   The front setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet from a property line
fronting on a local minor collector or marginal access street ROW, 30 feet from
a property line fronting on a major collector ROW and 80 feet from an arterial
ROW unless other provisions from combining accesses are provided and approved
by the county.
   (B)   There shall be a minimum side yard of ten feet for all uses, except in
the case of a nonresidential use adjacent to a residential use, the minimum
side yard shall be 20 feet.
   (C)   The minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.140 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   In an RR 1 Zone, the following dimensional standards shall apply.
   (A)   Percent of lot coverage. The main building and accessory buildings
located on any building site or lot shall not cover in excess of 30% of the
total lot area.
   (B)   Building height. No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any
building or structure, shall be hereafter erected to exceed two stories or more
than 30 feet in height.
   (C)   Minimum lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage on a public street or
private roadway shall be 50 feet, except that a flag lot frontage may be
reduced to the width of a required driveway but no less than 20 feet and except
for a cul-de-sac, where the frontage may be reduced to 30 feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.141 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   In an RR 1 Zone, the off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of §§
156.595 through
156.604.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.142 LOT SIZE.
   The minimum average width of lots shall be 150 feet and have an area not
less than two acres.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.143 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01,
passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-
24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
FARM RESIDENTIAL ZONE (FR-2)
§ 156.155 PURPOSE.
   The Rural Residential Zone recognizes the existence of smaller lots outside
of urban growth boundaries and allows the continuation of single-family
dwellings on small lots in areas where this development has been established.
However, state policy discourages the expansion of small lot development
outside of urban growth boundaries, and effective October 4, 2000, increased
the minimum lot area for rural residential development to two acres. In an FR-
2 Zone, the following regulations shall apply.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.156 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an FR-2 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright:
   (A)   Single-family dwelling on an individual lot, including a mobile home
subject to requirements set forth in §
156.603;
   (B)   Farming, subject to the restrictions on animals set forth in §
156.158, and excluding hogs or mink farms, livestock feed or sales yard and
slaughterhouses;
   (C)   Utility facility necessary to serve the area and county;
   (D)   Public park, recreation area, community or neighborhood center; and
   (E)   Other public uses or buildings necessary to serve the farm residential
needs for the area.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.157 CONDITIONAL USES.
   In an FR-2 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
when authorized in accordance with the requirements set forth by this section
and §§
156.620 through
156.630:
   (A)   Golf course;
   (B)   Water supply and treatment facility;
   (C)   Sewage disposal and treatment facility;
   (D)   Solid waste disposal site and facility;
   (E)   Two-family dwelling (duplex);
   (F)   Operations for the exploration, mining and processing of geothermal
resources, as defined by O.R.S. 522.005(11), aggregate and mineral resources;
   (G)   Home occupations subject to the limitations set forth in §§
156.620 through
156.630;
   (H)   Training stable;
   (I)   Veterinary clinic;
   (J)   Air strip; and
   (K)   Dog kennel.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.158 LIMITATIONS ON USES.
   (A)   In Farm Residential Two Acre Zone (FR-2), the number of livestock and/
or animals including cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine, poultry or fur-
bearing animals is subject to the density limitations listed in this section.
      (1)   The primary intended use for properties zoned FR-2 is residential.
The raising of livestock and/or animals in these zones shall be incidental to
the primary use.
      (2)   Livestock and/or animal densities are as follows:
         (a)   Cattle: two per acre;
         (b)   Horses, mules, donkeys, llamas: two animals per acre;
         (c)   Sheep or goats: six animals per acre;
         (d)   Emu: eight ratites per acre;
         (e)   Ostrich: four ratites per acre;
         (f)   Miniature cows, horses, mules and donkeys: four per acre; or
         (g)   Swine: four swine per acre.
      (3)   Cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, llamas, sheep, goats, emu and
ostriches cannot be kept on a site having an area of less than one-half acre.
      (4)   All swine shall be confined to an area not less than 500 feet from
any adjacent residential dwelling (not the property of the owner of the swine).
      (5)   Animal density listed above for livestock, including cattle,
horses, mules, donkeys, llamas, sheep, goats, emu and ostrich, also allows two
offspring up to six months of age, per animal.
      (6)   The number of colonies of bees allowed on a property shall be
limited to one colony for each 1,000 square feet of lot area.
      (7)   Density for poultry shall be as follows: 20 fowl per acre; and
density for fur-bearing animals (rabbits, mink, chinchillas and the like): 20
animals per acre.
   (B)   In Farm Residential Two Acre (FR-2) Zone, commercial trucks and
trucking businesses are not an allowed use. A landowner may be allowed to use a
truck or tractor unit as personal transportation to the resident parcel. No
more than one truck or tractor unit is allowed per parcel.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. MC-C-5-08, passed - -2008; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03, passed 4-3-
2024)
§ 156.159 YARD AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   In an FR-2 Zone, the following yard and setbacks shall be maintained.
   (A)   The front setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet from a property line
fronting on a local minor collector or marginal access street ROW, 30 feet from
a property line fronting on a major collector ROW and 80 feet from an arterial
ROW unless other provisions from combining accesses are provided and approved
by the county.
   (B)   There shall be a minimum side yard of ten feet for all uses, except in
the case of a nonresidential use adjacent to a residential use the minimum side
yard shall be 20 feet.
   (C)   The minimum rear yard shall be ten feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.160 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   In an FR-2 Zone, the following dimensional standards shall apply.
   (A)   Percent of lot coverage. The main building and accessory buildings
located on any building site or lot shall not cover in excess of 30% of the
total lot area.
   (B)   Building height. No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any
building or structure, shall be hereafter erected to exceed two stories or more
than 30 feet in height.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.161 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   In an FR-2 Zone, the off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of §§
156.595 through
156.604.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.162 LOT SIZE.
   The minimum average width of lots shall be 150 feet and have an area not
less than two acres.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.163 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01,
passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-05, passed 9-28-2005; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-
24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
RURAL RESIDENTIAL TEN ZONE (RR-10)
§ 156.175 PURPOSE.
   The RR-10 Rural Residential Zone is designed to provide lands for rural
living in a rural residential atmosphere. The ten-acre minimum lot size
complies with Statewide Planning Goal 14 where parcels are rural in size and
are sufficiently large enough to accommodate private wells and sewage disposal
systems. Standards for development are consistent with desired rural character
and are compatible with adjacent farming and natural resource land management.
Gardens and limited livestock are allowed outright in the Zone. The RR-10 Zone
may be approved when an application for rezoning lands also includes an
application for exception to Statewide Planning Goal 3 and O.A.R. Chapter 660-
004-0000 and amendment standards found in §§
156.670 through
156.675. A rezone application must also comply with Statewide Planning Goal 12
Transportation and the County Transportation System Plan (TSP).
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.176 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an RR-10 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
with a zoning permit, pursuant to §
156.005:
   (A)   Single-family dwelling on an individual lot, including a mobile home
subject to requirements set forth in §
156.603; and
   (B)   Other public or private uses or buildings necessary to serve the rural
residential use of the land.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.177 CONDITIONAL USES.
   In an RR-10 Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
when authorized in accordance with the requirements set forth by this section
and §§
156.620 through
156.630:
   (A)   Home occupations subject to the limitations set forth in §§
156.620 through
156.630;
   (B)   Public parks, trails, recreation area, community or neighborhood
center;
   (C)   Agri-tourism events as defined in §
156.003; and
   (D)   Utility facility necessary to serve the area or county.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.178 LIMITATIONS ON USES.
   (A)   In Rural Residential Ten Acre Zone (RR-10), the number of livestock
and/or animals, including cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine, poultry or fur-
bearing animals is subject to the density limitations listed in this section.
      (1)   The primary intended use for properties zoned RR-10 is residential.
The raising of livestock and/or animals in these zones shall be incidental to
the primary use.
      (2)   Livestock and/or animal densities are calculated based on open
space of each parcel as follows:
         (a)   Cattle: two per acre, ten cattle maximum;
         (b)   Horses, mules, donkeys, llamas: two animals per acre, ten
maximum;
         (c)   Sheep or goats: six animals per acre, 30 animals maximum;
         (d)   Emu: eight ratites per acre, 40 animals maximum;
         (e)   Ostrich: four ratites per acre, 20 animals maximum;
         (f)   Miniature cows, horses, mules and donkeys: four per acre, 20
animals maximum;
         (g)   Swine: four pigs per acre with maximum of four per parcel;
         (h)   Cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, llamas, sheep, goats, emu and
ostriches cannot be kept on a site having an area of less than one-half acre;
         (i)   All swine shall be confined to an area not less than 500 feet
from any adjacent residential dwelling (not the property of the owner of the
swine). Swine are only allowed seasonally as part of 4-H or FFA projects;
         (j)   Animal density listed above for livestock, including cattle,
horses, mules, donkeys, llamas, sheep, goats, emu and ostrich, also allows two
offspring up to six months of age, per animal;
         (k)   The number of colonies of bees allowed on a property shall be
limited to one colony for each 1,000 square feet of lot area; and
         (l)   Density for poultry shall be as follows: 20 fowl per acre; and
density for fur-bearing animals (rabbits, mink, chinchillas and the like: 20
animals per acre.
   (B)   In Rural Residential Ten-Acre (RR-10) Zone, commercial trucks and
trucking businesses are not an allowed use. A landowner may be allowed to use a
truck or tractor unit as personal transportation to the resident parcel. No
more than one truck or tractor unit is allowed per parcel.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-5-98, passed 7-22-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03, passed 4-3-2024)
§ 156.179 YARDS AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   In an RR-10 Zone, the following yards and setbacks shall be maintained.
   (A)   The front setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet from a property line
fronting on a local minor collector or marginal access street ROW, 30 feet from
a property line fronting on a major collector ROW and 80 feet from an arterial
ROW unless other provisions from combining accesses are provided and approved
by the county.
   (B)   There shall be a minimum side yard of ten feet for all uses, except in
the case of a nonresidential use adjacent to a residential use, the minimum
side yard shall be 20 feet.
   (C)   The minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.180 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   In an RR-10 Zone, the following dimensional standards shall apply.
   (A)   Percent of lot coverage. The main building and accessory buildings
located on any building site or lot shall not cover in excess of 30% of the
total lot area.
   (B)   Minimum lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage on a public street or
private roadway shall be 50 feet, except that a flag lot frontage may be
reduced to the width of a required driveway but no less than 20 feet and except
for a cul-de-sac, where the frontage may be reduced to 30 feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.181 LOT SIZE.
   The minimum average width of lots shall be 150 feet and have an area not
less than ten acres.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.182 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all land use generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01,
passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021)
SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONE (SR)
§ 156.195 PURPOSE.
   The SR Zone accommodates small lot development and transition to urban type
densities and uses within an urban growth boundary. In an SR Zone, the
following regulations shall apply.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-4-96, passed 4-24-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.196 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an SR Zone, the following uses and their accessory structures and uses
are permitted subject to zoning permit approval in accordance with §
156.610. Unless otherwise mandated by §
156.611, authorization of such uses does not require notice to adjacent
property owners or other interested parties and does not constitute a land use
decision pursuant to O.R.S. 197.015(10):
   (A)   Single-family dwellings, including a mobile home on an individual lot
subject to the requirements set forth in §
156.603;
   (B)   Two-family dwellings;
   (C)   Multi-family dwelling complexes of 20 or less units; and
   (D)   Family childcare home.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-4-96, passed 4-24-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.197 USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   In the SR Zone, the following uses and activities and their accessory
buildings and uses may be permitted outright through the site plan review
process provided in §
156.611, and subject to the provisions of this section if determined by the
Planning Director to satisfy the applicable criteria and provisions of law.
Notice and an opportunity to file an appeal must be provided in the manner
described in O.R.S. 215.416. These uses may be referred to the Planning
Commission for review if deemed appropriate by the Planning Director:
   (A)   Utility facility necessary for public service;
   (B)   Church;
   (C)   Childcare center; provided the residential character of the building
is maintained;
   (D)   Governmental structure, or use including park, playground, recreation
building, fire station, library or museum and limited hereto; and
   (E)   Multi-family dwelling complex of more than 20 units.
(Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.198 CONDITIONAL USES.
   In an SR Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
when authorized in accordance with the requirements set forth in §§
156.620 through
156.630:
   (A)   Golf course and other open land recreational use, but excluding
intensive commercial amusement uses such as “pitch and putt” golf course,
driving range, automobile or motorcycle race track or amusement park;
   (B)   Hospital, sanitorium, rest home, home for the aged, nursing home or
convalescent home and medical or dental clinic;
   (C)   School or college;
   (D)   Mobile home park;
   (E)   Home occupations conducted in a structure accessory to the dwelling;
provided, that all other limitations of home occupations are observed;
   (F)   Water supply and sewage treatment facility; and
   (G)   Crop cultivation or farm and truck gardens, including plant nurseries.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-4-96, passed 4-24-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.199 LIMITATIONS ON USES.
   (A)   In Suburban Residential One Acre Zone (SR-1), the number of livestock
and/or animals, including cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine, poultry or fur-
bearing animals is subject to the density limitations listed in this section.
      (1)   The primary intended use for properties zoned SR-1 is residential.
The raising of livestock and/or animals in these zones shall be incidental to
the primary use.
      (2)   Livestock and or animal densities are as follows:
         (a)   Cattle: two per acre;
         (b)   Horses, mules, donkeys, llamas: two animals per acre;
         (c)   Sheep or goats: six animal per acre;
         (d)   Emu: eight ratites per acre;
         (e)   Ostrich: four ratites per acre;
         (f)   Miniature cows, horses, mules and donkeys: four per acre; and
         (g)   Swine: permitted only for 4-H and/or FFA projects and limited to
two per acre.
      (3)   Cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, llamas, sheep, goats, emu and
ostriches cannot be kept on a site having an area of less than one-half acre.
      (4)   The number of colonies of bees allowed on a lot shall be limited to
one colony for each 1,000 square feet of lot area.
      (5)   Livestock, animals, ratites and/or fowl shall be properly caged or
housed, and proper sanitation shall be maintained at all times. Animal feed
shall be appropriately stored in rodent-proof receptacles.
      (6)   No other livestock except for domestic dogs and cats are permitted.
      (7)   Animal density listed above for livestock, including cattle,
horses, mules, donkeys, llamas, sheep, goats, emu and ostrich, also allows two
offspring up to six months of age, per animal.
      (8)   Density for poultry shall be as follows: 20 fowl per acre; and
density for fur-bearing animals (rabbits, mink, chinchillas and the like): 20
animals per acre.
      (9)   Within an SR-1 Zoning District located outside an urban growth
boundary, a manufactured home placed outside of a manufactured home subdivision
or a mobile home park shall:
         (a)   Be multi-sectional (double-wide or wider) and enclose a floor
area of not less than 1,000 square feet;
         (b)   Be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation, enclosed
at the perimeter with no more than 16 inches of the enclosing material exposed
above grade. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than 16 inches
of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the home. If
the manufactured home is placed on a basement, the 16-inch limitation will not
apply;
         (c)   Have a roof with a nominal pitch of three feet in height for
each 12 feet in width;
         (d)   Have a garage or carport with exterior materials matching the
manufactured home;
         (e)   Be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal
envelope meeting performance standards which reduce heat loss to levels
equivalent to the performance standards required of single-family dwellings
constructed under the State Building Code, as defined in O.R.S. 455.010;
(Evidence demonstrating that the manufactured home meets “Super Good Cents”
energy efficiency standards is deemed to satisfy the exterior thermal envelope
certification requirement; additional manufacturers’ certification shall be
required);
         (f)   Not have bare metal siding or roofing; and
         (g)   Single-side mobile homes that existed on or before April 24,
1996, shall not be subject to this section, (i.e., single-wide mobile homes
will be “grand-fathered” for the purposes of this section; single-wide mobile
homes must meet all other requirements of § 156.603).
   (B)   In Suburban Residential One Acre (SR-1) Zone, commercial trucks and
trucking businesses are not an allowed use. A landowner may be allowed to use a
truck or tractor unit as personal transportation to the resident parcel. No
more than one truck or tractor unit is allowed per parcel.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-4-96, passed 4-24-1996; Ord. MC-C-5-
98, passed 7-22-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03, passed 4-3-
2024; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.200 LOT SIZE.
   In an SR Zone, the following lot sizes shall apply; or if located within the
urban growth boundary of a city, the lot size standards set forth hereby shall
apply.
   (A)   For a single-family dwelling served by both an approved community or
municipal water system and an approved community or municipal sewerage system,
the minimum lot area shall be 7,000 square feet.
   (B)   For a two-family dwelling served by both an approved community or
municipal water system and an approved community or municipal sewerage system,
the minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet.
   (C)   For a single-family dwelling not served by either an approved
community or municipal water system or an approved community or municipal
sewerage system, the minimum lot area shall be one acre (43,560 square feet).
   (D)   For a single-family dwelling served by an approved community or
municipal water system, but not served by an approved community or municipal
sewerage system, or a single-family dwelling served by an approved community or
municipal sewerage system but not served by an approved community or municipal
water system, the minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet.
   (E)   For a two-family dwelling served by an approved community or municipal
sewerage system but not by an approved community or municipal water system, or
a two-family dwelling served by an approved community or municipal water system
but not by an approved community or municipal sewerage system, the minimum lot
area shall be 30,000 square feet.
   (F)   For a two-family dwelling not served by either an approved community
or municipal water system or an approved community or municipal sewerage
system, the minimum lot area shall be one and one-half acre (65,340 square
feet).
   (G)   For a multi-family dwelling having one-story and not served by either
an approved community or municipal water system or an approved community or
municipal sewerage system, the minimum lot area shall be one and one-half acres
(65,340 square feet) plus 7,500 square feet for each dwelling unit over two.
   (H)   For a multi-family dwelling unit having more than one story and not
served by either an approved community or municipal water system or an approved
community or municipal sewerage system, the minimum lot size shall be one and
one-half acres (65,340 square feet) plus 6,000 square feet for each dwelling
unit over two.
   (I)   For a multi-family dwelling unit having one story and served by either
an approved community or municipal water system or an approved community or
municipal sewerage system, but not by both, the minimum lot area shall be
30,000 square feet plus 5,000 square feet for each dwelling unit over two.
   (J)   For a multi-family dwelling unit having more than one story and served
by either an approved community or municipal water system or an approved
community or municipal sewerage system, but not by both, the minimum lot area
shall be 30,000 square feet plus 3,500 square feet for each dwelling unit over
two.
   (K)   For a multi-family dwelling unit having one story and served by both
an approved community or municipal water system and an approved community or
municipal sewerage system, the minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet
plus 2,500 square feet for each dwelling unit over two.
   (L)   For a multi-family dwelling unit having more than one story and served
by both an approved community or municipal water system and an approved
community or municipal sewerage system, the minimum lot area shall be 10,000
square feet plus 1,500 square feet for each dwelling unit over two.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-4-96, passed 4-24-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.201 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   In an SR Zone, the following requirements shall apply.
   (A)   Percent of coverage. The main building and accessory buildings located
on any building site or lot shall not cover in excess of 30% of the lot area.
   (B)   Front yard. Front yards shall not be less than 20 feet deep.
   (C)   Side yards. There shall be a minimum side yard of ten feet for all
uses, except in the case of a nonresidential use adjacent to a residential use,
the minimum side yard shall be 20 feet.
   (D)   Building height. No building or structure nor the enlargement of any
building or structure shall be hereafter erected to exceed two and one-half
stories or more than 35 feet in height, except hospitals, public schools or
churches, which may be increased in height to three stories or 45 feet.
   (E)   Vision clearance.
      (1)   On corner lots, there shall be a minimum of 20 feet except as
otherwise set forth in §
156.596.
      (2)   Vision clearance on alley-street intersections shall be a minimum
of seven and one-half feet.
   (F)   Rear yard. A rear yard shall be a minimum of ten feet, except as set
forth in §
156.647(C)(5).
   (G)   Minimum lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage on a public street or
private roadway shall be 50 feet, except that a flag lot frontage may be
reduced to the width of a required driveway, but no less than 20 feet, and
except for a cul-de-sac, where the frontage may be reduced to 30 feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-4-96, passed 4-24-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.202 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   In an SR Zone, off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of §§
156.595 through
156.604.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-4-96, passed 4-24-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.203 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-4-96, passed 4-24-1996; Ord. MC-C-8-
98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL 2A ZONE (SR-2A)
§ 156.215 PROCEDURES.
   All uses in a SR-2A Zone require zoning permit approval in accordance with §
156.610.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-05-
2006, passed 10-18-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.216 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an SR-2A Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright:
   (A)   One single-family dwelling or manufactured home on an individual lot
not less than two acres in size. Single-family stick-built homes shall have a
carport or garage, attached or detached, sited on the same lot or parcel and be
at least 180 square feet in size, constructed before occupancy. A manufactured
home placed outside of a manufactured home subdivision or a mobile home park
shall meet the manufactured home siting standards for Residential Zones in §
156.603; and
   (B)   Family childcare home.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-05-
2006, passed 10-18-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.217 USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   In the SR Zone, the following uses and activities and their accessory
buildings and uses may be permitted outright through the site plan review
process provided in §
156.611, and subject to the provisions of this subchapter if determined by the
Planning Director to satisfy the applicable criteria and provisions of law.
Notice and an opportunity to file an appeal must be provided in the manner
described in O.R.S. 215.416. These uses may be referred to the Planning
Commission for review if deemed appropriate by the Planning Director:
   (A)   Utility facility necessary for public service;
   (B)   Church;
   (C)   Governmental structure, public park, playground, recreation building
or fire station/emergency facilities; and
   (D)   Childcare center; provided the residential character of the building
is maintained.
(Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.218 CONDITIONAL USES.
   In an SR-2A Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
when authorized in accordance with the requirements set forth in §§
156.620 through
156.630:
   (A)   Schools or colleges;
   (B)   Golf course;
   (C)   Home occupations;
   (D)   Hospital, sanatorium, rest home for the aged, nursing home and medical
and dental clinics, subject to state and federal regulations; and
   (E)   Crop cultivation or farm and truck gardens, including plant nurseries.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-05-
2006, passed 10-18-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.219 LIMITATIONS ON USES.
   (A)   In Suburban Residential 2A Two Acre Zone (SR-2A), the number of
livestock and/or animals including cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine, poultry
or fur-bearing animals is subject to the density limitations listed in this
section.
      (1)   The primary intended use for properties zoned SR-2A is residential.
The raising of livestock and/or animals in these zones shall be incidental to
the primary use.
      (2)   The number of chickens, fowl and/or rabbits over the age of six
months shall not exceed one for each 500 square feet of property. The number of
young chickens, fowl and/or rabbits (under the age of six months) allowed on
the property at any time shall not exceed three times the allowable number of
chickens, fowl and/or rabbits over the age of six months. Livestock and/or
animals densities are as follows:
         (a)   Cattle: two per acre;
         (b)   Horses, mules, donkeys, llamas: two animals per acre;
         (c)   Sheep or goats: six animals per acre;
         (d)   Emu: eight ratites per acre;
         (e)   Ostrich: four ratites per acre;
         (f)   Miniature cows, horses, mules and donkeys: four per acre; and
         (g)   Swine: (permitted only for 4-H and/or FFA projects and limited
to two per acre).
      (3)   Cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, llamas, sheep, goats, emu and
ostriches cannot be kept on a site having an area of less than one-half acre.
      (4)   The number of colonies of bees allowed on a property shall be
limited to one colony for each 1,000 square feet of lot area.
      (5)   Livestock, animals, ratites and/or fowl shall be properly caged or
housed, and proper sanitation shall be maintained at all times. Animal feed
shall be stored in rodent-proof receptacles.
      (6)   No other livestock and/or animals except for domestic dogs or cats
are permitted in this zone.
      (7)   Animal density listed above for livestock, including cattle,
horses, mules, donkeys, llamas, sheep, goats, emu and ostrich, also allows two
offspring up to six months of age, per animal.
      (8)   Density for poultry shall be as follows: 20 fowl per acre; and
density for fur-bearing animals (rabbits, mink, chinchillas and the like): 20
per acre.
   (B)   In Suburban Residential 2A Two Acre (SR-2A) Zone, commercial trucks
and trucking businesses are not an allowed use. A landowner may be allowed to
use a truck or tractor unit as personal transportation to the resident parcel.
No more than one truck or tractor unit is allowed per parcel.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-5-98, passed 7-22-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-05-2006, passed 10-18-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03, passed
4-3-2024; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.220 LOT SIZE.
   In an SR-2A Zone all lots shall be at least two acres in size.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-05-
2006, passed 10-18-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.221 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   In an SR-2A Zone, the following requirements shall apply.
   (A)   Percent of coverage. The dwelling unit and accessory buildings on any
building site or lot shall not cover more than 30% of the lot area.
   (B)   Front yards. Front yards shall not be less than 20 feet deep.
   (C)   Side yards. There shall be a minimum side yard of ten feet for all
uses, except in the case of a nonresidential use adjacent to a residential use,
the minimum side yard shall be 20 feet.
   (D)   Rear yards. A rear yard shall be a minimum of ten feet.
   (E)   Building height. No building or structure, nor the enlargement or any
building or structure, shall be hereafter erected to exceed two and one-half
stories or more than 35 feet in height, except hospitals, public schools or
churches, which may be increased in height to three stories or 45 feet.
   (F)   Lot width. The width of any lot shall be a minimum of 150 feet.
   (G)   Vision clearance. On corner lots there shall be a minimum of 20 feet,
except as otherwise set forth in §
156.596.
   (H)   Minimum lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage on a public street or
private roadway shall be 50 feet, except that a flag lot frontage may be
reduced to the width of a required driveway but no less than 20 feet and except
for a cul-de-sac, where the frontage may be reduced to 30 feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-05-
2006, passed 10-18-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.222 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   In an SR-2A Zone off-street parking and loading shall be in accordance with
the provisions of §§
156.598 through
156.601.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-4-92, passed 5-20-1992; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-05-2006, passed 10-18-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.223 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01,
passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-05-2006, passed 10-18-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-G)
§ 156.235 PURPOSE.
   The General Commercial Zone is intended to provide areas within which a
variety of retail and wholesale business will occur. These areas would serve
general community needs with types of activities which need not be conducted
wholly within an enclosed building. In a C-G Zone, the following regulations
shall apply.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-7-
98, passed 10-7-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed
11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-
2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.236 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In a C-G Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright subject to zoning permit approval in accordance with §
156.610. Authorization of such uses does not require notice to adjacent
property owners or other interested parties and does not constitute a land use
decision pursuant to O.R.S. 197.015(10), except as required by §
156.611, and as limited by §
156.243:
   (A)   Bank or other financial institution;
   (B)   Agricultural or horticultural use, providing no livestock or poultry
is kept within 100 feet of a dwelling not on the same lot;
   (C)   Laundry or dry-cleaning institution;
   (D)   Public park, playground or similar recreational use;
   (E)   Printing shops, newspapers or other publishing businesses;
   (F)   Personal service business;
   (G)   Retail trade establishment;
   (H)   Church;
   (I)   Drug store, pharmacy or liquor store;
   (J)   Community meeting building, fraternal or social organization;
   (K)   Food, grocery or general merchandise store;
   (L)   Parking facility;
   (M)   Gift shop or similar tourist-oriented specialty shops;
   (N)   Self-service laundry;
   (O)   Home appliance repair;
   (P)   Sporting goods store;
   (Q)   Business or professional office; and
   (R)   Department or furniture store.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-7-
98, passed 10-7-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed
11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-
2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.237 USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   In the C-G Zone, the following uses and activities and their accessory
buildings and uses may be permitted outright through the site plan review
process provided in §
156.611, and subject to the provisions of this subchapter if determined by the
Planning Director to satisfy the applicable criteria and provisions of law.
Notice and an opportunity to file an appeal must be provided in the manner
described in O.R.S. 215.416. These uses may be referred to the Planning
Commission for review if deemed appropriate by the Planning Director:
   (A)   Hospital or nursing home;
   (B)   Public or private school;
   (C)   Medical or dental clinic;
   (D)   Commercial recreation facility;
   (E)   Commercial activity or use directly serving agriculture;
   (F)   Motel or hotel;
   (G)   Car wash;
   (H)   Eating or drinking establishment, including drive-in restaurants and
those serving alcoholic beverages;
   (I)   Veterinary clinic or kennel;
   (J)   Childcare center;
   (K)   Cabinet or carpenter shop;
   (L)   Building supply outlet;
   (M)   Plumbing, heating or electrical shop; and
   (N)   Public or semi-public use and public utility facility.
(Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.238 CONDITIONAL USES.
   In a C-G Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
when authorized in accordance with the provisions of §§
156.620 through
156.630:
   (A)   Automotive sales and services;
   (B)   Radio or television station;
   (C)   Boat, trailer, recreational vehicle or mobile home sales and service;
   (D)   Utility substation;
   (E)   Farm and heavy equipment sales and service;
   (F)   Sheet metal shop;
   (G)   Service station, truck stop;
   (H)   Multi-family dwelling;
   (I)   Mobile home park;
   (J)   Drive-in theater;
   (K)   Mortuary;
   (L)   Plant nursery or greenhouse;
   (M)   Other buildings and uses similar to the list above which shall not
have any different or more detrimental effect upon the adjoining areas or
districts than the buildings and uses specifically listed, shall only be
incidental and directly related to the operation of permitted General
Commercial uses; and
   (N)   A single-family residence in conjunction with a business.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-7-
98, passed 10-7-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed
11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-
2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.239 YARDS.
   In a C-G Zone, the minimum yard requirements shall be as follows.
   (A)   A front yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet between a building or
structure and the street right-of-way line.
   (B)   A side or rear yard abutting a street shall be a minimum of ten feet.
   (C)   A side or rear yard abutting a Residential Zone shall be a minimum of
25 feet.
   (D)   A rear yard abutting an alley shall be ten feet when it is used for
servicing the commercial establishment.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-7-
98, passed 10-7-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed
11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-
2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.240 HEIGHT OF BUILDING.
   In a C-G Zone, no building shall exceed a height of 45 feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-7-
98, passed 10-7-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed
11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-
2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.241 LOT COVERAGE.
   In a C-G Zone, buildings shall not occupy more than 70% of the total lot
area, except as approved by the Commission.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-7-
98, passed 10-7-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed
11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-
2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.242 LOT SIZE.
   In a C-G Zone, the minimum lot size shall be as follows.
   (A)   For residential uses permitted pursuant to this section, the
residential lot size standards set forth in the SR Zone shall apply.
   (B)   For all other uses permitted by this section, the minimum lot size
shall be governed by the combined yard, lot coverage, off-street parking
requirements and other requirements set forth by this section.
   (C)   If the site is located within the urban growth boundary of a city, the
lot size standards for the city shall apply.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-7-
98, passed 10-7-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed
11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-
2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.243 USE LIMITATIONS.
   In a C-G Zone, permitted uses shall be subject to the following limitations
and standards.
   (A)   All parking demand created by any use permitted under the provisions
of this section shall be accommodated on the subject premises entirely off-
street, except as approved by the Commission.
   (B)   No use permitted by this section shall require the backing of traffic
onto a public or private street, road or alley right-of-way to accommodate
ingress or egress to any use or the premises thereof.
   (C)   There shall not be more than one ingress and one egress from
properties accommodating uses permitted by this section per each 300 feet of
public street frontage or fraction thereof. If necessary to meet this
requirement, permitted uses shall provide for shared ingress and egress.
   (D)   All uses permitted by this section shall be screened from abutting
properties in a Residential Zone by densely planted trees and shrubs or sight-
obscuring fencing.
   (E)   All uses shall be subject to any additional requirements for access
and parking in §§
156.595 through
156.604 and the Transportation System Plan, as well as any specific
requirements recommended by the TIA, if applicable.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-7-
98, passed 10-7-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed
11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-
2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.244 SIGN LIMITATIONS.
   In addition to standards and regulations set forth by this chapter relative
to signs, and by O.R.S. Chapter 377 and administrative rules adopted pursuant
thereto when applicable in a C-G Zone, the following sign limitations shall
apply.
   (A)   No free-standing sign shall exceed 200 square feet and a height of 20
feet.
   (B)   No sign shall exceed 25% of the area of the wall it is attached to.
   (C)   No sign shall be located within or protrude into or over a street
right-of-way.
   (D)   All signs shall be located in such a manner so as to not shine or
reflect glare directly onto a lot in an abutting Residential Zone or onto a
street right-of-way.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-7-
98, passed 10-7-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed
11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-
2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.245 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   In a C-G Zone, off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of this section and §§
156.595 through
156.604.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-7-
98, passed 10-7-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed
11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-
2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.246 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-8-
98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-7-98, passed 10-7-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed
11-7-2001; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-
2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
TOURIST COMMERCIAL (TC)
§ 156.260 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The primary purpose of the Tourist Commercial Zone (TC) is to create
standards that allow for a variety of commercial ventures within the county.
This Zone is to provide services on adjacent highway transportation routes in
an aesthetically pleasing way.
   (B)   This chapter provides standards for the orderly creation and expansion
of the TC Zone by adherence to the following principles:
      (1)   Effective and efficient use of land and services;
      (2)   Direct commercial and retail development to a localized area;
      (3)   Provide a mix of uses which provides a destination and encourages
walking while meeting the needs of the major vehicle route driving public (e.g.
Interstate 84) and local public; and
      (4)   Provide for additional service employment opportunities.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.261 USES PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL.
   (A)   The following outright and accessory uses will be permitted utilizing
the site plan review criteria found in §
156.604, unless criteria-based site development review is required as outlined
in this chapter. Uses shall also meet the applicable development standards of
this section and other parts of §§
156.595 through
156.604.
   (B)   Conditional uses will be required to meet the applicable criteria in
§§
156.580 through
156.583,
156.622,
156.624 and
156.626. All conditional use permits are subject to Planning Commission review
and approval.
   (C)   The following are land uses permitted in the Tourist Commercial Zone.
      (1)   Institutional. These uses are public use, operated by a government
entity, special district or nonprofit organization:
         (a)   Government offices and facilities (administration, public
safety, utilities and similar uses);
         (b)   Libraries, museums and similar uses ancillary to a primary;
         (c)   Public parking lots and garages;
         (d)   Parks and recreational facilities; and
         (e)   Transportation facilities and improvements.
      (2)   Commercial.
         (a)   Auto-dependent and auto-oriented uses and facilities (e.g.,
fueling stations, drive-in restaurants and similar uses);
         (b)   Gift shops, retail and wholesale outlets (enclosed within a
building or buildings);
         (c)   Entertainment (theaters, clubs, dance halls, amusement uses,
golf courses and driving ranges, gaming establishments and other similar uses);
         (d)   Hotels/motels;
         (e)   Food services (restaurants, taverns, lounges or other similar
establishments);
         (f)   Personal and professional retail services (catering/food
services, barber shops and salons, banks and similar uses);
         (g)   Daycare facilities ancillary to a primary use (CUP);
         (h)   Vehicle and related repair services (enclosed within a building
or buildings) (CUP);
         (i)   Recreational vehicle park (CUP);
         (j)   Medical and dental offices, clinics and laboratories (CUP); and
         (k)   Telecommunications equipment (including wireless) (CUP).
      (3)   Light manufacture.
         (a)   Manufacturing of value added or novelty dairy products (ice
cream, cheese or similar products);
         (b)   Manufacturing of novelty wood products or items, including hand-
crafted wood items, sculptures, furniture or similar items;
         (c)   Foundry operations producing novelty bronze, brass or other cast
metallurgic sculptures or art-related products;
         (d)   Manufacture of confections, candies, jellies, jams or other
novelty food items; and
         (e)   Manufacture of novelty or craft gift items.
      (4)   Residential (CUP). Facility caretaker residence.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.262 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Building setbacks.
      (1)   In the TC Zone, buildings are placed to provide efficient movement
of the traveling public and to encourage pedestrian traffic. These standards
are to encourage public spaces between sidewalks and buildings and to encourage
a walkable commercial area.
      (2)   Building setbacks are measured from the respective property line to
the nearest vertical wall or foundation line, whichever is closer, of any
building or structure. Setbacks for porches are measured from the edge of the
deck or porch to the property line. The setback standards apply to primary and
accessory structures. The standards may be modified only by approval of a
variance, in accordance with §§
156.645 through
156.655.
   (B)   Front yard setbacks.
      (1)   Minimum setback. There is no minimum front yard setback required
except to provide for vision clearance standards set in the County
Transportation System Plan (TSP).
      (2)   Maximum setback. There is no maximum setback. On parcels with more
than one building, this standard applies to the largest building. The setback
standard may be increased when a usable public space with pedestrian amenities
(e.g., extra-wide sidewalk, plaza, pocket park, outdoor dining area or town
square with seating) is provided between the building and front properly line.
(See also §
156.268 for related building entrance standards.)
   (C)   Rear yard setbacks.
      (1)   Minimum setback. The minimum rear yard setback for all structures
shall be zero feet for street access lots and eight feet for alley-access lots
(distance from nearest vertical wall or foundation line of any building to rear
property line or alley easement) in order to provide space for emergency
vehicles, unless to provide for vision clearance standards set in the county
TSP.
      (2)   Through-lots. For buildings on through-lots (lots with front and
rear frontage onto a street), the front yard setbacks above will apply except
to provide for vision clearance standards set in the county TSP.
   (D)   Side yard setbacks. The minimum side yard setback required is ten
feet, except that buildings shall conform to the vision clearance standards in
the county TSP and the applicable fire and Building Codes for attached
structures, fire walls and related requirements.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.263 LOT SIZE AND FRONTAGE.
   A minimum lot size has not been determined for this Zone, however it is
anticipated that most, if not all, uses will be sited on lots of at least two
acres. The determination of lot size will be driven by the carrying capacity of
the land given the proposed use. Minimum lot frontage shall be 300 feet on an
arterial or collector and 200 feet on a local street. Shared accesses will be
encouraged.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.264 LOT COVERAGE.
   Lot coverage in the TC Zone is limited to 70% of impervious surface.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.265 BUILDING HEIGHT.
   All buildings in the TC Zone shall comply with the following building height
standards. The standards are intended to allow for development of appropriately
scaled buildings.
   (A)   Maximum height. Buildings shall be no more that four stories or 50
feet in height, whichever is greater.
   (B)   Method of measurement. Building height is measured as the vertical
distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of
a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of
the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be one
of the following, whichever yields a greater building height:
      (1)   The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface
within a five-foot horizontal distance of an exterior wall of the building when
such sidewalk or ground surface is not more that ten feet above the lowest
grade;
      (2)   An elevation ten feet higher than the lowest grade when the
sidewalk or ground surface described in §
156.260 is more than ten feet above the lowest grade. The height of a stepped
or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. Not
included in the maximum height are chimneys, bell towers, steeples, roof
equipment, flag-poles and similar features which are not for human occupancy.
These features will be no more than 25 feet measured from the highest point of
the building.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.266 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. The TC Zone design standards are intended
to provide similar and human scale design, while affording flexibility to use a
variety of building styles. This section applies to all of the following types
of buildings:
      (1)   Commercial buildings intended for use as professional, retail or
other similar uses and services;
      (2)   Public and institutional buildings, except that the standard shall
not apply to buildings which are not subject to site design review or those
that do not receive the public; and
      (3)   Light manufacture buildings.
   (B)   Guidelines and standards. The purpose of these standards is to provide
that all buildings contribute to the appeal of the TC Zone.
   (C)   Design of buildings and developments. The following standards shall
apply to buildings and developments and shall be appealing and compatible with
balance of the TC Zone.
      (1)   Buildings under 20,000 square feet (enclosed ground floor area)
shall incorporate at least five of the architectural features as follows:
         (a)   Decorative cornice or facade (for a flat roof) or provision of
eaves or other similar decorative feature for pitched roofs;
         (b)   Decorative display windows on ground floor;
         (c)   Entrance canopy, breezeway or kiosk;
         (d)   Changes in building color or texture;
         (e)   Building articulation on street frontages;
         (f)   Decorative wall or security lighting;
         (g)   Regularly spaced and similarly shaped windows;
         (h)   Decorative window hoods or trim;
         (i)   Changes in building height along street frontages; or
         (j)   Decorative screening of roof mounted equipment.
      (2)   Buildings with greater than 20,000 square feet of enclosed ground
floor space are considered large scale buildings.
         (a)   Measurement for these buildings shall be as follows:
            1.   Multi-tenant buildings shall be counted as the sum of all
tenant spaces within the same building shell; and
            2.   Multiple building developments with a combined ground floor
space (enclosed) greater than 40,000 square feet (e.g., shopping centers,
public and institutional campuses, overnight accommodations and similar
developments).
         (b)   Building and site design for large scale buildings shall include
at least four of the following to provide human scale design:
            1.   Incorporating changes in building direction (e.g.,
articulation);
            2.   Dividing large masses into varying heights and sizes;
            3.   Include building offsets projections;
            4.   Changes in elevation or horizontal direction;
            5.   Sheltering roofs or terraces;
            6.   Providing a distinct pattern of divisions in surface
materials; or
            7.   Use of windows, screening trees, small scale lighting (e.g.,
wall mounted lighting or up-lighting).
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.267 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all developments.
Landscaping shall provide an aesthetically pleasing commercial environment for
the public.
   (B)   Landscaping plan required. A landscape plan is required. A landscape
plan, to scale not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet, shall be submitted with
application for building permit or zoning approval.
   (C)   Landscape area standards. The minimum percentage of required
landscaping equals 30% of the site.
   (D)   Landscape materials. Landscape materials include trees, shrubs, ground
cover plants, non-plant ground covers and outdoor hardscape features, as
described below.
      (1)   Natural vegetation shall be preserved or planted where practicable.
      (2)   A combination of trees, shrubs and ground covers shall be used for
all planted areas, the selection of which shall be based on local climate,
exposure, water availability and drainage conditions. As necessary, soils shall
be amended to allow for healthy plant growth.
      (3)   Hardscape features (i.e., patios, decks, plazas and the like) may
cover up to 30% of the required landscape area. Swimming pools, sports courts
and similar active recreation facilities may not be counted toward fulfilling
the landscape requirement.
      (4)   Bark dust, chips, aggregate or other non-plant ground covers may be
used, but shall cover no more than 25% of the area to be landscaped. Coverage
is measured based on the size of plants at maturity or after two years of
growth, whichever comes sooner.
      (5)   Hardscape features and non-plant ground covers, in combination,
shall not exceed 40% of the overall minimum allowed landscaped area.
      (6)   Trees shall have a minimum caliper size of two inches or greater
when planted.
      (7)   The selection of trees shall provide for a canopy which shall cover
a minimum of 25% of the overall landscape area upon maturity of the selected
trees.
      (8)   Ground cover plants shall be sized and spaced so that they grow
together to cover a minimum of 75% of the underlying soil within five years.
      (9)   Stormwater facilities (e.g., detention/retention ponds and swales)
shall be landscaped with water tolerant, native plants. Street tree varieties
shall also be utilized in areas of stormwater management facilities and shall
be selected based on aesthetics, ability for nutrient removal and tolerance of
the local environmental conditions. These areas will also be irrigated to
assure proper plant health and growth.
   (E)   Landscape design standards. All yards, parking lots and required
street tree planter strips shall be landscaped in accordance with the
provisions of this section. Landscaping shall be installed with development to
provide erosion control, visual interest, buffering, privacy, open space and
pathway identification, shading and wind buffering, based on the following
standards.
      (1)   Yard setback landscaping. Landscaping shall satisfy the following
criteria:
         (a)   Provide visual screening and privacy within side and rear yards;
while leaving front yards and building entrances mostly visible for security
purposes;
         (b)   Use shrubs and trees as wind breaks, as appropriate;
         (c)   Define pedestrian pathways and open space areas with landscape
materials;
         (d)   Provide focal points within a development, such as signature
trees (i.e., large or unique trees), hedges and flowering plants;
         (e)   Use trees to provide summer shading within common open space
areas, and within front yards when street trees cannot be provided;
         (f)   Use a combination of plants for year-long color and interest;
and
         (g)   Use landscaping to screen outdoor storage and mechanical
equipment areas, and to enhance graded areas such as berms, swales and
detention/retention ponds.
      (2)   Parking areas. A minimum often 10% of the combined area of all
parking areas, as measured around the perimeter of all parking spaces and
maneuvering areas, shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall consist of an
evenly distributed mix of shade trees with shrubs and/or ground cover plants.
For the purpose of this division (E)(2), EVENLY DISTRIBUTED means that the
trees and other plants are distributed around the parking lot perimeter and
between parking bays to provide a partial canopy to cover, at maturity, 35% of
the parking area. At a minimum, one tree per eight parking spaces total shall
be planted to create a partial tree canopy over and around the parking area.
Automobile parking areas with more than 20 spaces shall include landscape
islands with trees to break up the parking area into rows of not more than 12
contiguous parking spaces. Large vehicle parking areas shall include landscape
islands with appropriate varieties of trees to not interfere with the large
vehicles and break up the parking area into rows of not more than 12 contiguous
parking spaces. All landscaped areas shall have minimum dimensions of six feet
by six feet to ensure adequate soil, water and space for healthy plant growth
when used as a modified swale in accordance with detention standards.
      (3)   Buffering and screening required. Buffering and screening are
required under the following conditions.
         (a)   Parking/maneuvering area adjacent to streets and drives. Where a
parking or maneuvering area is adjacent and parallel to a street or driveway, a
decorative wall (masonry or similar quality material), arcade, trellis,
evergreen hedge or similar screen shall be established parallel to the street
or driveway. The required wall or screening shall provide breaks, as necessary,
to allow for access to the site and sidewalk by pedestrians via pathways. The
design of the wall or screening shall also allow for visual surveillance of the
site for security. Hedges used to comply with this standard shall be a maximum
of 36 inches in height at maturity and shall be of such species, number and
spacing to provide the required screening within one year after planting. Any
areas between the wall/hedge and the street/driveway line shall be landscaped
with plants or other ground cover. All walls shall be maintained in good
condition or otherwise replaced by the owner.
         (b)   Parking/maneuvering area adjacent to building. Where a parking
or maneuvering area, or driveway, is adjacent to a building, the area shall be
separated from the building by a raised pathway, plaza or landscaped buffer no
less than three feet in width. Raised curbs, bollards, wheel stops or other
design features shall be used to protect buildings from being damaged by
vehicles.
         (c)   Screening of mechanical equipment, outdoor storage, service and
delivery areas and automobile-oriented uses. All mechanical equipment, outdoor
storage and manufacturing and service and delivery areas, shall be screened
from view from all public streets and highways. Screening shall be provided by
one or more the following: decorative wall (i.e., masonry or similar quality
material), evergreen hedge, sight-obscuring fence or a similar feature that
provides a sight-obscuring barrier. Walls, fences and hedges shall comply with
vision clearance requirements and provide for pedestrian circulation, in
accordance with the county TSP.
   (F)   Maintenance and irrigation. The use of drought-tolerant plant species
is encouraged and may be required when irrigation is not available. Irrigation
shall be provided for plants that are not drought-tolerant. If the plantings
fail to survive, the property owner shall replace them with an equivalent
specimen (i.e., evergreen shrub replaces evergreen shrub, deciduous tree
replaces deciduous tree and so forth). All other landscape features required by
this section shall be maintained in good condition or otherwise replaced by the
owner in perpetuity.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.268 PEDESTRIAN AMENITIES.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. This section is intended to provide
comfortable, inviting pedestrian spaces within the TC Zone and may also provide
a wind barrier. Pedestrian amenities serve as informal gathering places for
socializing and resting and contribute to the enjoyment of the area. This
section applies to all uses allowed in the Zone, except those that do not
receive the public (e.g., buildings used solely to house mechanical equipment
and similar uses).
   (B)   Guidelines and standards. Every use listed above shall provide at
least one of the following amenities listed below and meet appropriate
standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§
12101 et seq. Pedestrian amenities may be provided within a public right-of-way
when approved by the applicable jurisdiction:
      (1)   A plaza, courtyard, square or extra-wide sidewalk next to the
building entrance (minimum width of six feet);
      (2)   A sitting space, dining area, benches or ledges between the
building entrance and sidewalk at a minimum of 16 inches height and 30 inches
width;
      (3)   Building canopy, awning, pergola or similar weather protection
(minimum projection of four feet over a sidewalk or other pedestrian space);
and
      (4)   Public art which incorporates seating (e.g., fountain, sculpture
and the like) or wall decoration.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.269 SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN USES.
   This section supplements the uses and standards contained in this Zone. It
is to provide standards for the following land uses in order to control the
scale and compatibility of those uses within the TC Zone: accessory uses and
structures; light manufacturing uses; and auto-orientated uses and development.
   (A)   Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures are of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure
on the same lot. Typical accessory structures in the TC Zone include small
workshops, greenhouses, studios and similar structures. Accessory uses and
structures are allowed for all permitted land uses within the TC Zone, as
identified in §
156.261(C). Accessory structures shall comply with the following standards.
      (1)   An accessory structure shall not be allowed before or without a
primary use, as identified in §
156.261(C).
      (2)   Accessory structures shall comply with the setback standards in
this section.
      (3)   Accessory structures shall comply with the TC Zone design
guidelines, as provided in this section, and shall contribute to the visual
relatedness of the district.
      (4)   A structure shall not be placed over or under an easement that
prohibits such placement. No structure shall encroach into the public right-of-
way.
      (5)   The owner may be required to remove an accessory structure as a
condition of land division approval when removal of the structure is necessary
to comply with setback standards.
      (6)   Buildings 120 square feet or larger are required to obtain both a
zoning and building permit.
   (B)   Light manufacture. Light manufacturing uses shall conform to the
following standards, which are intended to protect the character of the TC
Zone.
      (1)   Light manufacture is allowed only when it is in conjunction with a
permitted retail or service use and does not exceed 60% of the gross floor
area.
      (2)   The light manufacture use shall be enclosed within a building or
shall be located within a rear yard not adjacent to a street and screened from
public view.
      (3)   Any allowed light manufacture shall be conducted to minimize
impacts to surrounding business and services. These shall include the
conditions set as follows:
         (a)   Deliveries shall not interfere with normal transportation
circulation (vehicular, pedestrian and the like);
         (b)   Operations shall not produce solid waste volumes in excess of
200% of the average of surrounding businesses and services;
         (c)   Operations shall not create conditions which would qualify as a
nuisance or otherwise not be in compliance under other county ordinances; and
         (d)   Shall be compatible with other TC Zone activities and
operations.
   (C)   Automobile dependent and auto-oriented uses and facilities.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (C), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         AUTOMOBILE-DEPENDENT USE. The use serves automobiles and/or other
motor vehicles and the use cannot function without them. These uses are allowed
outright in the TC Zone but when unrestricted, they detract from the
pedestrian-friendly character of the Zone and can consume large amounts of land
compared to other permitted uses. Examples would be a car wash or gas station.
         AUTOMOBILE-ORIENTATED USES. A use related automobiles and/or other
motor vehicles. Examples are McDonald’s or a drive-up at a bank.
      (2)   Standards. Automobile-dependent and -oriented uses shall comply
with the following standards.
         (a)   Parking, garages and driveways. All off-street parking,
including surface lots and garages, shall be accessed from alleys or common
driveways, placed in structures above the ground floor, or in parking areas
designed to efficiently and safely move vehicular traffic while reducing
pedestrian conflicts. All structured parking garage entrances facing a street
shall be recessed behind the front elevation by a minimum of six feet and have
minimum queuing areas of 30 feet. On corner lots, garage entrances shall be
oriented to a side-street (i.e., away from a main street) when vehicle access
cannot be provided from an alley or a common driveway.
         (b)   Drive-up, drive-in and drive-through facilities. Drive-up,
drive-in and drive-through facilities (e.g., associated with restaurants, banks
and similar uses) are permitted and shall conform to all of the standards
listed below:
            1.   The facility receives access from an alley or common driveway
and not a street; and
            2.   None of the drive-up, drive-in or drive-through facilities
(e.g., driveway queuing areas, teller machines, service windows, drop boxes and
similar facilities) are located within 20 feet of a street and shall not be
oriented to a street corner.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL ZONE (M-G)
§ 156.280 PURPOSE.
   The General Industrial Zone is intended to provide, protect and recognize
areas well suited for medium and heavy industrial development and uses free
from conflict with commercial, residential and other incompatible land uses.
This district is intended to be applied generally only to those areas which
have available excellent highway, rail or other transportation. In an M-G Zone,
the following regulations shall apply.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed 12-5-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010,
passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.281 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an M-G Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
subject to zoning permit approval in accordance with §
156.610. Authorization of such uses does not require notice to adjacent
property owners or other interested parties and does not constitute a land use
decision pursuant to O.R.S. 197.015(10), except as required by §
156.611, and as limited by §
156.084:
   (A)   Retail, wholesale or service business establishments except the uses
set forth in §§
156.282 and
156.283 and subject to the limitations set forth in §
156.283;
   (B)   Farming (other than the establishment of new structures, this use does
not require zoning permit approval);
   (C)   Residence, including a mobile home for caretaker or night watchperson
on property with an existing industrial use, or for the owner of said
industrial use;
   (D)   Freight depot;
   (E)   Contractor’s or building materials business and other construction
related businesses, including plumbing, electrical, roofing, siding and the
like, provided such is wholly enclosed within a building or no outside storage
is permitted unless enclosed by sight obscuring fencing;
   (F)   Ice or cold storage plant;
   (G)   Wholesale distribution outlet, including warehousing, but excluding
open outside storage;
   (H)   Welding, sheet metal or machine shop provided such is wholly enclosed
within a building or all outside storage is enclosed by sight obscuring
fencing;
   (I)   Veterinary clinic or kennel;
   (J)   Laboratory for experiment, research or testing;
   (K)   Compounding, packaging and storage of cosmetics, drugs, perfumes,
pharmaceuticals, soap or toiletries, excluding all processes involving refining
or rendering of fats and oils;
   (L)   Government buildings, including armories, maintenance, repair or
storage facilities provided all outside storage is enclosed by sight obscuring
fencing;
   (M)   Manufacture, repair or storage of ceramic products, musical
instruments, novelties, rubber or metal stamps, toys, optical goods, scientific
or electronic supplies and equipment, business machines, pleasure boats,
furniture, signs and similar operations provided no outside storage is
involved;
   (N)   Processing, packaging and storage of foods and beverages, excluding
those involving distillation, fermentation, rendering of fats or oils and
slaughtering; and
   (O)   Utility facilities necessary for public service, except utility,
transmission and communications towers greater than 200 feet in height.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed 12-5-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010,
passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.282 USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   In the M-G Zone, the following uses and activities and their accessory
buildings and uses may be permitted outright through the site plan review
process provided in §
156.611, and subject to the provisions of this subchapter if determined by the
Planning Director to satisfy the applicable criteria and provisions of law.
Notice and an opportunity to file an appeal must be provided in the manner
described in O.R.S. 215.416. These uses may be referred to the Planning
Commission for review if deemed appropriate by the Planning Director:
   (A)   Data center;
   (B)   Utility, transmission and communications towers 200 feet in height and
taller;
   (C)   The resumption of a residential use, including a mobile home where the
subject use has previously been conducted and has not been discontinued for a
period exceeding six months;
   (D)   Manufacturing, repair, servicing and storage of machinery, implements,
equipment, trailers, recreational vehicles or manufactured homes. Retail sales
and rentals shall only be associated with these primary uses;
   (E)   Any use permitted by §
156.281 where open outside storage is involved;
   (F)   Concrete or ready-mix plant;
   (G)   Automobile and other automotive wrecking yard;
   (H)   Quarry, gravel pit, subsurface or surface mining, including crushing,
screening or washing of extracted materials;
   (I)   Commercial feed lot, stockyard, sales yard, slaughterhouse and
rendering plant;
   (J)   Railroad trackage and related facilities;
   (K)   Lumber and other wood products manufacturing;
   (L)   Agricultural products storage and processing plants;
   (M)   Manufacture, repair or storage of articles manufactured from bone,
cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, glass, stone, paper, plastic,
precious or semi-precious stone or metal, wax, wire, wood, rubber, yarn and
similar materials provided such uses do not create a nuisance because of odor,
noise, dust, smoke, gas, traffic or other factors; and
   (N)   Rail loop and spur dependent uses;
(Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.283 CONDITIONAL USES.
   In an M-G Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
when authorized in accordance with the provisions of this section and §§
156.620 through
156.630:
   (A)   Any use permitted by §§
156.281 or
156.282 which is proposed to exceed or expected to exceed the following
standards:
      (1)   Occupy more than 70% of the land area designed or designated for
said use; or
      (2)   Generates any odor, fumes, glare, flashing lights or noise which is
perceptible from a residential parcel located within 500 feet of the property
line of the subject use without instruments.
   (B)   Solid waste facilities and sites as governed by the County Solid Waste
Plan and Ordinance, codified in
Chapter 51;
   (C)   A recreational vehicle park meeting the requirements of §§
156.620 through
156.630. This use is only allowed in the General Industrial Use Zone also known
as the old mill site just north of the City of Heppner; and
   (D)   Other buildings and uses similar to the list above which shall not
have any different or more detrimental effect upon the adjoining areas or
districts than the buildings and uses specifically listed. Such uses shall only
be incidental and directly related to the operation of permitted General
Industrial uses.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed 12-5-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010,
passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.284 USE LIMITATIONS.
   In an M-G Zone, the following limitations and standards shall apply to all
permitted uses.
   (A)   No use permitted under the provisions of this section that requires a
lot area exceeding two acres shall be permitted to locate adjacent to an
existing residential lot in a duly platted subdivision, or a lot in a
Residential Zone, except as approved by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   No use permitted under the provisions of this section that is expected
to generate more than 20 auto-truck trips during the busiest hour of the day to
and from the subject property shall be permitted to locate on a lot adjacent to
or across the street from a residential lot in a duly platted subdivision, or a
lot in a Residential Zone.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed 12-5-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010,
passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.285 DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following dimensional requirements apply to all buildings and structures
constructed, placed or otherwise established in the M-G Zone.
   (A)   Lot size and frontage. 
      (1)   For residential uses permitted pursuant to this section, the
residential lot size standards set forth in the SR Zone shall apply.
      (2)   For all other uses permitted by this section, the minimum lot size
shall be governed by the combined yard, lot coverage, off-street parking
requirements and other requirements set forth by this section.
      (3)   If the site is located within the urban growth boundary of a city,
the lot size standards for the city shall apply.
   (B)   Minimum lot frontage. Minimum lot frontage shall be 300 feet on an
arterial or collector; and 200 feet on a local street.
   (C)   Setbacks. No specific side or rear yard setbacks are identified within
this Zone, but may be dictated by provisions of the Building Code or other
siting requirements. The minimum setback between a structure and the right-of-
way of an arterial shall be 50 feet. The minimum setback of a structure from
the right-of-way of a collector shall be 30 feet and from all lower class
streets the minimum setback shall be 20 feet. There shall be no setback
requirement where a property abuts a railroad siding or spur if the siding or
spur will be utilized by the permitted use.
   (D)   Stream setback. All sewage disposal installations such as outhouses,
septic tank and drainfield systems shall be set back from the high-water line
or mark along all streams and lakes a minimum of 100 feet, measured at right
angles to the high-water line or mark. All structures, buildings or similar
permanent fixtures shall be set back from the high-water line or mark along all
streams or lakes a minimum of ten feet measured at right angles to the high-
water line or mark.
   (E)   Uses adjacent to residential uses. A sight-obscuring fence shall be
installed to buffer uses permitted in the General Industrial Zone from
residential uses. Additional landscaping or buffering such as diking,
screening, landscaping or an evergreen hedge may be required as deemed
necessary to preserve the values of nearby properties or to protect the
aesthetic character of the neighborhood or vicinity.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed 12-5-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010,
passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.286 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-8-
98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed
12-5-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-
2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD- 2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
AIR/INDUSTRIAL PARK ZONE (AI)
§ 156.300 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The AI Zone is intended to recognize those areas devoted to or most
suitable for the immediate operational facilities necessary for commercial and
non-commercial aviation. It is intended to provide areas for those activities
directly supporting or dependent upon aircraft or air transportation when such
activities, in order to function, require a location within or immediately
adjacent to primary flight operations and cargo service facilities.
   (B)   The August 2002 Boardman Airport Layout Plan Report will direct
location of all development at the Boardman Airport. Location of all
development at the Lexington Airport will be directed by the Lexington Airport
Layout Plan.
   (C)   In the AI Zone, the regulations in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.301 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT DEPENDENT USE OR ACTIVITY. A use or activity requiring a location at
or adjacent to an airport to be economically viable. Economic viability is
measured by determining whether the use or activity would suffer an economic
disadvantage if not located at or adjacent to an airport. One method of
authorization is to determine an industry to be eligible by evaluating its
airport dependence through the percentage of its business done with air cargo;
its dependence on air transportation by staff, management, sales personnel,
vendors or clientele, its site size requirements and its interest in locating
in a non-metropolitan area of the state.
   AIRPORT RELATED USE. An activity or use directly servicing the airport,
employees working on the airport property or air service patrons. Direct
service businesses include such uses as fueling stations, repair facilities,
hangars, air charter services and the like. Employee or patron service
businesses include such uses as restaurants, motels and hotels, travel
agencies, gift shops, car rental agencies and the like.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.302 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an AI Zone, the following uses are recognized as airport related and
dependent uses which are permitted outright in the AI Zone:
   (A)   Uses and buildings which are necessary for airport operation,
including aircraft hangars, fuel storage facilities, control tower, passenger
and air freight terminals, aircraft runways, taxi-ways and tie-down areas and
other airport operation uses;
   (B)   Retail sales and commercial services for air passengers or airport
connected activities;
   (C)   Air cargo warehousing and distribution facilities;
   (D)   Aerial mapping and surveying;
   (E)   Aircraft or aircraft component manufacturing or assembly;
   (F)   Aircraft related research and testing;
   (G)   Aircraft sales, repair, service and storage;
   (H)   Schools relating to aircraft operations;
   (I)   Aircraft or air transportation business;
   (J)   Aviation clubs;
   (K)   Auto rental agencies, restaurants, lounges, food preparation and food
service establishments, hotels, motels and traveler service and convenience
facilities;
   (L)   Taxi, bus and truck terminals;
   (M)   Environmental monitoring and enforcement agencies;
   (N)   Farm use;
   (O)   Accessory buildings normally required in connection with a use as
specified in this section; and
   (P)   Firefighting equipment and facilities.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.303 CONDITIONAL USES.
   In an AI Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
when authorized in accordance with the requirements set forth by this section
and §§
156.620 through
156.630: other airport related and airport dependent uses similar to those
identified as outright uses and meeting the definition under the purpose
statement of this section.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.304 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   In an AI Zone, the following dimensional standards shall apply.
   (A)   The minimum lot size shall be determined in accordance with the
provisions of this section relative to setback requirements, off-street parking
and loading requirements, lot coverage limitations and as deemed necessary to
maintain air, land and water resource quality, to protect adjoining and area
land uses, to ensure resource carrying capacities are not exceeded, and more
specifically, to protect the airport.
   (B)   The minimum setback between a structure and the right-of-way of an
arterial shall be 50 feet. The minimum setback of a structure from the right-
of-way of a collector shall be 30 feet, and from all lower class streets, the
minimum setback shall be 20 feet.
   (C)   The minimum lot frontage shall not be less than 50 feet.
   (D)   The minimum side setback between a structure and a property line shall
be three feet, and the total of both side setbacks shall be 12 feet.
   (E)   The minimum rear setback between any structure and a rear property
line shall be 25 feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.305 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01,
passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-
24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
SPACE AGE INDUSTRIAL ZONE (SAI)
§ 156.320 PURPOSE.
   The SAI Zone is intended to recognize those areas devoted to, or most
suitable for, space age technology research and development.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-6-96, passed 6-12-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-4-2009, passed 6-24-2009; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed
9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021;
Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.321 PROCEDURES.
   As in the case of all zones, a zoning permit is required prior to the
issuance of building permits. Facilities proposed adjacent to or near an
airport may be subject to §§
156.410 through
156.420 and
156.435. Additionally structures constructed 100 feet or taller are subject to
notice to the Department of Defense and the Oregon Military Department relative
to impacts to the restricted airspace.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-6-96, passed 6-12-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-4-2009, passed 6-24-2009; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed
9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021;
Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.322 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an SAI Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
subject to zoning permit approval in accordance with §
156.610. Authorization of such uses does not require notice to adjacent
property owners or other interested parties and does not constitute a land use
decision pursuant to O.R.S. 197.015(10), except when required by §
156.611:
   (A)   Farm use as defined §
156.003, other than the establishment of new structures, this use does not
require zoning permit approval;
   (B)   Utility facility service lines, including accessory facilities or
structures that end at the point where the utility service is received by the
customer and that are located on one or more of the following: a public right-
of-way; land immediately adjacent to a public right-of way, provided the
written consent of all adjacent property owners has been obtained; or the
property to be served by the utility;
   (C)   Mining less than 5,000 cubic yards of aggregate material or excavation
of less than one acre of land conducted annually; and
   (D)   Excavations by the landowner or tenant on the landowner or tenant’s
property for the purpose of operations reasonably necessary for construction,
reconstruction or maintenance of access roads on the same parcel or on an
adjacent parcel that is under the same ownership as the parcel being excavated
reasonably necessary for farming.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-6-96, passed 6-12-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-4-2009, passed 6-24-2009; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed
9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021;
Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.323 USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   In the SAI Zone, the following uses and activities and their accessory
buildings and uses may be permitted outright through the site plan review
process provided in §
156.611, and subject to the provisions of this subchapter if determined by the
Planning Director to satisfy the applicable criteria and provisions of law.
Notice and an opportunity to file an appeal must be provided in the manner
described in O.R.S. 215.416. These uses may be referred to the Planning
Commission for review if deemed appropriate by the Planning Director:
   (A)   Buildings and structures (above and below ground) used for space age
technology research and development;
   (B)   Aerospace aircraft and space vehicle testing and related research
products;
   (C)   Propulsion testing which includes commercial engines, trans-
atmospheric space plane, remote piloted vehicle, missiles or other space age
related vehicles;
   (D)   Electronic, laser and microwave research activities;
   (E)   Contained shock testing;
   (F)   Firefighting equipment and facilities;
   (G)   Support facilities for on-site staff;
   (H)   Mining operation on existing sites; and
   (I)   Utility facilities necessary for public service, but not commercial
facilities for the purpose of generating electrical power for public use by
sale or transmission towers over 200 feet in height:
      (1)   Utility facilities necessary for public service proposed in the
Space Age Industrial Use Zone will need to meet the criteria found in O.R.S.
215.275;
      (2)   The acreage included in the analysis to require site development
review would be disturbed, constructed surfaces and parking areas; and
      (3)   A Reclamation Plan is required for non-agricultural lands affected
by a utility facility necessary for public service.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-6-96, passed 6-12-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-4-2009, passed 6-24-2009; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed
9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021;
Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.324 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   The following uses are allowed with a conditional use permit and other
reviews as identified below. If a project is over 100 acres of disturbed and
constructed surfaces, a site development review may also be required.
   (A)   A commercial utility facility for the purpose of generating power for
public use by sale, not including wind power generation facilities, subject to
§§
156.595 through
156.604,
156.620 through
156.630, other portions of this code, as appropriate, and pertinent sections of
state statutes and state administrative rules.
   (B)   A wind generation facility subject to the requirements found in O.A.R.
Chapter 660, division 33, Agricultural Land, §§
156.595 through
156.604,
156.620 through
156.630 and other portions of this chapter.
   (C)   Transmission towers over 200 feet in height subject to §§
156.595 through
156.604,
156.620 through
156.630 and other portions of this chapter.
   (D)   Operations conducted for the mining, stockpiling or processing of
mineral, aggregate and other mineral resources or other subsurface resources
not to exceed 500,000 tons, subject to §§
156.620 through
156.630.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-6-96, passed 6-12-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-4-2009, passed 6-24-2009; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed
9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021;
Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.325 LIMITATIONS ON USE IN AN SAI ZONE.
   (A)   A use which has been declared a nuisance by a state statute, by action
of the County Board of Commissioners or by a court of competent jurisdiction,
is prohibited.
   (B)   Material shall be stored and grounds shall be maintained in a manner
which will not create a health hazard.
   (C)   All related state statutes shall be complied with, specifically those
dealing with radioactive material and hazardous substances.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-6-96, passed 6-12-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-4-2009, passed 6-24-2009; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed
9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021;
Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.326 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-6-96, passed 6-12-1996; Ord. MC-C-8-
98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-4-2009, passed 6-
24-2009; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021;
Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
PORT INDUSTRIAL ZONE (PI)
§ 156.340 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The PI Zone is intended to regulate development at portions of the
Port of Morrow Industrial Park and other appropriate locations. The Zone is
intended to provide for port-related industrial uses and be an industrial
sanctuary, limiting commercial uses to those appropriate and necessary to serve
the needs of the workers employed within the Zone.
   (B)   In the PI Zone, the regulations in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-1-88, passed 5-11-1988; Ord. MC-C-8-
96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed
12-5-2007; Ord. ORD-2014-1, passed 1-22-2014; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-
2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.341 USES PERMITTED WITH A ZONING PERMIT.
   Outside activities are permitted within the scope of allowed uses outlined
below. Port Industrial projects utilizing more than 100 acres are subject to
site development review:
   (A)   Water-dependent and related industrial uses;
   (B)   Aerospace-related industrial uses;
   (C)   Chemical and primary metal industrial uses which are port-related;
   (D)   Port-related industrial uses which are land intensive;
   (E)   Lumber and wood-products manufacturing and other related industrial
uses which are port-related;
   (F)   Effluent disposal of industrial wastes and agricultural activities in
conjunction therewith;
   (G)   Manufacturing, refining, processing or assembling of any agricultural,
mining or industrial product;
   (H)   Manufacturing, repair, servicing and storage of machinery, implements,
equipment, trailers, recreational vehicles or manufactured homes with retail
sales and rentals only associated with the primary use;
   (I)   Utility facilities necessary for public service, except for utility,
transmission and communications towers greater than 200 feet in height;
   (J)   Oil module production and shipping and related industrial uses which
are port-related;
   (K)   Ship building and repair;
   (L)   Any other industrial use authorized by O.R.S. 777.250(1) through (3)
unless site development review is required by §
156.611;
   (M)   Buildings, structures, offices and other uses customarily accessory to
and in conjunction with permitted uses in the PI Zone;
   (N)   Rail facilities, including, but not limited to, rail lines, spurs,
turnouts, switches, signals, rail car storage and related facilities;
   (O)   Rail loop and spur dependent uses;
   (P)   Concrete or ready-mix manufacturing plant;
   (Q)   Uses allowed outright in the General Industrial Zone, not including
residential caretaker use;
   (R)   Facility for security personnel and activities involved in the
policing, control, regulation and management of property which may include
sleeping facilities, but which is not a dwelling;
   (S)   Intermodal transportation facilities not requiring a State Department
of Environmental Quality solid waste disposal site permit, such as a truck
intermodal facility or rail to truck; and
   (T)   Outdoor advertising sign or billboard.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-1-88, passed 5-11-1988; Ord. MC-C-8-
96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed
12-5-2007; Ord. ORD-2014-1, passed 1-22-2014; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-
2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.342 USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   In the PI Zone, the following uses and activities and their accessory
buildings and uses may be permitted outright through the site plan review
process provided in §
156.611, and subject to the provisions of this subchapter if determined by the
Planning Director to satisfy the applicable criteria and provisions of law.
Notice and an opportunity to file an appeal must be provided in the manner
described in O.R.S. 215.416. These uses may be referred to the Planning
Commission for review if deemed appropriate by the Planning Director:
   (A)   Commercial uses appropriate and necessary to serve the needs of
workers employed within the zone. Total cumulative square footage of retail
floor space shall not exceed 10,000 square feet within areas zoned PI or 10% of
the area of any building or complex of buildings, unless the applicant provides
information justifying a larger area;
   (B)   Quarry, gravel pit, subsurface or surface mining, including crushing,
screening or washing of extracted materials;
   (C)   Asphalt plant;
   (D)   Intermodal transportation facilities that have been designated a
transfer station by the Department of Environmental Quality and must acquire a
solid waste disposal site permit. These facilities must meet the requirements
of the County Solid Waste Ordinance, codified in
Chapter 51; and
   (E)   Data center.
(Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.343 CONDITIONAL USES.
   Other buildings and uses similar to the list in §§
156.341 and
156.342 which shall not have any different or more detrimental effect upon the
adjoining areas or districts than the buildings and uses specifically listed,
shall only be incidental and directly related to the operation of permitted
Port Industrial uses.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-1-88, passed 5-11-1988; Ord. MC-C-8-
96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed
12-5-2007; Ord. ORD-2014-1, passed 1-22-2014; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-
2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.344 LIMITATIONS ON USES.
   (A)   Material shall be stored and grounds shall be maintained in a manner
which will not create a health hazard.
   (B)   All related provisions of the state statutes shall be complied with,
particularly those dealing with hazardous substances and radioactive materials.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-1-88, passed 5-11-1988; Ord. MC-C-8-
96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed
12-5-2007; Ord. ORD-2014-1, passed 1-22-2014; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-
2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.344 DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following dimensional requirements apply to all buildings and structures
constructed, placed or otherwise established in the PI Zone:
   (A)   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet. No structure shall be erected
closer than 90 feet from the centerline of any public, county or state road.
Structures on corner or through lots shall observe the minimum front yard
setback on both streets;
   (B)   Minimum side and rear yard setback: ten feet;
   (C)   Minimum lot coverage: no limitation;
   (D)   Maximum building height: no limitation; and
   (E)   Exceptions to the setback regulations are as follows.
      (1)   There shall be no setback requirement where a property abuts a
railroad spur if the spur will be utilized by the permitted use.
      (2)   Side and rear lot requirements may be waived on common lot lines
when adjoining lot owners enter into a joint development agreement for
coordinating vehicular access and parking development. Party wall or adjoining
building walls must meet fire separation requirements of the State Structural
Specialty Code and Fire and Life Safety Code. The joint development agreement
must be approved by the Port of Morrow as to form and content, recorded in the
County Clerk’s office, and a copy must be provided to the Planning Department.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-1-88, passed 5-11-1988; Ord. MC-C-8-
96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed
12-5-2007; Ord. ORD-2014-1, passed 1-22-2014; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-
2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.346 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   (1)   In the event that it is unclear that a proposed use is a
permitted use within the PI Zone, the Planning Director shall initially make
such a determination.
      (2)   Notice of the Planning Director’s decision shall be mailed to all
owners of real property located within 250 feet of the subject property.
      (3)   Any person entitled to such notice or who is adversely affected or
aggrieved by the decision may request a public hearing pursuant to §
156.691 within 15 days following the mailing of the Planning Director’s
decision.
   (B)   (1)   When an intermodal transportation facility handles solid waste
in a situation that is considered temporary and when solid waste is transferred
in a non-containerized or non-typical manner the Planning Director shall make a
notice of decision concerning this action.
      (2)   This notice shall be mailed to all owners of real property located
within 250 feet of the subject property based on the temporary nature of these
activities this decision is final and is not subject to appeal or hearing.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-1-88, passed 5-11-1988; Ord. MC-C-8-
96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed
12-5-2007; Ord. ORD-2014-1, passed 1-22-2014; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-
2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.346 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   Transportation impacts will be evaluated using provisions within §
156.595(D)(6). If that provision is not applicable, a traffic impact analysis,
as outlined in the County Transportation System Plan, will be required if the
necessary thresholds are triggered.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-1-88, passed 5-11-1988; Ord. MC-C-8-
96, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2007, passed
12-5-2007; Ord. ORD-2014-1, passed 1-22-2014; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-
2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
UMATILLA ARMY DEPOT MILITARY ZONE (UADM)
§ 156.360 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Umatilla Depot Military Zone is to recognize the area in
the county portion of the Army Depot that will be utilized by the National
Guard Bureau (NGB), State National Guard (ONG) and the State Military
Department (OMD). The county has adopted this Zone for two reasons: to
recognize land uses by the military that will be allowed outright, without
local land use permits; and as a Zone that will apply to state or private
landowners at the point in time that the land is no longer in federal
ownership. It is recognized that development with a primary purpose of carrying
out the ONG military mission is allowed outright and development with a
commercial or industrial purpose that is not directly related to military
mission will be subject to local land use regulations. The purpose of this Zone
is to ensure the OMD location has the appropriate Comprehensive Plan and Zoning
designation to provide for ONG facilities and functions.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.361 MILITARY USES ALLOWED OUTRIGHT.
   Such uses will be carried out in a safe manner, consistent with State
National Guard protocol. Neighboring property owners should be aware that noise
and vibration are common elements of such ONG training activities and are
allowed without local restriction. The following uses are allowed without local
permits:
   (A)   Military use and related military support uses, including operation of
live fire weapons, laser and demolition ranges;
   (B)   Conduct of vehicular, aerial and dismounted maneuver training;
   (C)   Field bivouac operations;
   (D)   Operations, maintenance and construction of structures for the
warehouse, operation, repair and construction of equipment, administration,
simulations, classroom and instructional facilities, billeting and dining
facilities, morale, welfare, recreation and fitness facilities and structures;
and
   (E)   Utility and infrastructure support facilities such as energy
generators or energy generation facilities, water distribution systems and
wastewater treatment facilities with the purpose of providing services to the
activities on the subject parcel and not for commercial or industrial purposes.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.362 USES PERMITTED WITH A ZONING PERMIT.
   The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted upon the issuance
of a zoning permit. The ONG is exempt from this permit requirement for
development that is intended for military purposes and not for commercial or
industrial purposes:
   (A)   Buildings and structures that are existing and used for warehousing
and related uses;
   (B)   Rail oriented warehousing and railroad related industries;
   (C)   Support facilities, but not new residential units, for on-site staff;
   (D)   Offices for administrative and transportation activities;
   (E)   Vehicle and railroad repair facilities;
   (F)   Refueling and transportation service centers;
   (G)   Container storage and trans-shipment facilities;
   (H)   Farming (EFU);
   (I)   Wildlife reserve/agriculture wildlife; and
   (J)   Police/fire training.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.363 CONDITIONAL USES.
   Uses allowed in the adjacent Port Industrial Use Zone may be permitted
conditionally subject to the requirements of this section and §§
156.620 through
156.630 to include findings that the proposed use: complies with the
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance and other relevant county policies; will
serve a useful purpose to the area and to the purpose of the UADM Zone as
stated herein; and will be designed and built so as to reduce potential
negative impacts to neighboring parcels and the primary purpose of the UADM
Zone. All conditional use applications associated with the established UADM
Zone shall submit as part of the application a general land use plan schematic
for the Zone, and a more detailed site plan for the specific conditional use
request sufficient to evaluate design and land use considerations associated
with the permit request. A zoning permit will be issued following final
approval of a conditional use.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.364 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   The following dimensional standards shall apply.
   (A)   Parcel size. The minimum lot size shall be one acre unless written
proof, from the Department of Environmental Quality is provided which shows
that an approvable subsurface disposal system can be permitted or the
development is served by an existing sanitary system. The minimum lot size
shall be the minimum necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the
proposed use and is also consistent with the purpose and intent of the UADM
Zone.
   (B)   Setback. No building shall be located closer than 20 feet from a
property line, street or road.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
RURAL LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE (RLI)
§ 156.375 PURPOSE.
   The Rural Light Industrial Zone (RLI) is designed to provide suitable areas
for the development of small-scale industry that does not require full urban
services. The intent is to provide industrial uses of a local nature, unlike
the uses that would normally be sited in the Port Industrial Zones or in an
urban growth boundary. This Zone can accommodate incubator facilities and
allows storefront businesses. This Zone is to be applied in areas where
transportation opportunities are already in place and available.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.376 USES; PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   The following uses, with accessory uses, will be permitted through the
zoning permit process found in §
156.610, unless site plan review is required as outlined in §
156.611. Uses shall also meet the applicable development standards listed in §§
156.595 through
156.604.
   (A)   Institutional. These uses are: public use; operated by a government
entity; special district; or non-profit organization:
      (1)   Airport and related aviation uses, including hangar and maintenance
facilities;
      (2)   Animal shelter;
      (3)   Freight, train, bus or taxi terminals;
      (4)   Public and semi-public building, such as police or fire station,
ambulance service, emergency medical facility or museum; and
      (5)   Utility structure.
   (B)   Sale and/or service.
      (1)   Automobile, truck and heavy equipment sales, parts and accessory
stores, service stations, paint and body shop, tire sales and repair, and
trucking facilities;
      (2)   Heavy equipment and farm implement sales, service, rental or
repair;
      (3)   Photographic film processing, photo engraving, photocopying,
printing, lithographing, blueprinting or publishing and distribution facilities
or establishments;
      (4)   Building maintenance service;
      (5)   Plumbing and sheet metal shops;
      (6)   Saw shops, including sales and repair;
      (7)   Taxidermy;
      (8)   Upholstery, automobile and furniture;
      (9)   Veterinary clinic and hospital; and
      (10)   Food catering preparation with no on-site retail sales.
   (C)   Storage and distribution.
      (1)   Agricultural cooperative;
      (2)   Towing services and impound yard, overnight truck or trailer
parking;
      (3)   Rental equipment facilities and storage yards;
      (4)   Commercial parking lot;
      (5)   Mini-storage units with office; and
      (6)   Contractor’s or building materials business, and other construction
related businesses including plumbing, electrical, roofing, siding and the
like; provided such is wholly enclosed within a building or no outside storage
is permitted unless enclosed by sight obscuring fencing.
(Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.377 USES; PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY.
   Uses permitted conditionally will be required to meet the applicable
criteria in §§
156.595 through
156.604,
156.622 and
156.624. Additional criteria may be found in §
156.626. All conditional use permits are subject to Planning Commission review
and approval.
   (A)   Institutional. Some of these uses may also be subject to the County
Solid Waste Management Plan:
      (1)   Utility yard, recycling center or resource recovery facility; or
      (2)   Sewage disposal plant, pumping or treatment facility, water storage
reservoir, sewage transfer site or waste transfer site.
   (B)   Sale and/or service.
      (1)   Lockers, ice houses and meat or game processing facilities to serve
the personal scale market; or
      (2)   General or scientific laboratories, research or experimental
facilities.
   (C)   Repair, assembly and manufacturing.
      (1)   Compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of products;
      (2)   Temporary cement and asphalt batching, rock processing and
crushing;
      (3)   Metal works including foundry, metal reduction, milling, refining,
fabrication, welding and repair;
      (4)   Manufacture, assembly or repair of textiles, cloth, fiber or wood
products, including secondary and tertiary processing; or
      (5)   Processing or packaging of food or drink products.
   (D)   Storage and distribution.
      (1)   Warehousing, receiving and shipping, wholesale sales or
distribution of equipment or products including food, which may also include
retail sales; or
      (2)   Local fuel distribution facility.
   (E)   Support services. These uses tend to provide support to other uses
within the zone or adjoining zones:
      (1)   Caretaker or night watchperson (quarters or manufactured dwelling).
The unit must be related to the business. The manufactured dwelling must be
removed when the business ceases to operate. The resident must be an employee
of the business and employee status must be documented; or
      (2)   Restaurant, lounge, tavern, food stand, coffee kiosk or mobile food
vendors.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.378 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   All uses authorized by this subchapter and section may be subject to certain
additional permit, process and property development standards that are
contained elsewhere in the County Zoning Ordinance, the County Transportation
System Plan, other applicable county ordinances or identified below.
   (A)   Landscaping and screening. Properties bordering Tourist Commercial or
Residential Zones need to have in place a site obscuring fence or landscaping
of such design that the visual impact is reduced or eliminated. No other
specific landscaping or screening is required in this zone.
   (B)   Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size in the RLI zone is two acres.
   (C)   Minimum lot frontage. Minimum lot frontage shall be 300 feet on an
arterial or collector; 200 feet on a local street. Shared accesses will be
encouraged.
   (D)   Setbacks. No specific side or rear yard setbacks are identified within
this zone, but may be dictated by provisions of the Building Code or other
siting requirements. The minimum setback between a structure and the right-of-
way of an arterial shall be 50 feet. The minimum setback of a structure from
the right-of-way of a collector shall be 30 feet, and from all lower class
streets the minimum setback shall be 20 feet.
   (E)   Signs. Signs installed in this zone will need to meet the requirements
of §
156.602.
   (F)   Building height. The height of the building needs to be less than 45
feet or three stories, unless the applicant can provide proof from the
providing fire district that services can be provided in the event of an
emergency.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
06, passed 3-15-2006; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
AIRPORT LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE (ALI)
§ 156.390 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The ALI Zone is intended to permit airport-compatible light industrial
uses and other airport-compatible uses on existing industrial land near the
Boardman Airport.
   (B)   Light industrial uses are manufacturing, assembly, processing,
packaging and other industrial uses that do not generate noise, odor, dust,
glare or vibration in amounts that might otherwise be objectionable to nearby
land uses.
   (C)   Airport-compatible uses are uses that do not create glare, light,
smoke, dust, steam, bird attractants or electrical interference in amounts that
could interfere with airport operations and airport safety.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.391 AIRPORT SAFETY AND COMPATIBILITY.
   Uses permitted within the ALI Zone that are also located within the Airport
Safety and Compatibility Overlay Zone shall comply with applicable standards in
the Airport Safety and Compatibility Overlay Zone.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.392 NOTICE REQUIRED.
   Timely notice of applications for permits in the ALI Zone shall be provided
to the State Department of Transportation, the State Department of Aviation and
the United States Department of Navy.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.393 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In the ALI Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses, will be
permitted through the zoning permit process found in §
156.610, unless site plan review is required as outlined in §
156.611. Uses shall also meet the applicable development standards listed in §§
156.595 through
156.604:
   (A)   All uses permitted outright in the Air/Industrial Park Zone (AI);
   (B)   Storage buildings and warehouses; and
   (C)   Utility facilities necessary for public service, except for utility,
transmission and communications towers greater than 200 feet in height; and
   (D)   Farming, other than the establishment of new structures, this use does
not require zoning permit approval.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.394 USES SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   In the ALI Zone, the following uses and activities and their accessory
buildings and uses are permitted upon demonstration of compliance with the
standards in this subchapter through the site plan review process provided in §
156.611, if determined by the Planning Director to satisfy the applicable
criteria and provisions of law. Notice and an opportunity to file an appeal
must be provided in the manner described in O.R.S. 215.416. These uses may be
referred to the Planning Commission for review if deemed appropriate by the
Planning Director:
   (A)   Data center;
   (B)   Solar energy projects where the United States Department of Navy
indicates that the location of solar panels would impact Navy flight
operations, consideration shall be given to any design recommendations offered
by the Navy;
   (C)   Light industrial uses where the Department of Aviation does not
provide evidence demonstrating that such activity would create a safety hazard
or limit approved airport uses;
   (D)   Agricultural processing, where the Department of Aviation does not
provide evidence demonstrating that such activity would create a safety hazard
or limit approved airport uses; and
   (E)   Speedway uses, subject to compliance with the standards in the
Speedway Limited Use Overlay Zone.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.395 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   In the ALI Zone, the following dimensional standards shall apply.
   (A)   Minimum lot size. No limitation.
   (B)   Minimum lot coverage. No limitation.
   (C)   Minimum lot frontage. Minimum lot frontage shall be 300 feet on an
arterial or collector street and 200 feet on a local street.
   (D)   Minimum setbacks.
      (1)   Front yard setbacks. The minimum front yard setback between a
structure and a street right-of-way shall be 50 feet for an arterial street, 30
feet for a collector street and 20 feet for a local street. Structures on
corner lots shall observe the minimum front yard setback for both streets.
      (2)   Side and rear yard setbacks.
         (a)   There is no side or rear yard setback except as may be required
by the Building Code or other siting requirements. Where so required, the
requirements may be waived on common lot lines when adjoining lot owners enter
into a joint agreement for coordinating vehicular access and parking. Party
wall or adjoining building walls must meet fire separation requirements of the
State Structural Specialty Code and Fire and Life Safety Code.
         (b)   The joint development agreement must be approved by the Port of
Morrow as to form and content and recorded in the County Clerk’s office, and a
copy must be provided to the Planning Department.
      (3)   Railroad spur. There is no structure setback from a railroad spur
where the spur will be utilized by the permitted use. Otherwise the setback
shall be 20 feet.
   (E)   Maximum building height. No maximum height. However, no structure
shall be allowed to penetrate an airport imaginary surface.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.396 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   Upon request by ODOT or the county, a traffic impact analysis (TIA) shall be
required when projects on lands zoned ALI, cumulatively, have generated more
than 400 passenger car equivalent trips per day on the local street network.
Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and buses will be defined as two
and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. The TIA shall include: daily vehicle
trips generated by existing projects and projects that are reasonably likely to
occur within the ALI Zone during the planning period, peak hour trip
distribution at affected intersections, analysis of compliance with applicable
roadway performance standards, recommended mitigation measures necessary to
achieve or retain compliance with applicable roadway performance standards and
identification of triggers addressing the timing of future mitigation.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
AIRPORT APPROACH ZONE (AA)
§ 156.410 PURPOSE.
   The AA Zone is an overlay zone intended to restrict development in the
vicinity of an airport. At the Lexington Airport, the AA Zone is the area
identified on the March 2001 ALP Map as “Approach Surface.” In an AA Zone, the
following regulations shall apply.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.411 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an AA Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright:
   (A)   Airport, including hangers, control facilities, aircraft maintenance
and repair and similar aircraft related commercial uses; and
   (B)   Farm use, excluding commercial livestock feed lot, livestock sales
yard and excepting those uses set forth in §
156.412.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.412 CONDITIONAL USES.
   In an AA Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
when authorized in accordance with the requirements of this section and §§
156.620 through
156.630:
   (A)   Farm accessory buildings and uses;
   (B)   Mining, quarrying or other extraction activity, including the
processing or refining of ore or other raw materials;
   (C)   Utility facility necessary for public service;
   (D)   Golf course;
   (E)   Park, playground, other public recreation site or facility or
community service facility owned and operated by a governmental agency or
nonprofit community organization;
   (F)   Veterinary clinic, animal pound or kennel;
   (G)   Private or public grounds and buildings for games, sports, riding
arenas, race tracks and similar activities;
   (H)   Water supply and treatment facility;
   (I)   Sewage disposal and treatment facility;
   (J)   Solid waste disposal site;
   (K)   Manufacturing and warehousing;
   (L)   Traveler’s accommodation facilities;
   (M)   Retail and wholesale trade facilities; and
   (N)   Residential use including mobile homes and development therefor.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.413 USE LIMITATIONS.
   In an AA Zone, the following limitations and standards shall apply to all
uses permitted.
   (A)   All uses shall only be permitted if found to be in compliance with the
Airport Master Plan and the standards, criteria and guidelines thereof.
   (B)   The height of any structure or part of a structure such as chimneys,
towers, antennas and the like, shall be limited according to requirements
established by the county or any governmental agency relative to uses in the
vicinity of an airport, but in no case shall any building or structure exceed
35 feet.
   (C)   In approach zones beyond the clear zone areas, no meeting place for
public or private purposes which is designed to accommodate more than 25
persons at any one time shall be permitted, nor shall any residential use be
permitted.
   (D)   All parking demand created by any use permitted by this section shall
be accommodated on the subject premises entirely off-street as provided in §§
156.595 through
156.604.
   (E)   Access to sites and uses shall be permitted as provided in §§
156.595 through
156.604 and applicable provisions of the Transportation System Plan.
   (F)   Any use permitted under the provisions of this section that is
determined to be incompatible with an existing or planned use adjacent thereto
or across the street from shall be screened from such incompatible uses by
densely planted trees and shrubs or sight-obscuring fencing.
   (G)   Mining or quarry operation permitted by §
156.412(B) may not be permitted if such use will allow or cause ponding which
is likely to attract birds.
   (H)   No use permitted by §
156.412(C) shall permit any power lines to be located in clear zones and any
power lines located within an approach zone shall be in conformance with
designated approach slope ratios.
   (I)   No use permitted by this section shall be allowed if such use is
likely to attract an unusual quantity of birds, particularly birds which are
normally considered high flight.
   (J)   No structure or object shall be erected, altered, allowed to glow or
be maintained in such a manner as to penetrate any of the imaginary surfaces
consistent with Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR), part 77.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.414 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   In an AA Zone, the following dimensional standards shall apply.
   (A)   The minimum lot size shall be determined in accordance with the
provisions of this section relative to setback requirements, off-street parking
and loading requirements, lot coverage limitations and as deemed necessary by
the Commission to maintain air, land and water resource quality, to protect
adjoining and area land uses, to ensure resource carrying capacities are not
exceeded and, more specifically, to protect the airport; except that
residential lot size standards shall comply with standards set forth in the SR
Zone.
   (B)   No nonresidential use permitted by this section which is located
adjacent to or across the street from an existing residential use or platted
lot shall exceed more coverage than 70% of the land area designed or intended
for such use, including buildings, storage and loading areas.
   (C)   No residential use permitted by this section shall be permitted to
exceed 30% lot coverage by buildings and accessory structures.
   (D)   The minimum setback between a structure and the right-of-way of an
arterial shall be 50 feet. The minimum setback of a structure from the right-
of-way of a collector shall be 30 feet, and from all lower class streets, the
minimum setback shall be 20 feet.
   (E)   The minimum setback between a nonresidential structure and a property
line abutting a residential use or lot shall be 50 feet; and the same setback
shall be required for a residential structure and a property line abutting a
nonresidential use or lot.
   (F)   The minimum lot frontage shall not be less than 50 feet.
   (G)   The minimum side setback between a structure and a property line shall
be three feet, and the total of both side setbacks shall be 12 feet.
   (H)   The minimum rear setback between any structure and a rear property
line shall be 25 feet.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.415 SIGN LIMITATIONS.
   In addition to standards set forth by this chapter, by applicable sign codes
or by regulations set forth by any other appropriate agency, in an AA Zone, the
following sign limitations shall apply for any use permitted by this section.
   (A)   The total area of all signs shall not exceed 200 square feet.
   (B)   No free-standing sign shall exceed 80 square feet and a height of 20
feet.
   (C)   No sign exceeding 50 square feet of area and six feet in height shall
be located upon the roof of any building.
   (D)   No sign shall exceed 15% of the area of the wall it is attached to.
   (E)   No sign shall be located within or protrude into a street right-of-
way.
   (F)   No sign shall flash or move, or be illuminated between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except as approved by the Commission.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.416 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   In an AA Zone, off-street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of this section and §§
156.595 through
156.604.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.417 SITE DESIGN.
   (A)   In an AA Zone, the site design of any permitted use shall make the
most effective use reasonably possible of the site topography, existing
landscaping and building placement so as to preserve existing trees and natural
features, preserve vistas and other views from public ways, minimize visibility
of parking, loading and storage areas from public ways and neighboring
residential uses, and to minimize intrusion into the character of existing
developments and land uses in the immediate vicinity of the proposed use.
   (B)   The State Aeronautics Division shall be included as a reviewing
affected party for use applications in this Zone.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.418 DESIGN AND USE CRITERIA.
   (A)   In the consideration of an application for a proposed use in an AA
Zone, the Commission shall take into account the impact of the proposed use on
nearby residential and commercial uses, on resource carrying capacities, on the
capacity of transportation and other public facilities and services, and on the
appearance of the proposal.
   (B)   In approving a proposed use the Commission shall find that:
      (1)   Proposal is in compliance with the applicable state and Federal
Aviation compatibility guidelines;
      (2)   Proposal is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and the
Airport Master Plan;
      (3)   Proposal is in compliance with the intent and provisions of this
chapter and more particularly this section; and
      (4)   The Planning Commission may require establishment and maintenance
of screenings, the use of glare resistant materials in construction and
landscaping, or may attach other similar conditions or limitations that will
serve to reduce hazards to airport operations.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.419 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   As a condition of approval of any use proposed within an AA Zone, the
Commission may require:
   (A)   An increase in required setbacks;
   (B)   Additional off-street parking and loading facilities and building
standards;
   (C)   Limitations on signs or lighting, time of operations, points of
ingress and egress and building heights;
   (D)   Additional landscaping, screening and other improvements;
   (E)   Additional limitations on building heights;
   (F)   Additional sound insulation requirements; and
   (G)   Any other conditions considered necessary to achieve compliance with
the intent and purposes of this chapter, policies of the Comprehensive Plan and
to protect the airport.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.420 TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS; TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA).
   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this section,
a TIA will be required for all projects generating more than 400 passenger car
equivalent trips per day. Heavy vehicles, trucks, recreational vehicles and
buses will be defined as two and two-tenths passenger car equivalents. A TIA
will include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the
project; identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more
peak hour passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment,
impacts of the project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a
state highway, use ODOT standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01,
passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-
18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
AIRPORT HAZARD ZONE (AH)
§ 156.435 PURPOSE.
   (A)   A Zone regulating and restricting the height of structures and objects
of natural growth, and otherwise regulating the use of property, in the
vicinity of the Lexington public use airport by creating the appropriate zones
and establishing the boundaries thereof; providing for changes in the
restrictions and boundaries of such zones; defining certain terms used herein;
referring to the land use plan and approach clear zone plan (zoning maps) which
are incorporated in and made a part of this chapter; providing for enforcement;
and imposing penalties.
   (B)   This Zone is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the
county. It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and
property of users of the Lexington public use airport in the county, and
property or occupants of land in the vicinity thereof, and also if the
obstruction type, in effect reduces the size of the area available for the
landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair
the utility of these airports and the public investment therein. Accordingly,
it is declared that:
      (1)   The creation of establishment of an airport hazard within the Zone
is a public nuisance and an injury to the region served by public use airports
in the county;
      (2)   It is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety
and general welfare and prosperity that the creation or establishment of
airport hazards be prevented; and
      (3)   The prevention of these hazards should be accomplished, to the
extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without
compensation.
   (C)   It is further declared that both the prevention of the creation or
establishment of airport hazards and the elimination, removal, alteration,
mitigation or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public
purposes for which political subdivisions may raise and expend public funds and
acquire land or interests in land.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.436 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The highest point of an airport’s usable landing area
measured in feet from mean sea level (205 feet MSL).
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or object of natural growth located on or in
the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near such airport, which
obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or
takeoff at such airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or takeoff of
aircraft.
   APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES. These zones apply to
the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal and conical surfaces
defined in Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) part 77, and shown on the
approved Approach and Clear Zone Plan for each airport.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this section and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea
level elevation unless otherwise specified.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth or
use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this section or an
amendment thereto.
   NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal
guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-
precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for
which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on the Airport
Layout Plan.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association or governmental entity. It includes a trustee,
receiver, assignee or similar representative of any of them.
   PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or a Precision Approach
Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is
planned and is so indicated on the approved Airport Layout Plan.
   PRIMARY SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. The PRIMARY
SURFACE extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. The width of the
PRIMARY SURFACE of a runway will be that width prescribed in part 77 of the
Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or
planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the
PRIMARY SURFACE is the same as the elevation of the nearest point onto the
runway centerline.
   PUBLIC USE AIRPORT. Any airport, publicly or privately owned, which is open
to public use and meets all appropriate state and federal operational criteria.
   RUNWAY. A defined area on public use airport prepared for landing and
takeoff of aircraft along its length including both existing and proposed as
shown on approved Airport Layout Plans for each airport.
   STRUCTURE. An object constructed or installed by humans, including, but
without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formation and
overhead transmission lines.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
   UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less
(Runway 8-26 and 9-27 at the County Airport).
   VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure
and no instrument designation indicated on the FAA approved Airport Layout
Plan.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.437 AIRPORT ZONES.
   In order to carry out the provisions of this section, there are hereby
created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying
within the approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones and conical
zones as they apply to a public use airport. Such zones are shown on both the
“Land Use Plan” (Drawing 3) and “Approach and Clear Zone Plan” (Drawing 2) of
the County Airport Layout Plan, which are attached to the ordinance codified in
this subchapter and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the
following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive
limitations. At the Lexington Airport, the AH Zone applies to the areas
identified on the March 2001 ALP Map as the approach surface, horizontal
surface and conical surface. For the purpose of this subchapter, the various
zones are hereby established and defined as follows.
   APPROACH AND CLEAR ZONES. The areas depicted on the approved Approach and
Clear Zone Plan including the horizontal conical, approach and primary surfaces
which pertain to federal aviation regulation (FAR) part 77. Within this zone
are the following defined sub-zones.
      (1)   CONICAL SUB-ZONE. The conical zone is hereby established in the
area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward
therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The CONICAL ZONE does not
include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional zones.
      (2)   HORIZONTAL SUB-ZONE. The horizontal zone is hereby established by
swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines
tangent to those arcs. The HORIZONTAL ZONE does not include the approach and
transitional zones.
      (3)   PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY APPROACH SUB-ZONE. The inner edge of
this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000
feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000
feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      (4)   RUNWAY LARGER THAN UTILITY WITH A VISIBILITY MINIMUM GREATER THAN
THREE-QUARTERS OF A MILE NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT APPROACH SUB-ZONE. The inner
edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and
is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of
3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface.
Its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      (5)   TRANSITIONAL SUB ZONES. These zones are hereby established as the
area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and
upward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway.
      (6)   UTILITY RUNWAY VISUAL APPROACH SUB-ZONE. The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet
wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline
being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.438 AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no structure or tree
shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or be maintained in any zone created
by this section to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein
established for such zone.
   (B)   Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of
the zones and sub-zones in question as follows.
      (1)   Utility runway visual approach sub-zone. Slopes upward 20 feet
horizontally for each foot vertically, beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
      (2)   Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than
three-quarters of a mile non-precision instrument approach sub-zone. Slopes
upward 34 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of
and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal
distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
      (3)   Precision instrument runway approach sub-zone. Slopes upward 50
feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of
10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward 40 feet
horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of
40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
      (4)   Transitional sub-zones. Slopes upward and outward seven feet
horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and the approach zones, and extending to a
height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is the highest elevation
of each public use airport. In addition to the foregoing, there are established
height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot
vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach
zones, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the
precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone,
height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot
vertically shall be maintained beginning at the sides of and at the same
elevation as precision instrument runway approach surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90-degree angles to the extended
runway centerline.
      (5)   Horizontal sub-zone. One hundred and fifty feet above the airport
elevation.
      (6)   Conical sub-zone. Slopes upward and outward 20 feet horizontally
for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and
at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet
above the airport elevation.
      (7)   Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this zone shall be
construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or
structure to a height up to 35 feet above the surface of the land. When an area
is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation
shall prevail. These surfaces are shown on the approved Approach and Clear Zone
Plan for each public use airport.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.439 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no use may be
made of land or water within Airport Zones established by this section in such
a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or
radio communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for
pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the
eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the
airport or otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing,
takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the public use airport.
Included in this restriction is any land or water use which would tend to
foster or increase bird population and thereby increase the likelihood of a
bird strike problem.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no use may be
made of land or water within the approved Approach and Clear Zones established
by this section in such a manner which would promote or provide for large
congregations of people and/or above-ground storage of flammable substance.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.440 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this Zone
shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other changes or
alterations of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of
the effective data of this section, or otherwise interfere with the continuance
of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in
the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction
or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this Zone and
is diligently prosecuted.
   (B)   Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this
section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby
required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such
markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the County Board of
Commissioners, to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be
installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the owner of the public
use airport.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.441 PERMITS.
   (A)   Future uses. No material change shall be made in the use of land, and
no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise
established in any zone or sub-zone hereby created unless a permit therefor
shall have been applied for and granted.
      (1)   However, a permit for a tree or structure of less than 75 feet of
vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the horizontal and
conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a horizontal
distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runway except when such tree or
structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, would
extend above the height limit prescribed for the respective zone.
      (2)   Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which
the permit is desired with sufficient particulars to determine whether the
resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulation herein
prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be
granted.
   (B)   Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use,
structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on
the effective date of this Zone or any amendments thereto or than it is when
the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for
such a permit shall be granted.
   (C)   Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the county
determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more
than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be
granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height
limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
   (D)   Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his or her property not in
accordance with the regulations prescribed in this section may apply to the
County Planning Commission for a variance from such regulations. Such variances
shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or
enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship and relief granted would not be contrary to the public
interest but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit
of this Zone.
   (E)   Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if
such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this Zone and be
reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of
the structure or tree in question to permit the county or airport owner, at its
own expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon, such markers and lights
as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.442 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the county
administering office made in his or her administration of this Zone may appeal
as provided in §§
156.690 through
156.699.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-04-
2008, passed 3-5-2008; Ord. ORD-2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
AIRPORT SAFETY AND COMPATIBILITY OVERLAY ZONE (ASC)
§ 156.455 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this overlay zone is to protect and support the continued
operation of the Boardman public use airport by establishing compatibility and
safety standards and to reduce potential safety hazards for persons living,
working or recreating near that airport.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD- 2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.456 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRCRAFT. Includes airplanes and helicopters, but not hot air balloons or
ultralights.
   AIRPORT DIRECT IMPACT AREA. The area located within 5,000 feet of an airport
runway, excluding lands within the runway protection zone and approach surface.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The highest point of an airport’s usable runway, measured
in feet above mean sea level.
   AIRPORT IMAGINARY SURFACE. Imaginary areas in space and on the ground that
are established in relation to the airport and its runways. Imaginary areas are
defined by the primary surface, runway protection zone, approach surface,
horizontal surface, conical surface and transition surface.
   AIRPORT SECONDARY IMPACT AREA. The area located between 5,000 and 10,000
feet from an airport runway.
   AIRPORT SPONSOR. The owner, manager, person or entity designated to
represent the interests of an airport. (See O.A.R. 660-013-0020.)
   APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary
surface.
      (1)   The inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the
primary surface and it expands uniformly to a width of:
         (a)   One thousand two hundred and fifty feet for a utility runway; or
         (b)   One thousand five hundred feet for a runway other than a utility
runway.
      (2)   The approach surface extends for a horizontal distance of 5,000
feet at a slope of 20 feet outward for each foot upward.
      (3)   The outer width of an approach surface will be that width
prescribed in this definition for the most precise approach existing or planned
for that runway end.
   CONICAL SURFACE. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery
of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a distance of 4,000 feet.
   DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION. The State Department of Aviation, formerly the
Aeronautics Division of the State Department of Transportation.
   FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION’S (FAA) TECHNICAL REPRESENTATIVE. As used in
this chapter, the federal agency providing the FAA with expertise on wildlife
and bird strike hazards as the relate to airports. This may include, but is not
limited to, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and the State
Department of Fish and Wildlife.
   HEIGHT. Height of building, as defined in §
156.003, including the highest point of a tree, plant or other object of
natural growth, measured from mean sea level.
   HORIZONTAL SURFACE. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of
specified radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each
runway of each airport and connection the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to
those arcs. The radius of each arc is 5,000 feet.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any structure or tree, plant or other object of natural growth
that penetrates an imaginary surface.
   OTHER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to
be used by turbine-driven aircraft or by propeller-driven aircraft exceeding
12,500 pounds gross weight.
   PRIMARY SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When a
runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200
feet beyond each end of that runway. When a runway has no specially prepared
hard surface, or planned hard surface, the PRIMARY SURFACE ends at each end of
that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as
the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of the
PRIMARY SURFACE is: 250 feet for utility runways; and 500 feet for other than
utility runways.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY FACILITY OR LOCATION. A permanent or temporary structure or
facility, place or activity where concentrations of people gather in reasonably
close quarters for purposes such as deliberation, education, worship, shopping,
employment, entertainment, recreation, sporting events or similar activities.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY FACILITIES include, but are not limited to, schools, churches,
conference or convention facilities, employment and shopping centers, arenas,
athletic fields, stadiums, clubhouses, museums and similar facilities and
places, but do not include parks, golf courses or similar facilities unless
used in a manner where people are concentrated in reasonably close quarters.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY FACILITIES also do not include air shows, structures or uses
approved by the FAA in an adopted airport master plan, or places where people
congregate for short periods of time such as parking lots or bus stops.
   RUNWAY. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
   RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE (RPZ). An area off the runway end used to enhance the
protection of people and property on the ground. The RPZ is trapezoidal in
shape and centered about the extended runway centerline. The inner width of the
RPZ is the same as the width of the primary surface. The outer width of the RPZ
is a function of the type of aircraft and specified approach visibility minimum
associated with the runway end. The RPZ extends from each end of the primary
surface for a horizontal distance of 1,000 to 2,500 feet.
   SIGNIFICANT. As it relates to bird strike hazards, a level of increased
flight activity by birds across an approach surface or runway that is more than
incidental or occasional, considering the existing ambient level of flight
activity by birds in the vicinity.
   TRANSITIONAL SURFACE. The surfaces that extend upward and outward at 90-
degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a
slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the side of the
primary and approach surfaces to the point of intersection with the horizontal
and conical surfaces. TRANSITIONAL SURFACES for those portions of the precision
approach surfaces which project through and beyond the limits of the conical
surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of
the approach surface and at a 90-degree angle to the extended runway
centerline.
   UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight or less.
   VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures, where no straight-in instrument approach procedures
or instrument designations have been approved or planned, or are indicated on
an FAA-approved airport layout plan or any other FAA planning document.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.457 IMAGINARY SURFACE DELINEATION.
   The airport elevation and the location and dimensions of the runway, primary
surface, runway protection zone, approach surface, horizontal surface, conical
surface and transitional surface shall be delineated for each airport subject
to this overlay zone and shall be made part of the official zoning map. All
lands, waters and airspace or portions thereof, that are located within these
surfaces shall be subject to the requirements of this overlay zone.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD- 2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.458 NOTICE OF LAND USE AND PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided, written notice of applications for land use or
limited land use decisions in the area within this overlay zone, including
Comprehensive Plan or zoning amendments, shall be provided to the airport
sponsor and the Department of Aviation in the same manner as notice is provided
to property owners entitled by law to written notice of land use or limited
land use applications.
   (A)   Notice shall be provided to the airport sponsor and the Department of
Aviation when the property or a portion thereof that is subject to the land use
or limited land use application is within 5,000 feet of the sides or ends of
the runway.
   (B)   Notices required by this section need not be provided to the airport
sponsor or the Department of Aviation where the land use or limited land use
application:
      (1)   Would only allow structures less than 35 feet in height, measured
from grade;
      (2)   Involves property located entirely outside the approach surface;
      (3)   Does not involve uses that emit smoke dust or steam; sanitary
landfills or water impoundments; or radio-telephone, television or similar
transmission facilities; or electrical transmission lines; and
      (4)   Does not involve wetland mitigation, creation, enhancement or
restoration.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.459 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   All uses permitted by the underlying zone shall comply with the height
limitations in this section unless standards of the underlying zone are more
restrictive.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, no structure or tree or
other object of natural growth shall be allowed to penetrate an airport
imaginary surface.
   (B)   For areas within airport imaginary surfaces but outside of the
approach and transition surfaces, where terrain is at higher elevations than
the airport runway surfaces where existing structures and permitted development
penetrate the airport imaginary surfaces, a local government may authorize
structures up to 35 feet in height.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.460 PROCEDURES.
   An application for a land use or limited land use approval on property
within this overlay zone shall provide the following information in addition to
any other required information:
   (A)   A map or drawing showing the location of the property in relation to
the airport imaginary surfaces; and
   (B)   Elevation profiles and a site plan, drawn to scale, including the
location and height of all existing and proposed structures, measured from
existing grade.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.461 LAND USE COMPATIBILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   Any land use allowed in the underlying zone may be permitted in the overlay
zone, subject to the following standards.
   (A)   The user shall comply with the height standards in §
156.459.
   (B)   The use shall not include a place of public assembly.
   (C)   The uses shall not create a bird attractant. If the airport sponsor
determines that there is a potential for attracting birds, the application
shall include a study demonstrating that any hazard to use of the airport is
mitigated.
   (D)   The use shall not cause light or glare that projects lighting directly
onto a runway or taxiway, or imitates airport lighting.
   (E)   The use shall not be a source of smoke, dust or steam.
   (F)   The use shall not cause electrical interference with the airport
operations, or in the case of proposed or expanded communications or
transmission facilities, the Department of Aviation and the FAA shall approve
the facility.
   (G)   The use shall not create a new or expanded water impoundment within
5,000 feet of the edge or end of a runway larger than one-quarter acre in size
unless necessary for airport operations or approved in writing by the airport
sponsor, the Department of Aviation and the FAA.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.462 PROHIBITED USES.
   Notwithstanding the underlying zoning, the following uses are prohibited in
the Airport Safety and Compatibility Overlay Zone:
   (A)   New residential development; and
   (B)   New public assembly facilities.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.463 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   The regulations prescribed by this Zone shall not be construed to
require the removal, lowering or other changes or alterations of any structure
or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this
section, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use.
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction,
alteration or intended use of any structure that was approved under the
requirements of the previous Airport Approach or Airport Hazard zones,
including those approvals that expired or that became void. Such approvals are
hereby validated as consistent with this Airport Safety and Compatibility
Overlay and no further approval is required under the terms of the Zoning
Ordinance.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of
any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the
installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as
shall be deemed necessary by the County Board of Commissioners, to indicate to
the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such
airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and
maintained at the expense of the owner of the public use airport.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-4, passed 5-18-2016; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY ZONE (FP)
§ 156.475 PURPOSE.
   In any zone which is a FH Overlay Zone, the requirements and standards of
this section shall apply in addition to those herein specified for such zone
previously; provided, that if a conflict in regulations or standards occurs,
the provisions of this section shall govern.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
2007, passed 11-28-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.476 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all areas of special flood
hazards within the jurisdiction of the county. The areas of special flood
hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration on the flood study
with accompanying flood insurance rate maps is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this subchapter, and the provisions of this subchapter
shall apply to all flood hazard areas identified by said maps.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
2007, passed 11-28-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.477 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Planning Director’s interpretation of
any provision of this subchapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly
defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet
flow and AH indicates ponding.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD or SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land
in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes the letter A.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood have a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. Also referred to as the “100-year-flood.” Designation on maps
always includes the letter A.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides. Not to be confused with below-grade crawlspace which
differs in function and size (see BELOW-GRADE CRAWLSPACE).
   BEFORE REGULATORY FLOODWAY. A floodway without an actual “floodway”
designation on the FEMA maps. Until FEMA makes an official designation
concerning these areas and when the area has been designated within Zones A1-30
and AE on the FIRMs, development is limited as outlined in §
156.481(C).
   BELOW-GRADE CRAWLSPACE. The area of a building which is bounded by
foundation walls and is located between the bottom of the lowest floor and the
ground. The interior grade of a crawlspace below the base flood elevation must
not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade. BELOW-GRADE
CRAWL SPACES are generally less than four feet in height and provide a means of
ventilation, visual inspection and access to pipes, ducts and electrical
wiring.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited to,
schools, nursing homes, hospitals police, fire and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or
hazardous waste.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, or storage of
equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. The official document, FEMA Form 81-31, in which
lowest floor and floodproofing elevations are recorded. It provides information
necessary to ensure compliance with the county’s floodplain management
ordinance, to determine flood insurance rates and to support a request for a
letter of map amendment (LOMA) or letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-
F).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of rivers or streams; or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source.
   FLOODPROOFING. Protection measures made to a nonresidential building that is
not elevated above the base flood level. It includes ensuring that the walls
and floor are water-tight and capable of withstanding hydrostatic pressures and
hydrodynamic forces (dry floodproofing).
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Once
established, nothing can be placed in the floodway that would cause any rise in
base flood elevation (i.e., 0.0 feet).
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this subchapter found at §
156.481(B)(1)(b).
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include park trailers or recreational vehicles.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, which is the horizontal or base
line of reference for the FIRM elevations.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of this subchapter.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
state of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers or
foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. For floodplain management purposes, a vehicle which
is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this subchapter which
permits constructing in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
subchapter.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
2007, passed 11-28-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.478 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Lands to which this subchapter applies. This subchapter shall apply to
all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the county.
   (B)   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a
scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for
Morrow County,” dated December 18, 2007, with accompanying flood insurance maps
is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this subchapter.
   (C)   Penalties for noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance
with the terms of this subchapter and other applicable regulations. Violation
of the provisions of this subchapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall, upon conviction, be punishable by imposition
of a fine not to exceed: $500 in the case of a non-continuing offense; or
$1,000 in the case of a continuing offense.
   (D)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This subchapter is not intended
to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restriction. However, where this subchapter and another ordinance, easement,
covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   (E)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this
subchapter, all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   (F)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this subchapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes
and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by human-made
or natural causes. This subchapter does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This subchapter shall not create liability on the
part of the county, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
subchapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
2007, passed 11-28-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.479 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Establishment of development permit.
      (1)   Development permit required. A development permit shall be obtained
before construction or development begins within any area of special flood
hazard established in §
156.478(B). The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured
homes, as defined in this subchapter and for all development, including fill
and other activities, also as defined in this subchapter.
      (2)   Application for development permit. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the County Planning Director and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the
location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
         (a)   Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure
has been floodproofed;
         (c)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in §
156.481(B)(2); and
         (d)   Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
   (B)   Designation of the County Planning Director. The County Planning
Director is hereby appointed to administer and implement this subchapter by
granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its
provisions.
   (C)   Duties and responsibilities of the Planning Director. Duties of the
County Planning Director shall include, but not be limited to, the following.
      (1)   Permit review.
         (a)   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this subchapter have been satisfied;
         (b)   Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required; and
         (c)   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that
the encroachment provisions of §
156.481(D)(1) are met.
      (2)   Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has
not been provided in accordance with §
156.478(B), the Planning Director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source, in order to administer §§
156.481(B) and (C).
      (3)   Information to be obtained and maintained.
         (a)   Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood
insurance study or required as in division (C)(2) above, obtain and record on
FEMA Form 81-31 the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement;
         (b)   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
            1.   Verify and record on FEMA Form 81-31 the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level); and
            2.   Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in division
(A)(2)(c) above.
         (c)   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this subchapter.
      (4)   Alteration of watercourses.
         (a)   Notify adjacent communities, the Department of State Lands and
the Department of Land Conservation and Development prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration; and
         (b)   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is
not diminished.
      (5)   Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of
the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in §
156.480.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
2007, passed 11-28-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.480 VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Appeal Board.
      (1)   The County Planning Commission as established by the county shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of
this subchapter.
      (2)   The County Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Planning Director in the enforcement or administration of this
subchapter.
      (3)   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Commission, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the County Board of Commissioners, as
provided in the County Zoning Ordinance.
      (4)   In passing upon such applications, the Planning Commission and the
County Board of Commissioners shall consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this subchapter,
and:
         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (e)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         (f)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood or for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         (k)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and
bridges.
      (5)   Upon consideration of the factors of division (A)(4) above and the
purposes of this subchapter, the Planning Commission or the County Board of
Commissioners may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purposes of this subchapter.
      (6)   The Planning Director shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon
request.
   (B)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level; provided, that items in divisions (A)(4)(a) through (A)(4)(k)
above have been fully considered. As the lot size increases the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (2)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in this section.
      (3)   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
as identified in division (A)(4) above or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
      (6)   Variances, as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program,
are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical
piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the
structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily
address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such,
variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.
      (7)   Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very
limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than water-
tight or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will
have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria, except §
156.479(A)(2)(a), and otherwise complies with §
156.481(A)(1) and (A)(2).
      (8)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
2007, passed 11-28-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.481 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   (A)   General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the
following standards are required.
      (1)   Anchoring.
         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
         (b)   All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement and shall be installed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but
are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors
(reference FEMA’s Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas
guidebook for additional techniques).
      (2)   Construction materials and methods.
         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
         (b)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
         (c)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise
elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
      (3)   Utilities.
         (a)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
         (b)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters.
         (c)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      (4)   Subdivision proposals.
         (a)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
         (b)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
         (c)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood damage.
         (d)   Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not
available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50
lots or five acres (whichever is less).
      (5)   Review of building permits. Where elevation data is not available
either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source
(§
156.479(C)(2)), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure
that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of
reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high
water marks, photographs of past flooding and the like, where available.
Failure to elevate at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade in these
zones may result in higher insurance rates.
   (B)   Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in §
156.478(B) or §
156.479(C)(2), the following provisions are required:
      (1)   Residential construction.
         (a)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest flood, including basement, elevated one foot or
more above the base flood elevation.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria.
            1.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level
of the base flood elevation; or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
         (a)   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
         (c)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this division (A)(2) based on
their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and
plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
156.479(C)(3)(b);
         (d)   Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed,
must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in
division (B)(1)(b) above; and
         (e)   Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be
notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot
below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed for the base flood
level will be rated as one foot below that level).
      (3)   Below-grade crawl spaces. The county will allow below-grade
crawlspace construction; provided, that the interior grade of the crawlspace
below the base flood elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade and the height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured
from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace
foundation wall, must not exceed four feet at any point. Additionally there
must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior
area of the crawlspace. (Reference: Crawlspace Construction for Buildings
Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas, Federal Insurance Administration
Technical Bulletin 11-01.)
      (4)   Below grade-crawlspace construction. Below-grade crawlspaces are
allowed, subject to the following standards as found in FEMA Technical Bulletin
11-01, Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard
Areas.
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy can usually be addressed through
the required openings stated in division (B)(4)(b) below. Because of
hydrodynamic loads, crawlspace construction is not allowed in areas with flood
velocities greater than five feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a
qualified design professional, such as a registered architect or professional
engineer. Other types of foundations are recommended for these areas.
         (b)   The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the base flood
elevation (BFE) and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic
pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom
of each flood vent opening can be no more than one foot above the lowest
adjacent exterior grade.
         (c)   Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation
walls of the crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists,
insulation or other materials that extend below the BFE. The recommended
construction practice is to elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation
above BFE.
         (d)   Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be
elevated above BFE or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate
within the system components during flood conditions. Ductwork, in particular,
must either be placed above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters.
         (e)   The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be
more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
         (f)   The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the
interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall
must not exceed four feet at any point. The height limitation is the maximum
allowable unsupported wall height according to the engineering analyses and
Building Code requirements for flood hazard areas.
         (g)   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should
be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage
system will vary because of the site gradient and other drainage
characteristics, such as soil types. Possible options include natural drainage
through porous, well-drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated
pipes, drainage tiles or gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or
mechanical means.
         (h)   The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five
feet per second for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five feet per
second, other foundation types should be used. For more detailed information
refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01.
      (5)   Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes to be placed or
substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation and
shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in
accordance with the provisions of division (A)(1)(b) above.
      (6)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are
required to either:
         (a)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices and has no permanently attached additions; or
         (c)   Meet the requirements of division (B)(5) above and the elevation
and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.
   (C)   Before regulatory floodway. In areas where a regulatory floodway has
not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on
the county’s FIRMs, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the county.
   (D)   Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§
156.478(B) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development unless certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge; and
      (2)   If division (D)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-03-
2007, passed 11-28-2007; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
LIMITED USE OVERLAY ZONE (LU)
§ 156.495 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Limited Use Overlay Zone is to limit the list of
permitted uses and activities allowed in the Zone to only those uses and
activities which are justified in the Comprehensive Plan “reasons” exception
statement under O.R.S. 197.732(1)(c). The Limited Use Overlay Zone is intended
to carry out the administrative rule requirement for “reasons” exceptions,
pursuant to O.A.R. 660-14-018(3).
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.496 OVERLAY ZONE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   When the Limited Use Overlay Zone is applied, the uses permitted in
the underlying zone shall be limited to those uses and activities specifically
referenced in the ordinance adopting the Limited Use Overlay Zone. The Limited
Use Overlay Zone cannot be used to authorize uses other than those expressly
provided in the underlying zone. Reasonable conditions may also be imposed by
the Limited Use Overlay Zone when necessary to carry out the provisions of the
Comprehensive Plan and this chapter. Until the overlay zone has been removed or
amended through the plan amendment process the only permitted uses and
activities in the Zone shall be those specifically referenced in the adopting
ordinance.
   (B)   The Limited Use Overlay Zone is to be applied through the plan
amendment and rezoning process at the time the primary plan and Zone
designation is being changed. The ordinance adopting the overlay zone shall
include findings showing that:
      (1)   No other zoning district currently provided in the Zoning Ordinance
can be applied consistent with the requirements of the “reasons” exception
statement because the zoning would allow uses beyond those justified by the
exception;
      (2)   The proposed Zone is the best suited to accommodate the desired
uses(s); and
      (3)   It is required under the exception rule (O.A.R. 660, division 4) to
limit the uses permitted in the proposed Zone.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.497 OFFICIAL PLAN/ZONING MAP.
   The official plan/zoning map shall be amended to show an LU suffix on any
parcel where the Limited Use Overlay Zone has been applied.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.498 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to limiting the uses in the Zone it may be necessary to require
county approval of the location of buildings, access and parking, screening and
other site planning considerations in order to ensure the compatibility of the
permitted uses with the area. This requirement may be added by specific
reference in the adopting ordinance. The ordinance shall indicate any special
concerns or locational requirements that must be addressed in the site plan and
be approved by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
UMCD PI LIMITED USE OVERLAY ZONE
§ 156.510 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the UMCD PI Limited Use Overlay Zone is to provide
guidance concerning the development of approximately 959 acres of designated
Port Industrial zoned lands. These lands are identified on the UMCD PI Limited
Use Overlay Zone Map and include roads and bunkers used as part of the Army
Depot.
   (B)   Land disturbance activities will be limited and may be prohibited in
this area. The existing concrete igloos/bunkers located in the Limited Use
Overlay Zone will be available for permitted and conditional uses as outlined
below.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.511 USES PERMITTED WITH A ZONING PERMIT.
   The following uses are permitted with a zoning permit:
   (A)   Ecotype preserve/wildlife refuge/open space preserve and associated
accessory uses, including, but not limited to, wildlife observation facilities,
plant propagation facilities for on-site restoration, natural heritage
interpretive displays and public restrooms;
   (B)   Low impact recreation facilities, including, but not limited to, non-
motorized uses such as hiking trails, bicycling paths, equestrian trails and
picnic facilities;
   (C)   Observatory;
   (D)   Utility facilities and roads, including the construction and
maintenance of electric and telephone transmission lines, gas and water
distribution lines, sewage collection lines, road development and maintenance,
construction and maintenance of railroad lines and related facilities, but
excluding commercial facilities for the purpose of generating power for public
use; and
   (E)   Commercial storage in existing structures with existing access. Use
shall be limited to igloos that have direct access to a roadway.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.512 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   Uses permitted with a conditional use permit are subject to applicable
provisions within this section and §§
156.620 through
156.630. A zoning permit will be issued following final approval of a
conditional use:
   (A)   Commercial operations conducted for the mining and processing of
geothermal resources, aggregate and other mineral resources or other subsurface
resources;
   (B)   Farm use that provides a net benefit to the wildlife habitat,
excluding livestock feedlots and sale yards and hog and poultry farms;
   (C)   The propagation or harvesting of a forest product;
   (D)   Commercial solar power generation for sale for public use; and
   (E)   Private cemetery or burial site.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.513 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   In this Zone, the following dimensional standards shall apply. The minimum
lot size shall be one acre unless written proof from the Department of
Environmental Quality is provided which shows that an approvable subsurface
disposal system can be permitted, or the minimum lot size shall be the minimum
necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the proposed use and is also
consistent with the purpose and intent of this Zone and the PI Zone.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
SPEEDWAY LIMITED USE OVERLAY ZONE (SO)
§ 156.525 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Speedway Overlay Zone is to provide guidance concerning
the development of speedways and associated uses on property approved for
speedway development. This section provides the requirements to be followed
relative to any speedway development, including, but not limited to,
transportation improvements, a variety of event plans and associated and
related uses.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.526 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   A speedway and the related and associated speedway uses and facilities
identified in the goal exception are permitted uses at the Boardman Airport
property as provided in the goal exception, subject to a demonstration of
compliance with the site development review requirements of the County Zoning
Ordinance. A speedway and its related and associated uses and facilities,
hereafter referred to collectively in these conditions as “a speedway,” shall
not exceed the size, scale or nature of use authorized in the goal exception
and this chapter without first obtaining a new goal exception. The capacity of
a speedway grandstand seating shall not exceed 145,000.
   (B)   A speedway shall hold no more than two events per year that attract
more than 100,000 persons to a speedway site on a single day.
   (C)   The associated racing related uses identified in the findings of the
ordinance codified in this subchapter shall be designed and located in a manner
that makes them an integral part of a speedway development, so long as they are
primarily for the use of users and patrons of a major motor speedway but
available as well to members of the general public.
   (D)   A speedway may include office space, so long as it is primarily for
the use of users and patrons of a major motor speedway but available as well to
members of the general public.
   (E)   A speedway may include a restaurant, so long as it is primarily for
the use of users and patrons of a major motor speedway but available as well to
members of the general public.
   (F)   A speedway may include a gift shop, so long as it is primarily for the
use of users and patrons of a major motor speedway but available as well to
members of the general public. These uses may be approved without regard to the
limitations on size or occupancy of speedway-related and accessory uses and
facilities specified in previous findings and decisions.
   (G)   A major motor speedway may include “high-end” speedway lodging not to
exceed 250 rooms. The speedway lodging shall be operated as an integral part of
the speedway, so long as they are primarily for the use of users and patrons of
a major motor speedway but available as well to members of the general public.
   (H)   A speedway may include an industrial park, so long as they are
primarily for the use of users and patrons of a major motor speedway but
available as well to members of the general public. Any use that, as part of
its regular operations, would cause emissions of smoke, dust or steam that
would obscure visibility within airport approach corridors shall be prohibited.
   (I)   Development of improved RV and unimproved camper/tent/RV spaces may be
approved so long as they are primarily for the use of users and patrons of a
major motor speedway but available as well to members of the general public.
   (J)   A speedway may include a multi-purpose recreational facility so long
as it is primarily for the use of users and patrons of a major motor speedway
but available as well to members of the general public.
   (K)   A speedway may include outdoor recreational facilities, such as a BMX
bicycle track, a go cart track, a miniature golf course and athletic fields and
courts, so long as they are primarily for the use of users and patrons of a
major motor speedway but available as well to members of the general public.
   (L)   A speedway may include one gasoline service station with attached
convenience store not exceeding eight bays (24 pumps), so long as it is
primarily for the use of users and patrons of a major motor speedway but
available as well to members of the general public.
   (M)   Major motor speedways and racetracks authorized in previous findings
and decisions may be developed without taking further exception to the
statewide land use planning goals relating to agricultural lands, public
facilities and services and urbanization and without regard to the specific
sizes and configurations of the tracks specified in previous findings and
decisions.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.527 HEALTH AND SAFETY PLANS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Emergency Management Plan. An Emergency Management Plan shall be
developed for a speedway. In preparing the Emergency Management Plan, the
speedway owner or operator shall coordinate at a minimum with the Boardman
Rural Fire Protection District, County Emergency Services, County Public Works,
the County Sheriff’s Department and the Umatilla Electric Cooperative. The
Emergency Management Plan shall ensure that there are adequate firefighting
personnel and equipment to protect attendees at the speedway during all racing
events, and that emergency services are adequate to accommodate the needs of
area residents, racing team members and visitors to the speedway during all
racing events. The Emergency Management Plan shall incorporate utilization of
medical facilities at the speedway and helicopter transport capability for
serious medical or other emergency conditions. A demonstration of adequate
public safety measures is required to obtain site development review approval.
If additional personnel or equipment are required beyond the resources of fire
districts or emergency service providers in order to provide an adequate level
of protection for the speedway complex and its attendees, then the speedway
owner or operator shall provide funds to pay for the additional personnel and
equipment, including a new fire station (subject to land use approval) and
equipment at or near the speedway if required. The Emergency Management Plan
shall be reviewed annually and revised and updated as appropriate. The
Emergency Management Plan shall be subject to approval by the County Emergency
Management Director, who may appoint a committee to assist in review of the
Plan.
   (B)   Security Plan. A Security Plan shall be developed for a speedway. In
preparing the Security Plan, the speedway owner or operator shall coordinate
with affected law enforcement personnel serving the area, including, but not
limited to, the County Sheriff, the City of Boardman Police Department and the
state police. The Security Plan shall address speedway safety and security on-
site and at points of access adjoining the speedway. The Plan shall ensure that
law enforcement and public safety and security services are adequate to
accommodate the needs of area residents and speedway visitors during all racing
events. A demonstration of adequate law enforcement and public safety and
security measures is required to obtain site development review approval. The
speedway owner or operator shall be responsible for payment of the additional
costs incurred by law enforcement, public safety and emergency service
providers associated with servicing a racing event at the speedway. The
Security Plan shall be reviewed annually and revised and updated as
appropriate. The Security Plan shall be subject to approval by the County
Sheriff, who may appoint a committee to assist in review of the Plan.
   (C)   Litter Control Plan. Prior to a major motor speedway being used for
sanctioned, high speed automobile racing, the speedway owner or operator shall
prepare and submit a Litter Control Plan, acceptable to the County Planning
Department, demonstrating how litter and trash will be controlled and cleaned
up following speedway racing events. The Litter Control Plan shall encourage
the collection, reuse and recycling of solid waste. The speedway owner or
operator shall construct a fence around the perimeter of any major motor
speedway prior to the major motor speedway being used for premier, high speed
automobile racing both to control litter and to provide separation from I-84
and from the exercise of customary and usual aviation activities at the
Boardman Airport.
   (D)   Refinement Plan. The Port of Morrow or its designee shall be
responsible for the completion of a Refinement Plan, as defined in O.A.R. 660-
012-0025. The Refinement Plan shall address the following infrastructure needs:
deviation from the spacing standards related to the speedway interchange, which
shall include the types and levels of information necessary to obtain State
Transportation Commission approval of a major deviation study; modifications to
the Tower Road Interchange and the length of stacking and merge lanes serving
that interchange; and the precise length of the third lane on I-84, both
eastbound and westbound, in the vicinity of the Army Depot Interchange. The
Refinement Plan shall be completed and adopted as an amendment to the County
Transportation System Plan prior to issuance of a final environmental
assessment or environmental impact statement.
   (E)   Traffic Management Plan. Prior to holding sanctioned, premier, high
speed automobile racing events open to the general public at a speedway, the
speedway owner or operator shall prepare a detailed Traffic Management Plan
identifying traffic management measures proposed for implementation during
speedway racing events and providing for traffic monitoring as described in §
156.531.
      (1)   The Traffic Management Plan shall be a graduated plan covering a
spectrum of different event sizes.
      (2)   The Traffic Management Plan shall identify traffic management needs
and address how these needs will be implemented. The Traffic Management Plan
shall be designed to maintain compliance with ODOT and county roadway
performance standards as described in findings of the ordinance codified in
this subchapter and shall address, among other things, parking and circulation
within the speedway; access routes to the site and detour routes for through
traffic; point control with police officers; the availability and location of
tow trucks and emergency vehicles along access routes to the speedway; the use
of variable message signs; traffic coordination from helicopters; closure of RV
and camping areas for up to the first four hours following a premier event;
traffic route map and traffic/parking information mailed with race tickets; and
the use of nonstructural techniques to improve and facilitate speedway access
and roadway mobility.
      (3)   The Traffic Management Plan shall be prepared by a licensed traffic
engineering firm experienced in speedway events, in coordination with ODOT
Region 5, the Washington Department of Transportation, the County Public Works,
Planning and Emergency Management Directors, the Umatilla County Public Works
Director and representatives of the cities of Boardman, Umatilla and Irrigon
and the Port of Morrow. The Traffic Management Plan also shall be subject to
review and comment by other affected state and local agencies, local
governments and stakeholders such as PGE, Threemile Canyon Farms and Umatilla
Electric Cooperative, whose identity shall be determined jointly by the
speedway owner or operator and the County Planning Director.
      (4)   The Traffic Management Plan shall be updated on an annual basis and
modified as necessary during the course of the racing season. Plan updates and
modifications shall be prepared by a licensed engineering firm experienced in
speedway events, in coordination with ODOT Region 5, the county and other
affected agencies and local governments.
      (5)   The Traffic Management Plan, and updates and modifications to that
Plan, shall be reviewed and approved by the County Public Works Director,
Emergency Management Director and Planning Director and the ODOT Region 5
Manager, or their designees. The speedway owner or operator shall reimburse the
county for the cost of a traffic engineer to assist in evaluation of the
Traffic Management Plan. The initial Traffic Management Plan shall be submitted
to the county prior to a speedway being used for sanctioned, premier, high
speed automobile racing.
   (F)   Event Management Plan. Prior to holding sanctioned, premier, high
speed automobile racing events open to the general public at a speedway, the
speedway owner or operator shall prepare a detailed Event Management Plan
identifying event management measures proposed for implementation during racing
events.
      (1)   The Event Management Plan shall be a graduated plan covering a
spectrum of different event sizes.
      (2)   The Event Management Plan shall identify, among other things, the
types of activities and events that the speedway could hold and that would be
appropriate to attract persons attending larger racing events to the speedway
in advance of those events and shall provide strategies for holding such events
and activities to achieve that result. These events shall include smaller races
held earlier during the week whenever a race attracting 60,000 or more fans is
held at the speedway. The plan shall address how the strategies will be
implemented.
      (3)   The Event Management Plan shall be reviewed on an annual basis and
updated as necessary. The Plan shall include provisions addressing when plan
updates are required. The Event Management Plan and updates or modifications to
that Plan shall be reviewed and approved by the County Public Works Director,
Emergency Management Director and Planning Director and the ODOT Region 5
Manager, or their designees. The initial Event Management Plan shall be
submitted to the county prior to a major motor speedway being used for
sanctioned, premier, high speed automobile racing.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.528 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The speedway owner or operator shall obtain all required state agency
permits, including, but not limited to, DEQ water quality permits, permits for
wastewater, stormwater and air contaminants and, if required, hazardous
materials permits and such permits as may be required by the State Health
Department and State Water Resources Department. All required agency permits
shall be obtained prior to occupancy of a facility.
   (B)   The speedway owner or operator shall identify water storage
improvements needed to maintain an adequate on-site water supply for drinking,
domestic and firefighting purposes during speedway events and for other
speedway uses.
   (C)   To protect water quality, a speedway development shall apply best
management practices when constructing a speedway, including its related and
associated uses, and when constructing the road improvements identified in the
application.
   (D)   The speedway owner or operator shall pay all costs associated with
relocating utility facilities, should that prove necessary as a result of
required roadway improvements.
   (E)   Outdoor lighting at a speedway shall be aimed to prevent light from
projecting directly onto existing runways or taxiways at the Boardman Airport
or into existing airport approach corridors. The speedway owner or operator
shall coordinate with the State Department of Aviation to avoid the creation of
potential safety problems through radio, radio-telephone or television
transmission facilities or electrical transmission lines that might be placed
at the speedway. Development of a speedway shall be in compliance with the
airport planning rule.
   (F)   The speedway developer shall not construct any open water impoundment
in a manner that would create a potential safety hazard to the airport by
increasing bird flight or wildlife activity across runways or approach
corridors. Should the speedway developer desire to construct an open water
impoundment at a speedway, including lagoons to facility sanitary sewer
service, then, prior to constructing the water impoundment, the speedway
developer shall coordinate with the State Department of Aviation and shall
comply with any conditions required by the Department of Aviation to prevent an
increase in the level of air navigational hazard. Any new water impoundment
constructed at a speedway shall be consistent with and not violate any
contractual obligations between the Port of Morrow and the Federal Aviation
Administration and shall be consistent with the airport planning rule.
   (G)   The speedway developer shall be prohibited from constructing accessory
uses identified in findings of the ordinance codified in this subchapter prior
to commencement of construction of a speedway and speedway-related uses
identified in findings of the ordinance codified in this subchapter; provided,
that the speedway developer may first commence construction of a portion of the
RV park in order to accommodate workers involved in the construction of a
speedway and its related uses. The speedway developer may, in conjunction with
the development of a major motor speedway, commence construction on 250 road
course garage units and 100 units of transient lodging with associated
restaurant.
   (H)   Except with respect to the RV park, 250 road course garage units and
100 units of transient lodging with associated restaurant, the county shall not
issue occupancy permits for any of the uses identified in this subchapter prior
to the completion of a major motor speedway and a grandstand seating capacity
of 20,000 or more persons.
   (I)   No permanent housing shall be allowed at a speedway. No temporary
housing shall be allowed at the speedway other than at the 250 room speedway
lodging facility, the 100 units of transient lodging with associated restaurant
and public facilities necessary to support those uses and at areas designated
as RV and tent camping areas.
   (J)   A speedway may utilize signage on the site and on and within viewing
distance of I-84 or I-82 advertising the presence and location of the speedway.
Signage shall be in compliance with §
156.602 and O.A.R. Chapter 734.
   (K)   In the event that a speedway ceases operations, all accessory uses to
that speedway, other than industrial uses at the industrial park shall also
cease operation at the same time.
   (L)   The County Public Works Director and Engineer shall develop a roadway
design standard for Tower Road that is appropriate for construction of a five-
lane roadway.
   (M)   Prior to a major motor speedway being used for premier, high speed
automobile racing expected to attract 60,000 or more persons, the owner or
operator of the speedway shall demonstrate that Umatilla County has amended its
Transportation System Plan to authorize roadway improvements within that
county’s jurisdictional boundaries, including merge/diverge lanes and ramp
improvements associated with the I-84/I-82 Interchange, that are necessary to
accommodate a 60,000 person event at the speedway.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.529 TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   To ensure that the proposed land uses are in compliance with the
functions, capacities and performance standards of affected transportation
facilities, a major motor speedway owner or operator shall construct the
following roadway improvements:
      (1)   Modifications to the I-84/Tower Road Interchange, including two-
lane ramps for all ramps of the Interchange, a four-lane bridge across I-84 and
improved turning radiuses at the beginnings and ends of the on/off ramps. These
modifications will be further defined in a refinement study to be completed
prior to completion of the final environmental assessment (EA) or environmental
impact statement (EIS) required by the National Environmental Policy Act, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 4321(a) et seq.;
      (2)   Stacking and merge lanes extending approximately one and one-half
miles in each direction from the I-84/Tower Road Interchange, the precise
length to be defined in a refinement study;
      (3)   Widening of Tower Road to five lanes between I-84 and the
southernmost entrance to a speedway on Tower Road;
      (4)   A new Speedway Interchange on I-84 located east of PGE’s north/
south rail spur crossing of I-84 and including two-lane on and off ramps and a
four lane bridge over I-84;
      (5)   Stacking or merge lanes extending approximately one and one-half
miles in each direction from the I-84/Speedway Interchange;
      (6)   A third travel lane on I-84, both eastbound and westbound,
extending from the new Speedway Interchange to the State Highway 730
Interchange, and also extending both eastbound and westbound from approximately
1,200 meters west of the Army Depot Interchange to the I-82/I-84 Interchange,
the precise length to be defined in a refinement study to be completed prior to
the issuance of the Final EA or EIS. A length of 1,200 meters west of the Army
Depot Interchange shall be required for both east and westbound I-84 unless a
shorter length is agreed to by ODOT during the refinement study process;
      (7)   Bridge widening or modifications as necessary along I-84;
      (8)   Modifications to the off-ramp connecting I-82 southbound to I-84
westbound and the on-ramp connecting I-84 eastbound to I-82 northbound to
provide two-lane ramps;
      (9)   Construction of a four-lane speedway circulatory road within and
encircling the perimeter of a speedway;
      (10)   Relocation and realignment of the Kunze Lane connection with Tower
Road to meet state spacing standards (so that the intersection is no less than
1,320 feet from the ramp terminus of the I-84/Tower Road ramps); and
      (11)   Improvements to the I-84/Army Depot Interchange to facilitate I-
82/I-84 merge/diverge lanes.
   (B)   Transportation improvements identified in division (A) above shall be
permanent structural improvements and shall be constructed to meet all
applicable design standards. No listed improvements shall be provided for
through temporary, non-structural means, such as traffic management techniques.
   (C)   In coordination with ODOT Region 5 and the Federal Highway
Administration, the Port shall study alternative roadway improvements to a new
Speedway Interchange as required by the National Environmental Policy Act. If
the Port acquisition of land for new roadways identified during that analysis
proves feasible and reasonable; and if such roadways would better meet ODOT’s
needs and ODOT exhibits a strong preference for those roadways; and if
identified roadway alternatives are demonstrated to comply with all relevant
requirements of the Transportation Planning Rule, including O.A.R. 660-012-
0070, then the Port shall apply to the county for Transportation System Plan
amendments to authorize those improvements in lieu of improvements approved by
this section that would no longer be required.
   (D)   The speedway owner or operator shall manage the outbound flow of
traffic from a speedway in a manner that ensures that outbound traffic does not
exceed a volume of 3,750 vehicles per hour; provided, however, that higher
outbound volumes may be allowed if the speedway owner or operator and ODOT
Region 5 Manager agree that the volume of background traffic permits higher
rates of traffic to leave a speedway consistent with ODOT performance
standards. This section is intended to recognize that the 3,750 figure is based
on traffic impacts in the year 2020, and that the level of background traffic
in that year will be higher than in prior years leading up to 2020. Agreements
between ODOT’s Region 5 Manager and the speedway owner or operator shall be
filed with the Planning Director and shall specify the volume of traffic that
may exit a speedway per hour during any given year. The speedway owner or
operator shall manage the inbound and outbound flow of traffic from a speedway
for events of any size so that the relevant performance standards are not
exceeded for any state or county facility.
   (E)   (1)   When the speedway owner or operator contracts for a premier
racing event expected to attract 60,000 attendees on a single day, the owner or
operator shall hold preliminary speedway events on prior days and shall utilize
event management techniques, including, but not limited to, ticket packaging,
in a manner that is likely to attract at least 35% of those attending the
60,000 person event to a speedway at least one day in advance of that race. For
premier racing events expected to attract 100,000 or more people to a speedway
in a single day, the speedway owner or operator shall hold preliminary speedway
events and engage in event management that is likely to attract 50% to 60% of
fans to the speedway at least one day prior to the peak event.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (E), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         PRELIMINARY SPEEDWAY EVENTS. Smaller premier events, time trials and
other activities that are expected to attract fans in numbers sufficient to
comply with this section.
         PREMIER RACING EVENTS. Large and mid-size racing events, including,
but not limited to, NASCAR sanctioned races, Indy car races, Super Sport
Motorcycle races, GT Championships and CART and NHRA races, that are expected
to attract 20,000 or more attendees on the day of the racing event.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.530 PHASED DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The transportation improvements required in §
156.529(A) shall be constructed and operational prior to the holding of races
or other events at a speedway that are open to the general public, except as
follows:
      (1)   Interim racing events. If authorized pursuant to division (A)(5)
below:
         (a)   Prior to the construction of any of the roadway improvements
required by §
156.529(A), racing events may be held at a speedway that attract fans in
numbers not exceeding 3,000 people in attendance; and
         (b)   Following completion of the widening of Tower Road to five lanes
and construction of all required improvements to the Tower Road Interchange and
ramps as provided in this section, and following completion of the realignment
of Kunze Lane and making safety improvements to Kunze Lane as provided for in
this section, but prior to the completion of the other roadway improvements
identified in §
156.529(A), racing events may be held at a speedway that attract fans in
numbers not exceeding 23,000 in attendance; provided, however, that the 23,000
person attendance figure may be adjusted upward or downward as provided under
division (A)(3) below. Such events shall be accompanied by event management
measures provided on the day of the race that are intended to attract traffic
to the speedway prior to the main racing event over a period of at least four
hours.
      (2)   Rate of exiting traffic. Except as otherwise permitted under §
156.529(D), for all racing events authorized under divisions (A)(1) or (A)(3)
of this section, the speedway owner or operator shall control the rate of
traffic leaving the speedway to ensure that traffic volumes of 3,750 vehicles
per hour are not exceeded.
      (3)   Interim Traffic Monitoring Plan. For all racing events authorized
under this section, the speedway owner or operator shall monitor the flow of
traffic to and from the racing events in coordination with ODOT Region 5 and
the County Public Works Director. For events authorized under division (A)(1)
(b) above, if event experience indicates that a somewhat larger event can be
held that would be consistent with ODOT and the county roadway performance
standards, then upon agreement by ODOT’s Region 5 Manager and the County Public
Works Director, the County Public Works Director may authorize a larger racing
event, not to exceed 30,000 people in attendance. If event experience indicates
that a smaller sized racing event is required to ensure consistency with ODOT
and county roadway performance standards, then the County Public Works Director
shall reduce the maximum attendance size of the event to an appropriate number.
         (a)   Prior to the scheduling of any races authorized under this
division (A), the speedway owner or operator shall develop an Interim Traffic
Monitoring Plan in coordination with ODOT Region 5 and the county. The Interim
Traffic Monitoring Plan shall be reviewed and approved by the County Public
Works Director and ODOT’s Region 5 Manager and shall be applied to all races
held pursuant to this division (A) as stated in the monitoring plan. The
Interim Traffic Monitoring Plan shall provide for the timely gathering and
submittal of information to ODOT and the county, including advance notification
of events that are subject to this division (A).
         (b)   Unless ODOT’s Region 5 Manager and the speedway owner or
operator agree otherwise, the Interim Traffic Monitoring Plan shall require, at
a minimum, vehicle counts calculated on an hourly basis on the day or days of
any events expected or likely to attract 2,500 or more people to the facility
under division (A)(1)(a) above or 10,000 or more people under division (A)(1)
(b) above or this division (A)(3). These vehicle counts shall be taken
consistent with the Interim Traffic Monitoring Plan developed in division (A)
(3)(a) above, which shall include the following unless otherwise agreed to by
ODOT’s Region 5 Manager and the speedway owner or operator:
            1.   For events under division (A)(1)(a) above, vehicle counts
taken at all speedway entrances off of and exits onto Tower Road; and
            2.   For events under divisions (A)(1)(b) above and this division
(A)(3), vehicle counts taken at the I-84/Tower Road Interchange (all ramps) and
at all speedway entrances off of and exits onto Tower Road.
         (c)   The vehicle counts taken pursuant to division (A)(3)(b) above
shall be provided by the speedway owner or operator to ODOT’s Region 5 Manager
and the County Public Works Director, or their designees, within two weeks
following the day of the counts. The speedway owner or operator concurrently
shall provide ODOT’s Region 5 Manager and the County Public Works Director, or
their designees, with attendance figures for each racing event held on the days
for which counts are taken.
         (d)   The speedway owner or operator shall be responsible for payment
of all expenses incurred in preparing and executing the Interim Traffic
Monitoring Plan. This does not include costs for agency staffs and other
parties to participate in the development, modification or updating of the
Interim Traffic Monitoring Plan.
         (e)   The Interim Traffic Monitoring Plan shall provide for the
discontinuation of traffic monitoring for racing events authorized under
division (A)(1)(a) above if after two consecutive events subject to monitoring,
the traffic monitoring indicates that the racing events are meeting both the
3,750 vehicle/hour standard in division (A)(2) above and ODOT and county
roadway performance standards. The Interim Traffic Monitoring Plan also shall
provide for the discontinuation of traffic monitoring for racing events
authorized under division (A)(1)(b) above and under division (A)(3) above if,
after two monitored events under each of those divisions, the traffic
monitoring indicates that such racing events are meeting both the 3,750
vehicle/hour standard and ODOT and county roadway performance standards. In the
event that racing events authorized under division (A)(1) above or this
division (A)(3) are not meeting the 3,750 vehicle/hour standard and ODOT and
county roadway performance standards, then traffic monitoring shall continue
for racing events under the relevant provisions until these standards are met
for two consecutive racing events.
         (f)   The Interim Traffic Monitoring Plan shall provide criteria upon
which traffic monitoring of speedway racing events authorized under this
division (A) may be resumed. Should resumed traffic monitoring indicate that
the 3,750 vehicle/hour standard or ODOT or county roadway performance standards
are being exceeded, then traffic monitoring shall continue on an event by event
basis until the racing events again are shown to be meeting the 3,750 vehicle/
hour standard and ODOT and county roadway performance standards.
      (4)   Interim Traffic and Event Management Plan. Prior to a speedway
being used for sanctioned, premier, high speed automobile racing an Interim
Traffic and Event Management Plan shall be developed that is designed to comply
with both the 3,750 vehicle/hour standard and ODOT and county roadway
performance standards. The Interim Traffic and Event Management Plan shall be
developed in coordination with and obtain the concurrence of ODOT’s Region 5
Manager and the County Public Works Director or their designees. The Interim
Traffic and Event Management Plan shall be updated and modified as necessary
during the course of the racing season to ensure compliance with ODOT and
county performance standards. Plan updates and modifications shall be prepared
by a licensed engineering firm experienced in speedway events, in coordination
with ODOT Region 5 and the county.
      (5)   Completion of NEPA and site development review and agency approval.
         (a)   Prior to the improvement of any federal or state traffic
facility, the owner or operator of a speedway shall complete the NEPA process
and the issuance of a final land use decision approving site development review
for the speedway.
         (b)   Prior to a speedway being used for sanctioned, premier high
speed automobile racing, a speedway owner or operator shall obtain advance
approval from ODOT and the Federal Highway Administration.
   (B)   Prior to operation of speedway for events other than those permitted
under division (A) above, all mitigation required as a condition of the site
development review process shall be completed.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.531 TRAFFIC MONITORING.
   Following completion of construction of the roadway improvements identified
in §
156.529(A), the major motor speedway owner or operator shall monitor the flow
of traffic to and from premier racing events as provided for in this section.
   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted under §
156.529(D), the speedway owner or operator shall control the volume of traffic
leaving the speedway to ensure that traffic volumes of 3,750 vehicles per hour
are not exceeded.
   (B)   The speedway owner or operator shall prepare a detailed Traffic
Monitoring Plan to monitor the effectiveness of the Traffic Management Plan and
the Event Management Plan to maintain consistency with both the 3,750 vehicle/
hour standard in division (A) above and ODOT and county roadway performance
standards during premier racing events at the speedway. The Traffic Monitoring
Plan shall be developed in coordination with ODOT Region 5 and the County
Public Works Director and shall have the approval of ODOT’s Region 5 Manager or
his or her designee. The Traffic Monitoring Plan shall be submitted to the
county prior to a speedway being used for sanctioned, premier, high speed
automobile racing.
   (C)   The Traffic Monitoring Plan shall provide for traffic monitoring
during premier racing event weekends when single day attendances of 20,000 or
more are expected. The Traffic Monitoring Plan shall provide for the timely
gathering and submittal of information to ODOT Region 5 and the county,
including advance notification of events that are subject to this section and
shall provide for the following:
      (1)   During the first year following completion of all transportation
improvements required by §
156.529(A), traffic monitoring of all premier racing events. If only one
premier event is held during that first year, then traffic monitoring also
shall be required for the next premier racing event held at a speedway;
      (2)   Traffic monitoring of the first two premier racing events expected
or likely to attract 60,000 people to a speedway on a single day;
      (3)   Traffic monitoring of the first two premier racing events expected
or likely to attract 100,000 or more people to a speedway on a single day; and
      (4)   Traffic monitoring of additional 60,000 or 100,000 person events,
if attendance at these events falls short respectively of 60,000 or 100,000
people by more than 5%.
   (D)   Unless ODOT’s Region 5 Manager and the speedway owner or operator
agree otherwise, the Traffic Monitoring Plan shall require, at a minimum,
vehicle counts calculated on an hourly basis on the following days: the days
when premier racing events are held; the day prior to the holding of the first
premier racing event of the weekend; and the day following the holding of the
final premier racing event of the weekend. These vehicle counts shall be taken
consistent with the Traffic Monitoring Plan developed under this section, which
shall include the following unless otherwise agreed to by ODOT’s Region 5
Manager and the speedway owner or operator:
      (1)   Vehicle counts taken at all speedway entrances off of and exits
onto Tower Road and on Kunze Lane immediately east of Tower Road;
      (2)   Vehicle counts taken at the following Interchanges: I- 84/Speedway
Interchange (all ramps); I-84/Tower Road Interchange (all ramps); I-84/Highway
97 Interchange (SB 97 to EB I-84 and WB I-84 to NB 97 ramps); I-84/I-82
Interchange (SB I-82 to WB I-84 and EB I-84 to NB I-82 ramps); and I-82/Highway
730 Interchange (SB I-82 to SB 730 and NB 730 to NB I-82 ramps); and
      (3)   Vehicle counts taken on the main line of I-84, I-82 and Highway 730
in both directions at the following locations: on I-84 west of the Speedway
Interchange; on I-84 east of the Tower Road Interchange; on I-84 west of the I-
84/I-82 Interchange; on I-82 north of the I-84/I-82 Interchange; and on Highway
730 just northeast of I-84.
   (E)   The vehicle counts taken pursuant to division (D) above shall be
provided to ODOT’s Region 5 Manager and the County Public Works Director, or
their designees, within two weeks following the final day of the counts. The
speedway owner or operator concurrently shall provide ODOT’s Region 5 Manager
and the County Public Works Director, or their designees, with attendance
figures for each racing event held on the days for which counts are taken.
   (F)   The Traffic Monitoring Plan shall provide for the discontinuation of
traffic monitoring for events identified in division (C)(1), (C)(2) or (C)(3)
above if the traffic monitoring required by division (C) above indicates that
events at those attendance levels are meeting the 3,750 vehicle/hour standard
(or alternative § 156.529(D) standard) and ODOT and county roadway performance
standards.
   (G)   The Traffic Monitoring Plan shall provide criteria upon which the
monitoring of speedway events identified in divisions (C)(1), (C)(2) or (C)(3)
above may be resumed. This may include a provision requiring the monitoring of
certain racing events at periodic intervals (e.g., every five years). Should
resumed monitoring indicate that the 3,750 vehicle/hour standard (or § 156.529
(D) alternative) or ODOT or county roadway performance standards are being
exceeded for events at those attendance levels, then traffic monitoring shall
continue for such events until the racing events again are shown to be meeting
the 3,750 vehicle/hour standard (or § 156.529(D) alternative) and ODOT and
county roadway performance standards, unless otherwise provided for in the
Traffic Monitoring Plan.
   (H)   The speedway owner or operator shall be responsible for payment of all
expenses incurred in preparing and executing the Traffic Monitoring Plan. This
does not include costs for agency staffs and other parties to participate in
the development, modification or updating of the Traffic Monitoring Plan.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.532 SPEEDWAY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The speedway owner or operator and any successors in interest shall
work cooperatively with emergency service providers and affected state and
local governments and agencies, including ODOT Region 5, the county and the
state police, in developing one or more interagency agreements to prepare and
implement the Traffic Management Plan required by §
156.527(E). The interagency agreement shall be submitted prior to a speedway
being used for sanctioned, premier, high speed automobile racing.
   (B)   Unless otherwise agreed to by ODOT and the Federal Highway
Administration for state highways, or by the county for county roadways, the
speedway owner or operator or any successors in interest shall be responsible
for payment of all construction costs of the transportation improvements
required in §
156.529(A).
   (C)   Unless otherwise agreed to by federal, state or local transportation
providers, the speedway owner or operator, or any successors in interest, shall
be responsible for payment of all expenses incurred in executing the Traffic
Management Plan and the Event Management Plan for the speedway, including costs
incurred for emergency services required for speedway events. This does not
include costs for agency staffs and other parties to participate in the
development, modification or updating of the Traffic Management and Event
Management Plans.
   (D)   Implementation of the required Traffic Management, Event Management
and Traffic Monitoring Plans shall be an ongoing condition of approval for a
speedway. Failure by the speedway owner or operator to substantially comply
with those plans, including the 3,750 vehicle per hour standard in §
156.531(A) and the ODOT and county roadway performance standards that those
plans are intended to achieve, or to pay the costs of executing those plans
shall be a basis for enjoining operation of the speedway. The county agrees in
good faith to diligently enforce these plans and all other conditions of this
section.
   (E)   Prior to staging any racing event at a speedway, the owner or operator
of the speedway shall obtain all permits from ODOT and the county that are
required to implement the Traffic Management Plan for the speedway. Renewal of
such permits may be required on an annual basis. This division (E) anticipates
that the county may adopt an annual permitting process for the use.
   (F)   Unless otherwise agreed to by a representative of the Washington
Department of Transportation during development or revision of the Traffic
Management Plan, the speedway owner or operator, as part of that Plan, shall
provide for the placement of signage on eastbound I-82 in Washington in advance
of State Highway 730 and for the use of uniformed officers to provide traffic
control at the I-82/Highway 730 ramp terminal and at Brownell Avenue on a
sanctioned, premier, high speed automobile racing event day. The Plan also
shall provide that the speedway owner or operator maintain a towing service/
incident response team to monitor the bridge and other major roadways serving a
speedway on sanctioned, premier, high speed automobile racing event days.
   (G)   In addition to the attendance requirements required in §§
156.530(A) and 156.531, the speedway owner or operator shall maintain daily
counts of all persons attending all other speedway events involving the use of
the racetracks. The monitoring system shall provide that the owner or operator
submit attendance count information to ODOT Region 5 and the County Public
Works Director on at least a quarterly basis.
   (H)   The speedway owner or operator shall provide for monitoring and
analysis of the effectiveness of traffic management measures that were utilized
during each racing event weekend requiring traffic management measures. The
analysis shall occur promptly following the weekend. Where racing events are
held on two or more consecutive days over a weekend, review and appropriate
revisions to the Traffic Management Plan to minimize adverse traffic impacts
are encouraged after each racing day. A professional traffic engineer shall
oversee implementation of the Traffic Management Plan and coordinate the
traffic monitoring and analysis that occurs following racing events. To the
extent feasible and practical, review and revision of the Traffic Management
Plan shall involve ODOT Region 5, the state police, the County Sheriff’s
Department and affected local law enforcement agencies.
   (I)   A full traffic analysis shall be provided for all event size traffic,
to enable ODOT to issue final approvals and permits and to gain approval from
the Federal Highway Administration for interchange modifications. The traffic
study shall be prepared in accordance with O.A.R. Chapter 734, division 51 and
federal requirements for interchange modifications contained in the Federal
Register.
   (J)   The speedway owner or operator shall provide either an irrevocable
letter of credit or a bond in favor of ODOT that shall provide adequate funding
to construct all of the transportation improvements to state transportation
facilities required by this section. Additionally, the speedway owner or
operator shall provide either an irrevocable letter of credit or a bond in
favor of the county that shall provide adequate funding to construct all of the
transportation improvements to county transportation facilities required by
this section. All bonds or letters of credit required by this division (J)
shall be in place prior to the scheduling or holding of any sanctioned,
premier, high speed automobile racing events at a speedway and prior to
commencement of construction of the transportation improvements required by §
156.529(A). These security instruments in favor of ODOT and the county shall be
maintained, respectively, until all construction required by §
156.529(A) to state or county roadway facilities is completed.
   (K)   The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the conditions set out
in this approval either during or as a condition of site development review.
   (L)   The speedway owner or operator shall coordinate with the Bonneville
Power Administration (BPA) with regard to the power line easements on the
property prior to submitting an application for site development review. As
part of its site development review application, the speedway owner or operator
shall show evidence that the proposed site plan is acceptable to the BPA given
the terms of the existing easement.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.533 SIGNAGE.
   Only informational or directional signage will be allowed on state highways.
Any such signage shall conform with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.534 REST AREA FACILITIES.
   Unless ODOT or the Federal Highway Administration require otherwise, the
rest area facilities located on I-84 a few miles east of Tower Road shall
remain open during premier speedway racing events to serve both speedway
generated traffic and others traveling on I-84.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.535 APPLICATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   Applications to modify these conditions shall require review and
approval by the county following public notice and opportunity for hearing.
Notice of any proposed amendments to conditions shall be mailed in a timely
manner to ODOT’s Region 5 Manager and to DLCD.
   (B)   All speedway and speedway-related uses authorized by this subchapter
shall be constructed entirely within the subject site. Should land on adjoining
properties not currently owned by a speedway owner or operator or the Port of
Morrow become available to a speedway owner or operator or the Port, and should
the speedway owner or operator or the Port desire the use of those lands for
speedway-related parking, RV sites or similar uses, then the speedway owner or
operator or the Port shall apply to the county for Comprehensive Plan
amendments to utilize those properties for speedway uses. This may require
additional goal exceptions and/or master planning.
   (C)   During site development review, a speedway developer shall demonstrate
that the proposed site plan provides for safe and convenient pedestrian access
connecting the parking lots, RV and camping areas with the racetrack and the
other authorized speedway-related uses.
   (D)   In addition to service of notice on those persons required by law to
receive written notice of a land use application, written notice of the
application for site development review for a speedway shall be served on
ODOT’s Region 5 Manager, DLCD, DEQ, State Department of Aviation, the City of
Boardman and the Umatilla Electric Cooperative.
   (E)   A speedway developer shall coordinate with the County Road Department
to identify and provide safety improvements to Kunze Lane between Tower Road
and Toms Camp Road in the form of shoulder and lane widening and associated
paving. The improvements shall be made at the developer’s expense.
   (F)   Prior to issuance of a building permit, a speedway owner or operator
or the Port shall submit the appropriate paperwork and obtain the necessary
approvals from the Federal Aviation Administration, as required of all
development within 20,000 feet of a runway.
   (G)   A land partition application shall be filed and approved by the
Planning Commission before the landowner may sell or deed speedway property as
a separate parcel.
   (H)   The Tri-Oval Super Speedway, Asphalt Road Course, Asphalt Oval, Drag
Strip and Dirt Track all shall be located a minimum of two and four-tenths
miles from the location of the nearest residential dwelling as identified in
the Daly-Standlee & Associates report dated November 12, 2001 and entitled
“Noise Study for a Proposed International Raceway Facility in Morrow County.”
   (I)   A speedway shall include water storage capacity in an amount deemed
appropriate by the State Water Resources Department. Initial on-site storage
capacity shall not be less than 1,000,000 gallons. A storage facility
containing a minimum storage capacity of 2,000,000 gallons shall be provided
on-site prior to the holding of any event attracting more than 75,000 people to
the site on a single day.
   (J)   The speedway owner or operator shall cooperate with the Bureau of
Reclamation and the West Extension Irrigation District regarding impacts to
irrigation easements and facilities that might be impacted by speedway-related
transportation improvements on Kunze Lane.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see O.R.S. 92.010
§ 156.536 COUNTY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The county retains authority to enforce conditions of this land use
decision utilizing resources, including, but not limited to, the code
enforcement officer and associated enforcement ordinances. This enforcement
authority shall apply to all uses at a speedway.
   (B)   In the event a speedway is constructed in whole or in part and then
abandoned, the use of speedway-related and associated uses shall cease, except
as otherwise provided for in this subchapter or authorized by new goal
exceptions.
   (C)   The county reserves the right to review and require changes to the
traffic management, event management and security plans at any time in the
future to ensure continued compliance with county performance standards.
   (D)   These conditions are intended to ensure consistency with ODOT and
county roadway performance standards based on a 20-year traffic analysis
extending through the year 2021. These conditions are not intended to require
the applicant to make structural improvements to the state or county roadway
systems based on increases in traffic volumes beyond currently estimated year
2021 levels. Increases in background traffic volumes beyond currently estimated
year 2021 levels shall not provide a basis for enjoining activities at the
speedway under §
156.532(D) or any other condition of this subchapter; provided, that the
speedway owner or operator continues to implement traffic, event and security
management measures and traffic monitoring as required by this subchapter.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.537 SITE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of site development review is to encourage site
planning in support of development that is permitted under the county’s
Comprehensive Plan and land use regulations for speedway development; assure
that speedway development is supported with appropriate types and levels of
transportation improvements and public facilities and services; and implement
the County Comprehensive Plan and land use regulations with respect to
development standards and policies.
   (B)   Preapplication review. Prior to filing its application for site
development review, the applicant shall confer with the Planning Director, who
shall identify and explain the relevant review procedures and standards.
   (C)   When required.
      (1)   Site development review shall be required for all aspects of
speedway development in the Speedway Overlay Zone. When development is proposed
in phases, site development review shall apply to each phase of the
development.
      (2)   No building permit shall be issued prior to site development review
approval. Site development review shall not alter the type and category of uses
permitted.
      (3)   For the purpose of this section, DEVELOPMENT means any human-made
change to improved or unimproved real property associated with a speedway,
including, but not limited to, construction or installation of a building or
other structure; major site alterations such as those due to grading, paving
and improvements for use as parking. However, site development review shall not
apply to any interior remodeling of any existing building or structure or any
modification to an existing building or structure that does not substantially
change its exterior appearance.
   (D)   Plans required. A complete application for site development review
shall be submitted. The application shall include the following plans and
information:
      (1)   A site plan or plans, drawn to scale, containing the following
information:
         (a)   A vicinity map covering an area 250 feet from the boundary of
the development site and showing general information about the location,
dimensions and names of all existing and proposed streets, county roadways and
state highways, access points on both sides of the road when applicable,
sidewalks, bicycle routes and easements and utility locations. The map also
shall indicate distances to neighboring constructed access points, median
openings (where applicable), traffic signals (where applicable), intersections
and other transportation features on all sides of the property;
         (b)   The site size, dimensions and zoning, including dimensions and
gross area of the lot(s) or parcel(s) and tax map and tax lot number(s) for the
development site;
         (c)   Contour lines at two-foot contour intervals for grades 0% to 10%
and five-foot intervals for grades over 10%;
         (d)   The location of the following hazard areas on and within 100
feet of the boundaries of the site:
            1.   Areas indicated on national flood insurance rate maps as being
within the 100-year floodplain;
            2.   Areas subject to erosion as identified in the County
Comprehensive Plan; and
            3.   Other hazard areas identified in the County Comprehensive
Plan.
         (e)   The location of inventoried significant natural resource areas
on and within 100 feet of the boundaries of the site, including big game
habitat areas, fish and riparian habitat areas, mineral and aggregate resource
areas, significant natural areas, wetlands, water resources and historic
resources. For the purpose of this section, SIGNIFICANT INVENTORIED means a
resource area identified as significant in the county’s acknowledged inventory
of Goal 5 resource sites;
         (f)   The location, dimensions and setback distances of all existing
permanent structures, improvements and utilities on or within 25 feet of the
site, and the current and proposed uses of the structures;
         (g)   The location, dimensions, square footage and setback distances
of proposed structures, improvements and utilities, and the proposed uses of
the structures by square footage;
         (h)   The location, dimension and names, as appropriate, of all
existing and proposed streets, other public ways, sidewalks and easements on
and within the development site;
         (i)   All motor vehicle parking, circulation, loading and servicing
areas;
         (j)   Site access points for automobiles and pedestrians;
         (k)   On-site pedestrian circulation; and
         (l)   Outdoor areas proposed as open space.
      (2)   A landscaping plan, drawn to scale, showing the location and types
of existing trees (eight inches or greater in caliper measured four feet above
ground level) and vegetation proposed to be removed and to be retained on the
site, the location and design of landscaped areas, the varieties, sizes and
spacing of trees and plant materials to be planted on the site, the proposed
types and locations of irrigation systems to maintain plant materials and other
pertinent landscape features;
      (3)   Architectural elevations and floor plans for all proposed
structures, drawn to scale, with elevations accurately reflected to grade;
      (4)   A description of materials, referenced to UBC class codes, to be
used on proposed structures;
      (5)   An erosion control and grading plan;
      (6)   A drainage plan, developed in accordance with county standards or
with State Department of Environmental Quality standards if no county standards
have been adopted. The drainage plan shall identify the location of drainage
patterns and drainage courses on and within 100 feet of the boundaries of the
site;
      (7)   An exterior lighting plan, drawn to scale, showing type, height and
lighting levels on and at the edge of the site;
      (8)   A written statement identifying:
         (a)   The nature of the proposed use(s);
         (b)   Plans for the treatment and disposal of sewage and industrial
wastes and any on-site disposal of wastes; and
         (c)   Plans for handling traffic, noise, glare, air pollution, fire or
safety hazard.
      (9)   The following technical reports:
         (a)   1.   For developments expected to generate 400 or more vehicle
trips on a single day, a traffic report, prepared by a licensed traffic
engineer, demonstrating the ability of affected transportation facilities
including highways, roads and intersections to accommodate the anticipated
amount of traffic that would be generated by the proposed development over 20
years. The report shall identify existing traffic conditions and the safety and
capacity improvements that are needed to accommodate the anticipated traffic,
including facility reconstructions, modifications or widenings, additional
travel or passing lanes, intersection or interchange improvements,
realignments, channelization improvements or other needed facility
improvements, including possible new transportation facilities. The analysis
shall demonstrate consistency with the applicable performance standards of the
affected facilities. The County Transportation System Plan provides the
applicable standards for county transportation facilities. The State Highway
Plan provides the applicable standards for state transportation facilities;
            2.   When a Traffic Management Plan is required by the County
Transportation System Plan, the application shall not be deemed complete until
the applicant has filed with the Planning Director a Traffic Management Plan
(TMP) including transportation system management (TSM) and transportation
demand management (TDM) measures that have been coordinated with and address
the reasonable concerns of affected transportation providers (e.g., the county,
affected cities, State Department of Transportation and Federal Highway
Administration) and traffic safety and emergency service providers (e.g.,
County Sheriff, state police, fire district and ambulance). The TMP shall be
prepared by a licensed traffic engineer with established experience in the type
of event for which the TMP is being developed. Unless otherwise agreed to by
affected local governments or agencies, the costs of paying for necessary
transportation improvements and implementation of the TMP shall be borne by the
developer or its successors; and
            3.   The TMP shall include, but not be limited to: ingress and
egress from parking areas; deployment of personnel at ramps, intersections and
highway locations; plans for rerouting of traffic in the event of accident or
other cause of traffic delay; coordination with state police, County Sheriff
and emergency service providers; use of temporary signage, reader boards and
similar visual aids; estimates of numbers and types of personnel to be
employed; and other appropriate information.
         (b)   If located within 5,000 feet of a runway or approach surface of
a public use airport, a technical report explaining how the development is
compatible with customary aviation-related activities, including airport
takeoffs and landings. The report shall explain how the proposed uses,
including measures to minimize conflicts, do not: cause emissions of smoke,
dust or steam that would obscure visibility within airport approach surfaces;
project light directly onto existing airport runways or taxiways; or interfere
with airport radio, radio-telephone, television and electrical transmissions.
      (10)   Within 14 working days following receipt of a site development
review application, the Planning Director may waive the submission of
information for specific provisions of this section or may require information
in addition to that required by a specific provision of this section, as
follows.
         (a)   The Planning Director may waive the submission of information
for a specific requirement upon determination either that specific information
is not necessary to evaluate the application properly, or that a specific
approval standard is not applicable to the application. If submission of
information is waived, the Planning Director shall, in the staff
recommendation, identify the waived requirement and briefly explain the reasons
for the waiver.
         (b)   The Planning Director may require information in addition to
that required by a specific provision of this section upon determination that
the information is needed to evaluate the application properly and that the
need can be justified on the basis of a special or unforeseen circumstance. If
additional information is required, the Planning Director shall, in the
decision, briefly explain the reasons for requiring the additional information.
   (E)   Standards.
      (1)   All development shall comply with the following standards.
         (a)   Retaining walls shall be provided and designed consistent with
Uniform Building Code requirements. Grading and contouring shall take place
with particular attention to minimizing the possible adverse effects of grading
and contouring on the natural vegetation and physical appearance of the site.
         (b)   Development in floodplains shall not increase the floodplain
elevation unless the area in which the rise will occur contains no structures
and the owner of such property signs a written acceptance of any increase in
the floodplain elevation. Development in hazard areas identified in the County
Comprehensive Plan shall safely accommodate and not exacerbate the hazard and
shall not create new hazards.
         (c)   Drainage shall be provided in accordance with State Department
of Environmental Quality standards. The Planning Commission may impose
conditions to ensure that waters are drained from the development so as to
limit degradation of water quality.
         (d)   Off-street parking and loading-unloading facilities shall be
provided as required in §§
156.595 through
156.604. Safe and convenient pedestrian access to off-street parking areas also
shall be provided.
         (e)   County transportation facilities shall be located, designed and
constructed in accordance with the design and access standards in the County
Transportation System Plan.
         (f)   Circulation provided by public streets and by private streets,
accessways and maneuvering areas within the boundary of the site shall
facilitate safe and convenient motor vehicle and pedestrian access. Access for
emergency services (fire, ambulance and police) shall be provided consistent
with the requirements of the Fire Marshal and emergency service providers.
         (g)   Illumination resulting from outdoor lighting shall not exceed
one foot-candle at the property line.
         (h)   Site planning, including the siting of structures, roadways and
utility easements, shall provide, wherever practicable, for the protection of
trees, eight-inch caliper or greater, measured four feet from ground level.
         (i)   Development shall comply with applicable county regulations
protecting inventoried significant natural and historic resources.
         (j)   Development shall maintain continuous compliance with applicable
federal, state and county air and water quality standards. Prior to issuance of
a building permit, the Building Official may require submission of evidence of
compliance with such standards from the applicable federal or state agencies or
the receipt of the necessary permits for the development from these agencies.
         (k)   Development shall be designed to comply with applicable State
Department of Environmental Quality noise standards.
         (l)   Sewer, water and storm drainage facilities shall be adequate to
serve the proposed or permitted level of development. For uses like a speedway
that engage in activities that on occasion attract unusually large numbers of
people to the site, the development may rely on temporary sewer (e.g.,
portapotties and lagoon storage) and water facilities to accommodate the excess
demand. The applicant shall demonstrate that adequate facilities and services
are presently available or can be made available concurrent with development.
All facilities shall be designed to comply with applicable state and local
standards.
         (m)   Law enforcement, public safety and security measures shall be
adequate to serve the proposed or permitted level of development. For land uses
involving activities that may attract many thousands of visitors to a site at
one time on an occasional or episodic basis, adequate safety, law enforcement
and security measures may include, but are not limited to, the use of on-site
security service personnel and availability of police, fire and emergency
medical services. For such uses, the Planning Commission may require the
applicant to develop a public safety and security plan, which shall be
coordinated with appropriate local and state public safety providers.
         (n)   The transportation system shall be adequate to accommodate the
proposed or permitted level of development.
            1.   Rights-of-way and roadway and sidewalk improvements shall be
provided consistent with applicable county or state design, access management
and highway performance standards, including applicable State Highway Plan
standards. Access points to county roadways and state highways shall be
properly placed in relation to sight distance, driveway spacing and other
related considerations, including opportunities for joint and cross access. Any
application that involves access to or significantly impacts the state highway
system shall be reviewed by the State Department of Transportation. Such
applications shall demonstrate compliance with the State Highway Plan and shall
be conditioned on state issuance of access permits where required.
            2.   In determining the adequacy of the transportation system to
accommodate the proposed development, consideration shall be given to the need
for roadway reconstructions, modifications or widenings, additional travel or
passing lanes, intersection or interchange improvements, road realignments,
channelization improvements or other needed roadway improvements, including
possible new roads. Consideration also shall be given to the need for right-of-
way improvements such as installation of lighting, signalization, turn lanes,
median and parking strips, traffic islands, paving, curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, bikeways, street drainage facilities and other facilities needed
because of anticipated vehicular and pedestrian traffic generation. For uses
necessitating preparation of a transportation management plan, a decision
approving a site development review application shall include a condition
requiring implementation of the transportation system management measures and
transportation demand management measures that are determined to be needed to
accommodate the traffic generated by the development and to comply with the
State Highway Plan. Unless otherwise agreed to by affected local governments or
agencies or limited by constitutional constraints, the costs of paying for
necessary transportation improvements and implementation of the Traffic
Management Plan shall be borne by the developer or its successors.
            3.   Nothing in this or any other provision of this chapter shall
be construed to replace, alter or otherwise affect the applicability of the
Transportation Planning Rule, O.A.R. 660, division 12, to any development or
action that would otherwise be subject to that Rule.
         (o)   Access and facilities for physically handicapped people shall be
incorporated into the site and building design, consistent with applicable
federal and state requirements.
         (p)   Development located within 5,000 feet of a runway or approach
surface of a public use airport shall not cause emissions of smoke, dust or
steam that would obscure visibility within airport approach surfaces; project
light directly onto existing airport runways or taxiways; or interfere with
airport radio, radio-telephone, television or electrical transmissions.
         (q)   Uses and improvements, including all land uses and improvements,
including, but not limited to, Traffic Management Plans, proposed on exception
lands shall be consistent with the acknowledged goal exceptions taken for those
lands.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may impose such conditions as deemed
necessary to ensure compliance with these standards.
         (a)   When a transportation management plan is required, the Planning
Commission may impose conditions providing for monitoring and reporting on the
effectiveness of the traffic management measures and providing opportunity for
a hearing to consider modifications to the TMP if deemed appropriate by the
Planning Commission following its implementation. Any hearing that is held to
consider TMP modifications shall be noticed and processed in the manner set out
in this subchapter and shall include notice to the State Department of
Transportation and Federal Highway Administration.
         (b)   Required road dedications and other exactions shall comply with
constitutional limitations.
         (c)   To ensure compliance with this section, the Planning Commission
may require an applicant to sign or accept a legal and enforceable covenant,
contract, dedication, easement, performance guarantee or other document, which
shall be approved in form by the county’s legal counsel.
   (F)   Review and enforcement.
      (1)   Applications for site development review shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission in the manner provided by O.R.S. Chapter 197 for land use
decisions following review and recommendation by the Planning Director. Public
notice and an opportunity for hearing shall be provided in the manner provided
by O.R.S. Chapter 197 for land use decisions.
         (a)   In addition to the public notice described above, timely notice
of public hearing also shall be mailed to ODOT and the Federal Highway
Administration if the Planning Director determines that the use may impact
state or federal transportation facilities, and to the State Department of
Aviation and Federal Aviation Administration if the use is located within 5,000
feet of a runway or approach surface of a public use airport.
         (b)   The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the
County Board of Commissioners in the manner provided in §
156.691.
      (2)   The County Building Official may issue a certificate of occupancy
only after the Planning Director has determined that the improvements required
by site development review approval have been completed, or a schedule for
completion and a bond or other financial guarantee have been accepted by the
county and by ODOT for required improvements to the state highway system.
         (a)   Implementation of traffic management, public safety and/or
security plans, when required, shall be made ongoing conditions of approval of
the use, and failure to substantially comply with those plans may be a basis
for the Planning Director or Building Official to suspend or revoke the
occupancy permit and for the county, DLCD or ODOT (when a state transportation
facility is affected) to petition a court of competent jurisdiction to issue a
temporary restraining order and permanent injunction against further use of the
property for the purposes approved in the site development review.
         (b)   Prior to or concurrent with the suspension of any site
development review permit, the county shall provide the permittee with notice
and an opportunity to be heard in accordance with the process set out in
Chapter 93.
   (G)   Expiration and extension of permit.
      (1)   A site development review permit shall expire automatically two
years from the date of issuance unless one of the following occurs first:
         (a)   The development has commenced;
         (b)   An application for an extension is filed as provided in this
section; or
         (c)   The permit is appealed to a body of competent jurisdiction
following final approval by the county, in which case the two-year period shall
be tolled until a final, unappealed or unappealable decision is made by a court
or other body of competent jurisdiction.
      (2)   As used in division (G)(1) above, a development has commenced when:
         (a)   The permit holder has physically altered the land or structure
or changed the use thereof through actions such as preliminary grading for
roads, driveways or building sites, installation of utilities, construction of
required off-site improvements or construction of buildings;
         (b)   The alteration or change is directed toward completion of the
development;
         (c)   The permit holder has spent at least $50,000 in expenditures
related to completion of the development. Expenditures that could apply to
various other uses of the land or structure shall be excluded including the
cost of purchasing land; and
         (d)   The provisions of division (G)(1) above shall apply
independently to each discrete phase of a phased development. The commencement
requirement for a subsequent phase cannot be satisfied by commencement
activities conducted under an approval for an earlier phase of the development.
      (3)   If an extension is desired, the holder of the site development
review permit must file an application for an extension prior to the expiration
of the permit. The application shall be filed in writing with the Planning
Director. A maximum of two extensions are permitted. Unless approved, the
extension does not extend the expiration date. The Planning Director shall
grant an initial two-year extension upon the timely filing of the extension
application. Following notice and hearing, the Planning Commission shall grant
a second two-year extension only upon demonstration by the permit holder that:
         (a)   In terms of time, labor or money the permit holder has been
making a good faith effort to commence the development or has been precluded
from doing so for reasons beyond the permit holder’s reasonable control;
         (b)   Commencement of the development is likely during the second two-
year extension; and
         (c)   There has been no change in circumstance or the law likely to
necessitate significant modification of the development approval or conditions
of approval.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-02-
2008, passed 1-23-2008; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
PARKLAND OVERLAY ZONE (PO)
§ 156.550 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Parkland Overlay Zone is to limit uses of land identified
as parks. Use of lands overlaid with the PO designation are limited to those
uses which are consistent with the development of parks in the county and to
permit only development which is compatible with such protection.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-6-98, passed 7-22-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-2011, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.551 APPLICATION.
   The Parkland Overlay Zone shall be applied to those properties which have
been identified as park sites in the County Comprehensive Plan with the intent
of protecting the property as parkland. In addition, owners of adjacent
property will benefit by knowing the extent of uses allowed on the neighboring
public park property subject to this overlay designation.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-6-98, passed 7-22-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-2011, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.552 PERMISSIBLE USES.
   (A)   If a use is allowed outright in the underlying zone, it will be
allowed outright in the Parkland Overlay Zone but with the overriding provision
that no structures are permitted unless consistent with the following list and
in conjunction with park use:
      (1)   Roads;
      (2)   RV sites;
      (3)   Campground sites;
      (4)   Camper cabins;
      (5)   Restrooms;
      (6)   Office structures;
      (7)   Bridges;
      (8)   Picnic facilities;
      (9)   Playground equipment;
      (10)   Parking;
      (11)   Trails;
      (12)   Helipad for emergency uses, including, but not limited to, Medivac
and wildfire response;
      (13)   Off-highway vehicle trails and supporting facilities within the
specified boundaries of an OHV park;
      (14)   Fishing facilities;
      (15)   Recreation facilities;
      (16)   Maintenance to existing facilities;
      (17)   Expansion of existing facilities; and
      (18)   Other park uses as allowed in O.A.R. 660-034-0040.
   (B)   (1)   In no instance shall an owner operator of a park site locate a
structure or even a permissible use from the list above within 100 feet of the
exterior boundary of a park without first obtaining review process approval as
specified in §
156.554.
      (2)   In cases where it is brought, in writing, to the Planning
Director’s attention that implementation of a permitted use on public parkland
property is not consistent with a perceived notion of recreation need as noted
in the recreation element of the County Comprehensive Plan, the matter may be
transmitted to the Planning Commission for conditional use permit consideration
specified in §
156.553.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-6-98, passed 7-22-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-2011, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.553 CONDITIONAL USE.
   (A)   A use not permitted outright in an underlying zone or noted in the
list in §
156.552 shall not be allowed. In instances where the proposed use is not
accepted as a permitted use by the Planning Director, the applicant can submit
the proposed use to the Planning Commission in the form of a conditional use
permit application for a determination of similarity to permitted uses. The
conditional use permit review process is subject to the provisions of §§
156.620 through
156.630 and the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The information provided to the Planning Commission will include the
Planning Director’s initial determination and the reason for making the
determination.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-6-98, passed 7-22-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-2011, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.554 REVIEW PROCESS.
   When a determination has been made that a proposed use is a conditional use,
the Planning Commission shall conduct a conditional use hearing and consider
the following matters and criteria before arriving at a decision.
   (A)   The applicant shall submit a map(s) of the park site and a written
description of the proposed use in sufficient detail so that anticipated
impacts and benefits can be evaluated.
   (B)   The applicant shall fully describe any measures proposed to mitigate
anticipated impacts on adjacent property.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall approve the application only if it has
been determined that the proposed use does not adversely effect adjacent
properties or amenities in the park. The review criteria for conditional use
permits must be followed.
   (D)   The amount of area disturbed for the proposed use shall be the minimum
necessary to accomplish the purpose of the proposed use.
   (E)   There shall be no significant loss of habitat for threatened or
endangered species of animals or plants as listed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service or the State Department of Fish and Wildlife.
   (F)   Permanent vegetation removal within the area defined as the riparian
zone shall retain 75% of all layers or strata of vegetation (e.g., deciduous
trees, shrubs, sedges, rushes and emergents) and maintain riparian diversity.
   (G)   In no instance shall the minimum lot size of this section allow a
smaller lot or parcel size than allowed by the underlying zone.
   (H)   In no instance shall a permitted underlying use or a proposed
conditional use adversely impact water quality or quantity of any parkland
waters.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-6-98, passed 7-22-1998; Ord. MC-C-3-
01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-2011, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
SIGNIFICANT RESOURCE OVERLAY ZONE (SRO)
§ 156.565 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Significant Resource Overlay Zone is to provide a
mechanism to recognize and protect resources deemed significant in the county
and listed in the County Comprehensive Plan Inventory of Significant Resources.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.566 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Significant Resource Overlay Zone shall be applied to those sites
that have been designated by the county as a significant resource and listed in
the County Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   The resource categories in O.A.R. Chapter 660, Division 23 that can be
listed as “significant” and protected under Goal 5 are:
      (1)   Mineral and aggregate resources;
      (2)   Wetlands;
      (3)   Wildlife habitat;
      (4)   Federal wild and scenic rivers;
      (5)   State scenic waterways;
      (6)   Groundwater resources;
      (7)   Approved state recreation trails;
      (8)   Natural areas;
      (9)   Wilderness areas;
      (10)   Riparian corridors;
      (11)   Energy sources;
      (12)   Historic resources;
      (13)   Open space; and
      (14)   Scenic views and sites.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.567 CATEGORIES.
   (A)   Aggregate and mineral sites.
      (1)   Overlay Zone. The zoning map will be amended to apply the Overlay
Zone to an approved mining site including an impact area. Mineral and aggregate
sites approved in the county may have an impact area of up to 1,500 feet when
permitted under certain Comprehensive Plan approval processes. Based on the
Comprehensive Plan analysis, development in an Overlay Zone impact area is
subject to the following standards.
         (a)   Uses permitted outright. Uses permitted outright in the
underlying zone, except conflicting uses described in the Comprehensive Plan
analysis may be permitted subject to the standards and criteria of the
underlying zone.
         (b)   Uses allowed conditionally. Uses permitted conditionally in the
underlying zone and conflicting uses shall be reviewed as conditional uses
subject to the standards and criteria of the underlying zone and the criteria
listed in division (D) below.
         (c)   Prohibited uses. Uses identified through the Comprehensive Plan
analysis as incompatible with mining in all instances shall not be permitted
within the impact area.
         (d)   Approval criteria for proposed uses allowed conditionally in the
impact area. The applicant must demonstrate compliance with the following
criteria:
            1.   The proposed use will not interfere with or cause an adverse
impact on lawfully established and lawfully operating mining operations;
            2.   The proposed use will not cause or threaten to cause the
mining operation to violate any applicable standards of this section or county
approval in the Comprehensive Plan; and
            3.   An application for a new noise or dust sensitive use shall
demonstrate that the mining operation in the adjacent extraction area will
maintain compliance with DEQ noise control standards and ambient air quality
and emission standards as measured at the new noise or dust sensitive use. If
deemed necessary by the Planning Director, the applicant for a new noise
sensitive use shall submit an analysis prepared by an acoustical engineer,
demonstrating that the applicable DEQ noise control standards are met or can be
met by a specified date. If noise mitigation measures are necessary to ensure
continued compliance on the part of the mining operation, such measures shall
be a condition of approval. If noise mitigation measures are inadequate to
ensure compliance with DEQ noise control standards, the noise sensitive use
shall not be approved within the impact area.
      (2)   Termination of the Overlay Zone. When a significant aggregate site
has been depleted or can be proven to be uneconomical to mine, and either the
reclamation completed or a proposed zone change and development approved by the
county that would eliminate the need for the reclamation, the Overlay Zone can
be removed. Rezoning or other actions to terminate mining or the protection of
the resource will not relieve requirements on the part of the owner or operator
of obligations regarding the site in accordance with county approvals and state
law.
   (B)   Sensitive bird nesting sites.
      (1)   Bald and golden eagle nest sites and communal roost sites shall be
protected in accordance with U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Oregon-Washington
Bald Eagle Management Guidelines.
      (2)   No development shall be allowed within a 300-foot radius of a
sensitive bird-nesting site. Exceptions to this standard shall be based on
written recommendations from ODFW.
   (C)   Riparian vegetation/wetlands.
      (1)   Road construction within riparian zones shall be reviewed in
cooperation with the responsible agency listed in §
156.569. Road construction shall seek alternative methods whenever possible, to
avoid disturbing wildlife; reducing the size of the riparian zone; and
impacting water quality in the aquatic zone. New roads built along streams
shall be avoided whenever possible unless no other alternative route is
available. The safety and welfare of all road users shall be considered in
determining the appropriate management strategy.
      (2)   All dwellings and other non-water dependent structures shall be set
back a minimum of 100 feet from the high water level of the stream or the water
body reaches during normal seasonal run-off.
      (3)   Permanent vegetation removal within the area defined as the
riparian zone shall retain 75% of all layers or stratas of vegetation (e.g.,
deciduous trees, shrubs, sedges, rushes and emergents).
   (D)   Big game range restrictions.
      (1)   New structures shall be located as close as possible to adjacent
compatible structures (a compatible structure shall be any structure which does
not adversely affect the intended use of another structure).
      (2)   Structures shall share a common access road wherever possible.
      (3)   Where it is impractical to share a common access road, the dwelling
shall be located as close as possible to the nearest existing public road in
order to minimize the length of access from the nearest existing public road.
      (4)   No dwelling will be authorized where the overall density within a
square mile exceed one dwelling per 160 acres.
      (5)   If the Planning Director finds, after consultation with the State
Department of Fish and Wildlife, that a proposed residential development at a
lower lot or parcel size and/or higher dwelling density would not significantly
impact the resource, the minimum lot or parcel size and/or maximum density
standard of this section may be waived accordingly.
      (6)   Residential subdivisions shall have clustered dwellings or be a
planned development subject to the provisions of the County Subdivision
Ordinance.
      (7)   In no instance shall the minimum lot size or dwelling density
provisions of this section allow a smaller lot or parcel size or a greater
dwelling density than allowed by the underlying zone.
   (E)   Wildlife Habitat Zone. Land areas incorporated in wildlife preserves,
refuges or private or governmental game management areas or hunting preserves,
or areas identified by the State Wildlife Commission, or Agricultural/Wildlife
Management Areas, both public or private owned and operated and land areas
providing habitat for wild, rare or endangered species listed by the State
Wildlife Commission or by the Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife, United
State Department of the Interior, upon state and federally owned land.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.568 LIST OF CONFLICTING USES AND ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Sensitive bird nesting sites; bald and golden eagles:
      (1)   Use of chemicals;
      (2)   Residential development;
      (3)   Permanent structures;
      (4)   Road construction;
      (5)   Human activity during roost period (November to March);
      (6)   Mining; and
      (7)   Powerlines.
   (B)   Riparian vegetation/wetlands:
      (1)   Road construction;
      (2)   Campgrounds;
      (3)   Any long-term use adversely impacting water quality and quantity
(including temperature);
      (4)   Any use impeding the movement of wildlife from one habitat to
another;
      (5)   Any long-term use adversely resulting in the loss of vegetation
diversity within the riparian zone; and
      (6)   Mining.
   (C)   Big game:
      (1)   Residential uses; and
      (2)   Road construction.
   (D)   Water resources:
      (1)   Groundwater. Any use affecting the quality and quantity of existing
groundwater resources; and
      (2)   Streams and ponds. Residential, commercial and industrial
development, mining, removal of vegetation.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.569 RESPONSIBLE AGENCY LIST.
   The following agencies shall be consulted when a use or activity is proposed
in the following resource areas:
   (A)   Fish and wildlife habitat:
      (1)   State Department of Fish and Wildlife (i.e., surface water,
wildlife, wetland areas, big game habitat and nest sites); and
      (2)   U.S. Department of Fish Wildlife when they have jurisdiction.
   (B)   Water resources:
      (1)   Division of state lands;
      (2)   Department of Transportation; and
      (3)   Department of Water Resources.
   (C)   Energy resources: the Department of Energy;
   (D)   Mineral and aggregate resources:
      (1)   Public works;
      (2)   State Department of Transportation; and
      (3)   Department of Geology and Mineral Industries.
   (E)   Parks and recreation scenic:
      (1)   State parks and recreation waterways; and
      (2)   State Department of Transportation.
   (F)   Geothermal resources: the Department of Geology and Mineral
Industries; and
   (G)   Riparian habitat:
      (1)   Agencies listed under division (A) above;
      (2)   Department of Environmental Quality involving water quality; and
      (3)   Soil conservation services involving soil quality (erosion).
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021)
HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND SITES
§ 156.580 ALTERATION/DEMOLITION PERMITS.
   A permit is required for alteration or demolition of any structure listed in
the Comprehensive Plan inventory of significant historic resources.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, ALTERATION means any addition to
removal of, or change in the exterior part of a structure and shall include
modification of the surface texture, material or architectural detail of the
exterior part of the structure but shall not include paint color.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature on any property
covered by this section that does not involve a change in design, material or
external appearance thereof. Nor does this subchapter prevent the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or removal of any such
feature when the Building Official determines that such emergency action is
required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition. Prior
to such emergency action, notification shall be provided to the Planning
Commission.
   (C)   A permit is not required under this subchapter for alteration of a
structure when review of the proposed alteration is required by an agency of
the state or federal government.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.581 REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Application. A property owner or his or her authorized agent may
initiate a request for a permit for alteration or demolition of an historic
structure by filing an application with the Building Official using forms
prescribed for the purpose.
   (B)   Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to
review the permit according to the procedures for public hearing, notice and
decision set forth in §§
156.690 through
156.699.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.582 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   Alteration. In the case of an application for alteration of an
historic structure, the Planning Commission shall:
      (1)   Approve the request submitted;
      (2)   Approve the request with modifications or conditions; or
      (3)   Deny the request.
   (B)   Demolition. In the case of an application for demolition of an
historic structure, Planning Commission shall authorize either:
      (1)   Immediate issuance of the permit; or
      (2)   Delay of issuance of the permit for up to 180 days. During this
period, the Planning Commission shall attempt to determine if public or private
acquisition and preservation is feasible or if other alternatives are possible
which could be carried out to prevent demolition of the site or structure.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 156.583 CRITERIA.
   (A)   Exterior alteration. The Planning Commission authority shall approve
an application if the proposed alteration is determined to be harmonious and
compatible with the appearance and character of the historical building and
shall disapprove any application if found detrimental as unsightly, grotesque
or adversely affecting the architectural significance, the integrity or
historical appearance or the educational or historical value of the building.
The following guidelines apply to exterior alterations to historical buildings.
      (1)   Retention of original construction. So far as practicable, all
original exterior materials and details shall be preserved.
      (2)   Height. Additional stories may be added to historic buildings
provided that:
         (a)   The added height complies with requirements of the Uniform
Building Code and the Zoning Ordinance;
         (b)   The added height does not exceed that which was traditional for
the style of building;
         (c)   The added height does not alter the traditional scale and
proportions of the building style; and
         (d)   The added height is visually compatible with adjacent historic
buildings.
   (B)   Bulk. Horizontal additions may be added to historic buildings,
provided that:
      (1)   The bulk of the addition does not exceed that which was traditional
for the building style;
      (2)   The addition maintains the traditional scale and proportion of the
building style; and
      (3)   The addition is visually compatible with adjacent historic
buildings.
   (C)   Visual integrity of structure. The lines of columns, piers, spandrels
and other primary structural elements shall be maintained so far as is
practicable.
   (D)   Scale and proportion. The scale and proportion of altered or added
building elements, the relationship of voids to solids (windows to wall) shall
be visually compatible with the traditional architectural character of the
historic building.
   (E)   Materials, color and texture. The materials, colors and textures used
in the alteration or addition shall be visually compatible with the traditional
architectural character of the historic building.
   (F)   Signs, lighting and other appurtenances. Signs, exterior lighting and
other appurtenances, such as walls, fences, awnings and landscaping shall be
visually compatible with the traditional architectural character of the
historic building.
   (G)   Demolition. The Planning Commission shall authorize immediate issuance
of a demolition permit if it finds all of the following:
      (1)   The structure cannot be economically rehabilitated;
      (2)   A program or project does not exist which may result in
preservation of the structure;
      (3)   Delay of the permit would result in unnecessary and substantial
hardship to the applicant;
      (4)   Issuance of the permit will not act to the substantial detriment of
the public welfare considering the significance of the structure and the
economic, cultural and energy consequences of demolishing the structure; and
      (5)   No other reasonable alternative to demolition exists.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021)
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
§ 156.595 ACCESS.
   (A)   The intent of this section is to manage access to land development
while preserving the flow of traffic in terms of safety, capacity, functional
classification and level of service.
   (B)   Major roadways, including highways, arterials and collectors serve as
the primary network for moving people and goods. These transportation corridors
also provide access to businesses and homes and have served as the focus for
commercial and residential development. If access points are not properly
designed, these roadways will be unable to accommodate the needs of development
and retain their primary transportation function. This section balances the
right of reasonable access to private property with the right of the citizens
of the county and the state to safe and efficient travel.
   (C)   This section shall apply to all public roadways under the jurisdiction
of the county and to application for development for any property that abuts
these roadways.
   (D)   This section is adopted to implement the land access and access
management policies of the county as set forth in the Transportation System
Plan. Access shall be provided based upon the requirements below.
      (1)   Minimum lot frontage requirement. Every lot shall abut a street,
other than an alley, for at least 50 feet, except on culs-de-sac where the
frontage may be reduced to 30 feet.
      (2)   Access permit requirement. Where access to or construction on a
county road is needed, an access permit or right-of-way permit from the County
Public Works Department is required subject to the requirements in this
chapter. Where access to a state highway is needed, an access permit from ODOT
is required as part of the land use application. Where access is needed to a
road managed by the Forest Service or other entity, an access permit or other
authorization from the appropriate entity shall be required as part of the land
use application.
      (3)   Emergency vehicle access. It is the responsibility of the landowner
to provide appropriate access for emergency vehicles at the time of
development. A dead-end private street exceeding 150 feet in length shall have
an adequate turn around facility approved by the appropriate Fire Marshal or,
if the Fire Marshal fails to review the private street, approval by the
Building Official or his or her designee.
      (4)   Easements and legal access. All lots must have access onto a public
right-of-way. This may be provided via direct frontage onto an existing public
road, a private roadway or an easement. Minimum easement requirements to
provide legal access shall be as follows:
         (a)   One thousand feet or less, a minimum easement width of 20 feet;
         (b)   More than 1,000 feet, a minimum easement width of 40 feet; and
         (c)   Parcels where three or more lots share an access (current or
potential), a minimum easement of 60 feet.
      (5)   Access spacing requirements for development accessing state
highways.
         (a)   Applications for development with access onto state highways
shall be provided to ODOT for review, to ensure consistency with adopted ODOT
access management standards shown in
Table 156.595-1. These standards apply only to unsignalized access points.
Where a right of access exists, a property shall be allowed to have access onto
a state highway at less than adopted access spacing requirements only if all
the following conditions are met:
            1.   The property does not have reasonable access via an
alternative to the state highway;
            2.   There are no other possible access options along the parcel’s
highway frontage; and
            3.   The access spacing standards cannot be accomplished.
         (b)   When a proposed access onto a state highway does not meet the
access spacing standards in Table 156.595-1, a deviation from standard will be
considered by the ODOT Region Manager, subject to requirements in O.A.R. 734-
051-3050.
Table 156.595-1
Access Management Standards for the County
Non-Interstate Highways
   Access Spacing Standards for Public or Private
   Unsignalized Access (Feet) for Posted Speed Indicated (Mph)
Highway Classification >55 50 40 & 45 30 & 35 <25
Table 156.595-1
Access Management Standards for the County
Non-Interstate Highways
   Access Spacing Standards for Public or Private
   Unsignalized Access (Feet) for Posted Speed Indicated (Mph)
Highway  Classification >55 50  40 & 45 30 & 35 <25
OR 206   District       700 550 500     400     400
OR 207
U.S. 730 Regional       990 830 750     600     450
OR 74
Reference: O.A.R. 734-051 (2004)
   
      (6)   Access within the influence area of an interchange. Access within
the influence area of existing or proposed state highway interchanges is
regulated by standards in O.A.R. 734-051, which are included as Appendix F of
the 2005 County Transportation System Plan Update. These standards do not
retroactively apply to interchanges existing prior to adoption of the 1999
State Highway Plan, except or until any redevelopment, change of use or highway
construction, reconstruction or modernization project affecting these existing
interchanges occurs. It is the goal at that time to meet the appropriate
spacing standards, if possible, but, at the very least, to improve the current
conditions by moving in the direction of the spacing standard.
      (7)   Signalized intersection spacing on state facilities. New traffic
signals proposed for state facilities, whether the intersecting facility is a
public or private road, shall meet the requirements for installation of a
traffic signal on a state highway in O.A.R. 734-020-0400. New traffic signals
on state facilities must be approved by the State Traffic Engineer. For
approval of a new traffic signal on a county facility as part of a condition of
development approval, the applicant shall be required to show, through analysis
prepared by a qualified professional engineer registered in the state, that the
signal is warranted to improve traffic operations, address safety deficiencies
or a combination, based upon traffic signal warrants in the current version of
the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      (8)   Access spacing requirements for development accessing county
facilities.
         (a)   All developments shall have legal access to a county or public
road. Except for interim access as provided in division (D)(9) below, access
onto any county road in the unincorporated or incorporated urban area shall be
permitted only upon issuance of an access permit upon demonstration of
compliance with the provisions of the county road standards and the standards
of this section.
         (b)   For county roadways designated as major collector or arterial in
the Transportation System Plan, the standards in
Table 156.595-2 apply for intersections created by a new public roadway, new
private roadway or new private driveway. For county roadways designated as
minor collectors or local access roads, intersections created by a new public
roadway, new private roadway or new private driveway shall meet minimum county
traffic safety and operational requirements, including sight distance, as
determined by the County Engineer.
Table 156.595-2
Access Management Standards for County Roadways
Access Spacing Standards for Public or Private Access (Feet)
Classification Public Roadway Private Roadway Private Drivewaya
Table 156.595-2
Access Management Standards for County Roadways
Access Spacing Standards for Public or Private Access (Feet)
Classification Public Roadway Private Roadway Private Drivewaya
Arterial       600            600             300
Collector      300            300             100
Local          200            200             Access to each lot
a. For most roadways, at-grade crossings are appropriate. Also, allowed
moves and spacing requirements may be more restrictive than those shown to
optimize capacity and safety. Any access to a state highway requires a
permit from the district office of ODOT and is subject to the access spacing
standards in
Table 156.595-1.
 
         (c)   No use will be permitted to have direct access to a street or
road except as specified below, or as provided in division (D)(9) below. Access
spacing shall be measured from existing or approved accesses on either side of
a street or road. Measurements shall be made from easement or right-of-way line
to easement or right-of-way line. See the following access diagram where R/
W equals right-of-way; P.I. equals point-of-intersection where P.I. shall be
located based upon a 90 degree angle of intersection between ultimate right-of-
way lines, and “C” and “D” equal each side of adjacent accesses to private
property.
            1.   All minimum distances stated in the following sections shall
be governed by sight distance requirements according to this chapter and
applicable county road standards.
            2.   All minimum distances stated in the following sections shall
be measured to the nearest easement line of the access or edge of travel lane
of the access on both sides of the road.
            3.   The minimum curb radius shown in the diagram below (i.e.,
distance from Point “A” to Point “B”) shall be 15 feet. In areas zoned for
industrial uses, the minimum curb radius shall be 30 feet. At intersections
between facilities classified as major collector, arterial or highway, any new
or modified intersection shall be designed to accommodate a WB-50 semitrailer
design vehicle. If either route is designated by the county as a truck route,
the intersection shall be designed to accommodate a WB-65 Interstate
semitrailer design vehicle. The curb alignment shall be designed so that the
design vehicle can complete a right turn without entering a lane used by
opposing traffic.
            4.   All minimum distances between accesses shall be measured from
existing or approved accesses on both sides of the road.
            5.   Minimum spacing between driveways shall be measured from Point
“D” to Point “D” as shown below (i.e., the edges of adjacent driveways closest
to each other).
            6.   In all instances, access points near an intersection with a
collector or arterial shall be located beyond the influence of standing queues
of the intersection in accordance with AASHTO standards. Additionally, access
shall be located beyond the back of any left turn refuge either existing on the
affected road or required to accommodate the proposed development. This
requirement may result in an access spacing greater than 100 feet in the case
of a collector, or 300 feet in the case of an arterial.
            7.   Access onto local roads will not be permitted within ten feet
of Point “B” as shown below. If no radius exists, access will not be permitted
within 25 feet of Point “A.”
            8.   Access onto collector roads will not be permitted within 50
feet of Point “B” as shown below. If no radius exists, access will not be
permitted within 65 feet of Point “A.” Where a common or shared access is
available it shall be used, provided that such use will not result in
operational or safety problems. Minimum spacing between driveways shall be 100
feet.
            9.   Direct access to an arterial will be permitted provided that
Point “C” of such access is more than 300 feet from any intersection Point “A”
or other access to that minor arterial.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35e8b7a669b5acb892f245aebd6615cd59ce190b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1642.png]
 
      (9)   Interim access onto county facilities. No development with sole
access onto a county arterial or major collector shall be denied based only on
an inability to provide an access that meets applicable access spacing
standards. In such an event, the use may be issued an interim access permit
which shall expire when access as required under this chapter becomes
available. An interim access permit may be granted based upon the following:
         (a)   The site is situated such that adequate access cannot otherwise
be provided in accord with the access spacing requirements of this chapter;
         (b)   The interim access shall meet minimum county traffic safety and
operational requirements, including sight distance;
         (c)   Alternate access shall not be deemed adequate and connections to
alternate access shall not be required if the resulting route of access would
require a trip in excess of one block or 500 feet out of direction (whichever
is less);
         (d)   The property owner signs a consent to participate agreement for
the formation of a Local Improvement District or similar financing mechanism
for the primary purpose of constructing a public road or right-of-way providing
access to the arterial or collector road; such access shall meet the minimum
applicable county standard;
         (e)   The property owner records an agreement to participate in any
project that would consolidate access points where such project would not
result in new or more severe traffic operation or safety problems; and
         (f)   The property owner records an agreement to abandon use of the
existing private access way when an adequate alternative access becomes
available.
      (10)   Conditions requiring variance application. In the case of
transportation improvement plans that do not meet the above minimum standards,
the Public Works Department may work with the applicant to determine whether an
alternate design standard is appropriate (design modification). Design
modifications are reviewed and approved by the Public Works Department staff.
If upon mutual agreement it is determined that an alternate design standard
cannot be met, an application for a design variance will be required, subject
to review and approval by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5,
passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
§ 156.596 SIGHT DISTANCE.
   In all zones, adequate sight distance shall be maintained at the
intersection of two roads (public or private), a road intersecting a private
driveway or a road crossing a railroad.
   (A)   Sight distance requirements for new accesses. It is the intent of this
section to ensure that each new access point or each new lot or parcel created
or development in the county will have a safe access to a public road, with the
exception of development actions listed in division (B) below but are subject
to improvements to maximize sight distance to the extent practicable by the
County Operations Division through an access permit or right-of-way permit.
      (1)   Existing access points that do not satisfy the sight distance
standards, and are on property included with a development action which will
not add any additional vehicle trips to that access, are exempt from this
section. Improvements at these existing access points may be required of the
applicant to maximize sight distance to the extent practicable through an
access permit application.
      (2)   The minimum intersectional sight distance shall be based on the
vehicular speeds of the road. The vehicular speeds for the purpose of
determining intersectional sight distance shall be the greater of the
following, to be selected by the County Engineer or designee.
         (a)   Design speed. A speed selected by a registered engineer in the
state for purposes of design and correlation of those features of a road, such
as curvature, super-elevation and sight distance, upon which the safe operation
of vehicles is dependent.
         (b)   Posted speed. Speed which has been established by the State
Speed Control Board and is posted by the county.
         (c)   Eighty-fifth percentile speed. Speed as certified by a
registered engineer in the state below which 85% of all traffic units travel,
and above which 15% travel. The eighty-fifth percentile speed shall be measured
at the point where the sight restriction occurs.
      (3)   The intersectional sight distance shall:
         (a)   Be based on an eye height of three and one-half feet and an
object height of four and twenty-five hundredths feet above the road; and
         (b)   Be assumed to be ten feet from the near edge of pavement or the
extended curb line or the near edge of the graveled surface of a gravel road to
the front of a stopped vehicle.
      (4)   Minimum intersectional sight distance shall be equal to ten times
the vehicular speed of the road such as in the table below.
Intersectional Sight Distance
Mph Distance along Crossroad (feet)
Intersectional Sight Distance
Mph Distance along Crossroad (feet)
25  250
30  300
35  350
40  400
45  450
50  500
55  550
 
      (5)   Intersectional sight distance values shall conform to division (A)
(3) above. For significant road improvement projects, the above intersectional
standards shall be met in addition to the applicable AASHTO roadway sight
distance standards.
      (6)   In those instances where there are no access locations available to
the site that meet or can meet the sight distance requirements, a written
request for modification may be submitted to the County Engineer or designee.
The request for modification of the sight distance requirements shall be
subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   Submitted and certified by a registered engineer of the state;
         (b)   Nationally accepted specifications or standards are documented
and referenced;
         (c)   Certification that the modification will not compromise safety
or the intent of the county’s transportation standards;
         (d)   Agreement that the cost of any modifications agreed to must be
borne by the applicant; and
         (e)   Statement that there is no location available to provide an
alternative access location which currently meets the sight distance
requirements, or which can be altered to meet the sight distance requirements.
Alterations needed to provide adequate sight distance include, but are not
limited to, grading and the removal of vegetation. For the purpose of this
division (A)(6)(e), ALTERNATIVE ACCESS LOCATION means:
            1.   Any location on the proposed development site which meets or
can meet the sight distance requirements; or
            2.   Any location off the proposed development site which can
provide access to the site by an existing access easement or through an access
easement which will be provided to the site as part of the development
application. Such an off-site access must be shown to meet or be able to meet
sight distance requirements.
   (B)   Accesses exempt from sight distance requirements. Accesses for the
following development actions are exempt from the sight distance standards (see
division (A) above), but are subject to improvements to maximize sight distance
to the extent practicable by the County Operations Division through an access
permit or right-of-way permit:
      (1)   Replacement dwellings;
      (2)   Nonbuildable parcels;
      (3)   Applications for one dwelling on an existing vacant parcel;
      (4)   Home occupation applications that do not include the construction
or placement of new structures; or
      (5)   Applications which will not add additional vehicle trips to an
existing access which does not meet the sight distance standards.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5,
passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
§ 156.597 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND USE DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Plot plan requirements.
      (1)   Except where otherwise noted, all proposed projects should meet the
following plot plan requirements as described in Table 156.597-1. A common
threshold for a TIA (traffic impact analysis) applying to all types of
development is 400 daily trips (e.g., 40 houses). Trip generation should be
estimated using the current edition of trip generation by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, other similar published resources or actual driveway
counts of similar land uses.
      (2)   The County Planning Commission, County Planning Director or County
Public Works Director or designee may require a TIA for any level of
development. TIA requirements are described in the Appendix attached to the
ordinance codified in this section.
Application Permit Type Review Authority
Application                      Permit Type    Review Authority
Code/plan amendment              Legislative    Board of Commissioners
Conditional use permit           Quasi-judicial Planning Commission
Major variance                   Quasi-judicial Planning Commission
Subdivision tentative plan       Quasi-judicial Planning Commission
Administrative review            Administrative Staff
Land partition/replat            Administrative Staff, with notice provided
Property line adjustment         Administrative Staff, with notice provided
Minor variance                   Administrative Staff, with notice provided
Site plan review                 Administrative Staff, with notice provided
Temporary use permit             Administrative Staff, with notice provided
Temporary hardship variance      Administrative Staff, with notice provided
Zoning permit                    Ministerial    Staff
Occupancy permit                 Ministerial    Staff
Land use compatibility statement Ministerial    Staff
Final plat                       Ministerial    Staff
 
   (B)   Consent to participate agreement required.
      (1)   For those local roads which are not improved in accordance with
county road standards or maintained by the county, and which abut the property
owner’s proposed development or which do not abut the development but provide
direct access to the development, the property owner shall sign a consent to
participate agreement for the potential formation of a local improvement
district or other mechanism to improve and maintain these roads to county
standards, per the county standard consent to participate agreement.
Applications for property line adjustments, nonbuildable parcels, temporary
housing permits, land partitions in resource zones and one dwelling on an
existing vacant parcel, are not subject to this requirement.
      (2)   For those arterial and collector roads which are not improved in
accordance with county road standards and which abut the development site or
those roads which do not abut the development site but provide access to the
site, the property owner shall sign a consent to participate agreement for the
potential formation of a local improvement district or other mechanism to
improve the base facility of this road(s) to county standards, per the county’s
standard consent to participate agreement. Applications for property line
adjustments, nonbuildable parcels, temporary housing permits, land partitions
in resource zones and one dwelling on an existing vacant parcel, are not
subject to this requirement.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5,
passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
§ 156.598 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Because vehicle parking facilities can occupy large amounts of land,
they must be planned and designed carefully to use the land efficiently while
maintaining the visual character of the community.
   (B)   At the time of construction, reconstruction or enlargement of a
structure, or at the time a use is changed in any zone, off-street parking
space shall be provided as follows unless greater requirements are otherwise
established. When the requirements are based on the number of employees, the
number counted shall be those working on the premises during the largest shift
at peak season. Fractional space requirements shall be counted as a whole
space. Off-street parking spaces may include spaces in garages, carports,
parking lots and/or driveways if vehicles are not parked in a vehicle travel
lane (including emergency or fire access lanes), public right-of-way, pathway
or landscape area. The county may allow credit for “on-street parking,” as
provided in §
156.600. For uses not specified in
Table 156.598-1, parking requirements shall be determined by the use in
Table 156.598-1 found to be most similar in terms of parking needs.
Table 156.598-1
Minimum Parking Requirements
Use Minimum Vehicle Parking Requirements
Table 156.598-1
Minimum Parking Requirements
Use                                     Minimum Vehicle Parking Requirements
Commercial
Bank, office (except medical and        One space per 350 gross square feet
dental)
                                        One space per 100 gross square feet or
Eating or drinking establishment        one space per four seats, whichever is
                                        less
Medical and dental clinic               One space per 300 gross square feet
Mortuaries                              One space per six seats or eight feet
                                        of bench length in chapels
Retail store except wholesale           One space per 350 gross square feet
establishments
Service or repair shop, retail store
handling exclusively bulky merchandise, One space per 750 gross square feet
such as automobiles and furniture
Commercial Amusement
Bowling alley                           Five spaces per alley
Dance hall, skating rink                One space per 100 gross square feet
Stadium, arena, theater                 One space per four seats or eight feet
                                        of bench length, whichever is greater
Commercial Residential
Hotel or motel                          One space per guest room, plus one
                                        space for the manager
Industrial
Storage warehouse, manufacturing        One space per employee on the largest
establishment, rail or trucking freight shift
terminal
                                        One space per employee on the largest
Wholesale establishment                 shift plus one space per 700 square
                                        feet of patron-serving area
Public and Institutional Uses
Church                                  One space per four seats at maximum
                                        occupancy
Convalescent hospital, nursing home,
sanitarium, rest home, home for the     One space per four beds
aged
Daycare, pre-school or kindergarten     Two spaces per FTE staff
                                        One and one-half spaces per classroom
Elementary or junior high school        or one space per four seats or eight
                                        feet of bench length in the auditorium
                                        or assembly room whichever is greater
                                        One and one-half spaces per classroom
                                        plus one space for each ten students
High school, college, commercial school the school is designed to accommodate,
for adults                              or one space for four seats or eight
                                        feet of bench length in the main
                                        auditorium or assembly room, whichever
                                        is greater
Hospital                                Two spaces per bed
Library, reading room                   One space per 400 gross square feet
                                        One space per six seats or 12 feet of
                                        bench length, whichever is greater, or
Other auditorium or meeting room        one space for each 75 gross square feet
                                        of assembly room not containing fixed
                                        seats
Welfare or correctional institution     One space per six beds
Residential
One-, two- and three-family dwelling    Two spaces per dwelling unit
Residential use containing four or more One and one-half spaces per dwelling
dwelling units                          unit
Rooming or boarding house               One space per guest room
 
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5,
passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
§ 156.599 BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENT.
   This chapter also provides standards for bicycle parking, because children
as well as adults need safe and adequate spaces to park their bicycles
throughout the community. All uses subject to design review that are located
within an urban growth boundary shall provide bicycle parking in conformance
with the following guidelines. Uses outside an urban growth boundary are
encouraged to provide bicycle parking based on these guidelines.
   (A)   Number of parking spaces. A minimum of two bicycle parking spaces is
recommended for each use with greater than ten vehicle parking spaces. The
following additional standards apply to uses within an urban growth boundary
and are recommended for other areas of the county:
      (1)   Multi-family residences. At least one sheltered bicycle space per
four dwelling units, for uses of four or more units. Bicycle spaces may be
located within a garage, storage shed, basement, utility room or other similar
area. If a residential development use has no such protected areas, bicycle
parking spaces can be located under an eave, overhang or similar cover to be
protected from rain and sun;
      (2)   Parking lots. At least one bicycle parking space for every ten
vehicle spaces at commercial and public parking lots;
      (3)   Schools. One bicycle parking space for every ten vehicle spaces, at
public or private elementary and middle schools. High schools should provide
one bicycle space for every five students;
      (4)   Colleges and trade schools. One bicycle space for every ten motor
vehicle spaces. At least half of the spaces should be sheltered under an eave,
overhang or similar cover; and
      (5)   Multiple uses. For buildings with multiple uses, such as a
commercial building or mixed-use development, one bicycle space for every ten
motor vehicle spaces is recommended.
   (B)   Exemptions. This section does not apply to single-family, two-family
and three-family housing (attached, detached or manufactured housing), home
occupations, agriculture and livestock uses or other developments with fewer
than ten vehicle parking spaces.
   (C)   Location and design. Bicycle parking should be conveniently located no
farther away than the closest parking space.
   (D)   Visibility and security. Bicycle parking should be visible to cyclists
from street sidewalks or building entrances, so that it provides sufficient
security from theft and damage.
   (E)   Options for storage. Bicycle parking requirements for long-term and
employee parking can be met by providing a bicycle storage room, bicycle
lockers, racks or other secure storage space inside or outside of the building.
   (F)   Lighting. Bicycle parking should be least as well-lit as vehicle
parking for security.
   (G)   Hazards. Bicycle parking shall not impede or create a hazard to
pedestrians. Parking areas shall be located so as to not conflict with vision
clearance standards in §
156.596.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5,
passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
§ 156.600 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Buildings or structures to be built or substantially altered which receive
and distribute materials and merchandise by trucks shall provide and maintain
off-street loading berths in sufficient number and size to handle adequately
the needs of the particular use. Off-street parking areas used to fulfill the
requirements of this chapter shall not be used for loading and unloading
operations except during periods of the day when not required to care for
parking needs. General provisions are as follows.
   (A)   The provisions and maintenance of off-street parking and loading space
is a continuing obligation of the property owner. Should the owner or occupant
of any lot or building change the use to which the lot or building is put,
thereby increasing off-street parking and loading requirements, it shall be a
violation of this chapter to begin or maintain such altered use until such time
as the increased off-street parking or loading requirements are complied with.
   (B)   Requirements for types of buildings and uses not specifically listed
in this chapter shall be determined by the Planning Commission based upon the
requirements for comparable use listed.
   (C)   In the event multiple uses occupy a single structure or parcel of
land, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the
requirements of each use computed separately.
   (D)   Owners of two or more uses, or parcels of land may agree to utilize
jointly the same parking and loading spaces when the hours of operation do not
overlap; provided, that satisfactory legal evidence is presented to the county
in the form of deeds, leases or contracts to establish the joint use.
   (E)   Off-street parking spaces for dwellings shall be located on the same
parcel with the dwelling. Other required parking spaces for residential uses
shall be located not farther than 500 feet from the building or use they are
required to serve, measured in a straight line from the building.
   (F)   Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of
passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons and employees only and
shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of
trucks used in conducting the business or use.
   (G)   Parking designated exclusively for people with disabilities shall be
provided in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.
   (H)   The Director may, upon request, allow a reduction in the number of
required off-street parking spaces in housing developments for elderly or
disabled persons if such reduction is deemed appropriate after analysis of the
size and location of the development, resident auto ownership, number of
employees, possible future conversion to other residential uses and other
similar relevant factors.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5,
passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.601 DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Except for single-family and duplex dwellings, areas used for parking
for more than two vehicles shall have durable and dustless surfaces adequately
maintained.
   (B)   Except for parking in connection with single-family and duplex
dwellings, parking and loading areas adjacent to or within a Residential Zone
or adjacent to a dwelling shall be designed to minimize disturbance to
residents by the erection between the uses of a sight-obscuring fence or
planted screen of not less than six feet in height except where vision
clearance is required.
   (C)   Parking spaces along the outer boundaries of a parking lot shall
maintain a minimum setback from the property line of five feet, unless a
greater setback is specified for a structure in the zoning district and shall
be contained by a bumper rail or by a curb which is at least four inches high.
   (D)   Artificial lighting which may be provided shall not shine or create
glare in any Residential Zone or on any adjacent dwelling.
   (E)   Access aisles shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide for two-way traffic.
The minimum aisle width for emergency vehicle access (with one-way traffic) is
20 feet.
   (F)   Except for single-family and duplex dwellings, groups of more than two
parking spaces shall be so located and served by a driveway that their use will
require no backing movements or other maneuvering within a street right-of-way
other than an alley.
   (G)   Service drives to off-street parking areas shall be a minimum of 24
feet wide for two-way traffic flow and 20 feet wide for one-way traffic flow.
The number of service drives shall be limited to the minimum that will
accommodate anticipated traffic.
   (H)   Driveways shall maintain minimum sight distance per the standards of §
156.596.
   (I)   The standards set forth in the table below shall be the minimum for
parking lots approved under this chapter (all figures are in feet except as
noted). The letters in the first row of the table correspond to the letters in
the following diagram.
The letters in the first row of the table correspond to the letters in the
following diagram.
Table 156.601-1
Off-Street Parking Design Standards
A             B           C                  D           E
Parking Angle Stall Width Stall to Curb (19' Aisle Width Curb Length per Car
Degree                    Long Stall)
Table 156.601-1
Off-Street Parking Design Standards
A             B           C                  D           E
Parking Angle Stall Width Stall to Curb (19' Aisle Width Curb Length per Car
Degree                    Long Stall)
0             8.5         8.5                12          23
45            8.5         19.4               12          12
60            8.5         20                 15          9.8
75            8.5         19.6               24*         8.8
90            8.5         19                 24*         8.5
*Two-way circulation
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35e8b7a669b5acb892f245aebd6615cd59ce190b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1644.png]
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5,
passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
§ 156.602 SIGN LIMITATIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In addition to sign limitations and regulations set forth in a
specific zone, the following limitations and regulations shall apply to any
sign hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered within the jurisdiction
of the county.
   (B)   In addition to the standards and limitations set forth in this
chapter, signs shall be installed in accordance with applicable regulations of
state and federal agencies. No sign will hereafter be erected, moved or
structurally altered without being in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. Official traffic control signs and instruments of the state, county or
municipality are exempt from all provisions of this chapter.
      (1)   All outdoor advertising signs shall be in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of O.R.S. Chapter 377 when
applicable.
      (2)   No outdoor advertising sign permitted by O.R.S. Chapter 377 shall
be erected within 300 feet of a residential dwelling without written consent of
the owner and/or occupant of said dwelling.
      (3)   No sign shall be placed so as to interfere with visibility or
effectiveness of any permanent traffic control device.
      (4)   No sign shall be placed so as to impede the sight distance triangle
at any access point or intersection as specified in §
156.596.
      (5)   No sign shall cause glare, distraction or other driving hazards
within a street or road right-of-way.
      (6)   No sign shall shine directly upon a residential dwelling or
otherwise create a nuisance.
      (7)   In addition to the limitations on signs as provided by divisions
(B)(1) through (B)(5) above, additional sign restrictions may be required as
determined by the Planning Commission in approving conditional uses, as
provided by §§
156.620 through
156.630.
      (8)   Signs erected along scenic byways or other roads with similar
designations must meet applicable criteria for sign placement.
      (9)   Residents may request specific cautionary signage for individual
resident(s) to be installed within a county right-of-way. All costs including
materials, installation, maintenance and removal, shall be borne by the
requestor and shall otherwise conform with County Policy M-43674.
      (10)   Developers are to install street name, posted speed and other
traffic control signage required for private developments, per applicable
standards from the county and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD).
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-2-
2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5,
passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.603 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR A MANUFACTURED HOME ON INDIVIDUAL LOTS AS A
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.
   (A)   Manufactured homes in a Farm or Forest Use Zone. A manufactured home
permitted to be sited as a single-family dwelling on an individual lot or
parcel in Farm and Forest Use Zones shall be in compliance with the following
standards and regulations as a minimum. If the manufactured home is placed
within one-half mile of a Residential Zone (Rural Residential, Farm Residential
or Suburban Residential), the standards of division (B) below shall apply. The
distance of one-half mile will be measured from the site of the home to the
boundary of the Residential Zone in a direct line and not specifically along
roads or streets.
      (1)   The manufactured home shall be a 14-foot single-wide, at a minimum,
or a multi-sectional unit and shall contain at least 745 square feet of space
as determined by measurement of the exterior dimensions of the unit exclusive
of any trailer hitch device.
      (2)   The manufactured home unit shall be manufactured no more than ten
years before the receipt date of the siting request application by the Planning
Department and bear the State Department of Commerce insignia of compliance.
All pre-owned and pre-occupied units (i.e., used) shall be inspected by a
certified Building Official prior to installation and occupancy to ensure
compliance with applicable standards required for the insignia of compliance
and to ensure that such units are in such a condition as to not be detrimental
to the public health, safety and general welfare or to adjoining properties.
      (3)   The manufactured home shall be installed according to the
specifications outlined in the State Manufactured Dwelling and Park Specialty
Code in effect at the time of installation and as utilized by the County
Building Official. (See O.R.S. Chapter 446 and O.A.R. 918 division 500.)
      (4)   All manufactured home accessory buildings and structures shall
comply with state and local construction and installation standards. Roofing
and siding materials shall be of similar material and color and complementary
to the existing manufactured home unit. Manufactured home accessory structures
include porches and steps, awnings, cabanas or any other structure or addition
that depends in part on the manufactured home for its structural support, or in
any manner is immediately adjacent to or attached to the manufactured home.
Such structures or additions shall not total more than 40% of the total living
space of the manufactured home. Garages and carports, either attached or
detached, are not counted in this percentage. Ramadas, as defined in O.R.S.
Chapter 446, shall not be permitted.
      (5)   When removing a manufactured home, the owner of the property shall
remove the foundation and all accessory structures and additions to the
manufactured home and permanently disconnect sewer, water and other utilities
if the manufactured home is removed from its foundation unless otherwise
authorized by the county. In the event the owner fails to accomplish said work
within 30 days from the day on which the manufactured home is moved from its
foundation, the county may perform such work and place a lien against the
property for the cost of such work. This condition shall not apply in the event
that the manufactured home is replaced on the original foundation, or on the
original foundation as modified, or by another approved manufactured home
within 30 days of the original unit’s removal. Said lien may be initiated by
the County Board of Commissioners.
      (6)   A manufactured structure is recognized as any manufactured
dwelling, or prefabricated structure more than eight and one-half feet wide
that can be moved to a new location.
   (B)   Manufactured homes in a Rural Residential Zone. A manufactured home
permitted as a single-family dwelling on an individual lot or parcel in a
Residential Zone (Rural Residential, Farm Residential or Suburban Residential)
shall be in compliance with the following standards and regulations as a
minimum.
      (1)   Be multi-sectional (double-wide or larger); be a minimum of 1,000
square feet; and be manufactured no more than ten years before the receipt date
of the siting request application by the Planning Department.
      (2)   Placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at
the perimeter such that the manufactured home is located not more than 12
inches above grade.
      (3)   Have a pitched roof with a nominal slope of at least three feet in
height for each 12 feet in width.
      (4)   Certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope
meeting performance standards which reduce levels equivalent to the performance
standards required of single-family dwellings constructed under the State
Building Code.
      (5)   Have exterior siding and roofing materials which in color, material
and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly
used on residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to
the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as determined by the
Planning Department.
      (6)   Have a garage or carport sited on the same lot or parcel of at
least 180 square feet in size of like materials constructed before occupancy.
      (7)   All manufactured home accessory buildings and structures shall
comply with state and local construction and installation standards. Roofing
and siding materials shall be of similar material and color and complementary
to the existing manufactured home unit. Manufactured home accessory structures
include porches and steps, awnings, cabanas or any other structure or addition
that depends in part on the manufactured home for its structural support, or in
any manner is immediately adjacent to or attached to the manufactured home.
Such structures or additions shall not total more than 40% of the total living
space of the manufactured home. Garages or carports, either attached or
detached, are not counted in this percentage. Ramadas, as defined in O.R.S.
Chapter 446, shall not be permitted.
      (8)   (a)   When removing a manufactured home, the owner of the property
shall remove the foundation and all accessory structures and additions to the
manufactured home and permanently disconnect sewer, water and other utilities
if the manufactured home is removed from its foundation unless otherwise
authorized by the county.
         (b)   In the event the owner fails to accomplish said work within 30
days from the day on which the manufactured home is moved from its foundation,
the county may perform such work and place a lien against the property for the
cost of such work.
         (c)   This condition shall not apply in the event that the
manufactured home is replaced on the original foundation, or on the original
foundation as modified, or by another approved manufactured home within 30 days
of the original unit’s removal. Said lien may be initiated by the County Board
of Commissioners.
      (9)   A manufactured structure is recognized as any manufactured
dwelling, or prefabricated structure more than eight and one-half feet wide
that can be moved to a new location.
   (C)   Manufactured homes and other uses. Manufactured homes are to only be
used as single-family dwellings as stated in O.R.S. 446.245. Any changes to a
use of a manufactured home requires approval of the Planning Commission and
compliance with O.R.S. 446.245.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-05-
2006, passed 10-18-2006; Ord. MC-2-2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. OR-1-2013,
passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-
25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021;
Ord. ORD-2024-03, passed 4-3-2024; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.604 STANDARDS FOR TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS.
   The intent of these provisions is to provide clear directions and guidelines
when considering installation of transportation facilities in the county.
   (A)   Improvements permitted outright. Although some zone designations may
address certain uses listed below, these provisions generally apply to all
zones in the county. Thus, except where otherwise specifically regulated by
this chapter, the following improvements are permitted outright:
      (1)   Normal operation, maintenance, repair and preservation of existing
transportation facilities (roadways, bridges and the like), including the use
of stockpile sites in support of operation, maintenance, repair and
preservation;
      (2)   Installation of culverts, pathways, medians, fencing, guardrails,
lighting and similar types of improvements within the existing right-of-way;
      (3)   Projects specifically identified in the Transportation System Plan
as not requiring further land use regulation;
      (4)   Landscaping as part of a transportation facility;
      (5)   Emergency measures necessary for the safety and protection of
property;
      (6)   Acquisition of the right-of-way for public roads, highways and
other transportation improvements designated in the Transportation System Plan
except those that are located in exclusive Farm Use or Forest Zones;
      (7)   Construction of a street or road as part of an approved subdivision
or land partition approved consistent with the applicable land division
ordinance;
      (8)   Establishment or continuation of no spray zones on private
property;
      (9)   Cattle guards to be installed per County Board of Commissioners
Policy M-43673;
      (10)   Pavement aprons to be installed at intersections of gravel roads
or driveways with paved roads per County Board of Commissioners Resolution R-
29-2000; and
      (11)   Any excavation within the county right-of-way shall conform to the
Road and Street Excavation Ordinance, codified in §
151.020 through
151.047.
   (B)   Uses permitted by conditional use permit. The following uses are
permitted by conditional use permit:
      (1)   Construction, major reconstruction or widening of highways, roads,
bridges or other transportation projects that are not designed and constructed
as part of a subdivision or planned development shall comply with the
Transportation System Plan and applicable standards and shall address the
following criteria. For state projects that require an environmental impact
statement (EIS) or environmental assessment (EA), the draft EIS or EA shall be
reviewed and used as the basis for findings to comply with the following
criteria:
         (a)   The project is designed to be compatible with existing land use
patterns, noise generation, safety and zoning;
         (b)   The project is designed to minimize avoidable environmental
impacts to identified wetlands, wildlife habitat, air and water quality,
cultural resources and scenic qualities;
         (c)   The project preserves or improves the safety and function of the
facility through access management, traffic calming or other design features;
and
         (d)   The project includes provision for bicycle and pedestrian
circulation as consistent with the Transportation Element of the Comprehensive
Plan and other requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Construction of rest areas, weigh stations, temporary aggregate
storage and aggregate processing sites; and
      (3)   If review under this section indicates that the use or activity is
inconsistent with the transportation element of the Comprehensive Plan, the
procedure for a plan amendment shall be undertaken prior to or in conjunction
with the conditional use permit review.
   (C)   Private streets outside an urban growth boundary. All private streets
providing access from a public roadway to a proposed land division shall meet
the following standards:
      (1)   Have a minimum sight distance in compliance with adopted county
standards at any intersection with a public road. Additional sight distance or
advance warning signage or other devices may be required where known safety
hazards exist;
      (2)   For each private street, there shall be a legal recorded document
which includes:
         (a)   A legal description of the proposed easement;
         (b)   Ownership of the street;
         (c)   Use rights; and
         (d)   A maintenance and construction agreement which includes Fire
Marshal approved street specifications and turn around area (if required) and
the allocation and/or method of determining liability for maintenance.
      (3)   Where drainage conditions require it, a private street shall be
ditched in conformance with the county road standards;
      (4)   Private streets which access public or county roads shall be
located, designed and constructed (within the public right-of-way) in
accordance with adopted standards for county roads; and
      (5)   Prior to establishing a private driveway or a private street, the
owner shall obtain an access permit for access to the intersecting public road.
As a condition of granting access to a public road, the county may require the
applicant to clean the ditch serving the parcel and remove sight-obstructing
vegetation in the vicinity of the access.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-C-1-
02, passed 3-13-2002; Ord. MC-2-2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed
9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-
2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021;
Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
§ 156.610 ZONING PERMIT.
   A zoning permit is a non-discretionary or ministerial review conducted
without a public hearing by the Planning Director or designee. A zoning permit
is not intended to be a land use decision as defined in O.R.S. 197.015 nor a
permit as defined in O.R.S. 215.402. Where subjective analysis is required, the
Director may elect to process any zoning permit application through the
administrative review process provided in §§
156.690 through
156.700.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of zoning permit review is to ensure compliance
with the clear and objective standards of the land use district, such as
building setbacks, lot coverage, maximum building height and similar
provisions, and, if applicable, any precedent conditions of approval from a
prior land use approval. Any subsequent conditions will be met prior to
occupancy or commencement of the proposed development.
   (B)   Pre-application review. Prior to filing a zoning permit application,
the applicant may confer with the Planning Director or designee, who shall
identify and explain the relevant review procedures and standards.
   (C)   Applicability. Zoning permit approval shall be required prior to the
construction, reconstruction or alteration of any structure larger than 100
square feet or for any change of use or establishment of a new use that is
allowed outright in the underlying zone or received prior land use approval. A
zoning permit shall expire within one year of issuance unless a building permit
has been issued or if no building permit is required, the use has commenced. A
12-month extension request may be granted when submitted to the Planning
Department prior to the zoning permit expiration date.
   (D)   Review standards. The following review standards shall apply:
      (1)   The proposed land use is allowed in the underlying land use
district;
      (2)   If a land use approval (i.e., site plan review, conditional use
permit or legislative action) is required for the proposed development, the
land use approval has been granted and the proposed development is consistent
with that land use decision. If the land use approval included conditions of
approval, all precedent conditions of approval have been met, and applicant has
provided a compliance schedule for meeting the subsequent conditions prior to
construction or operation, as may be applicable. A precedent condition is a
condition that must be met prior to start of construction of the use or a phase
of the use; a subsequent condition is a condition that must be met prior to
start of operation of the use or a phase of the use;
      (3)   The building/yard setback, lot area, lot dimension, density, lot
coverage, building height and other applicable development standards of the
underlying zone and any sub-district(s) are met;
      (4)   Off-street parking and loading/unloading facilities shall be
provided as required in §§
156.598 and
156.600. Pedestrian access to off-street parking areas shall be provided;
      (5)   Unless applicant’s use of water is exempt from permitting
requirements under the state water law, the applicant shall have received all
necessary permits or licenses from the Oregon Water Resources Department prior
to construction or operation, as applicable. If OWRD water permits or licenses
are required for operations, applicant shall provide a compliance schedule for
obtaining the required authorization. If an off-site water source is used,
applicant shall provide a letter, notice or memorandum of understanding from
the service provider evidencing a commitment to serve the site, which shall
indicate the source of the water (e.g., surface water, existing water right and
the like) and a targeted delivery for water to the site;
      (6)   All applicable permits for water, sanitary sewer, wastewater, solid
waste or power services for the site have been granted or applicant has
provided evidence that such services will be provided prior to operation of the
use or phase of the use;
      (7)   The site shall not be the subject of outstanding code enforcement
violations unless the purpose of the application is to rectify an outstanding
violation; and
      (8)   The applicant shall obtain any required access permit(s) from the
Public Works Department and/or Oregon Department of Transportation.
   (E)   Submittal requirements. A zoning permit application shall be submitted
including all of the following information except for specific items determined
at the pre-application review not to be applicable. All zoning permit plans
shall have dimensions clearly indicated. An applicant may provide the
information on separate sheets, if necessary or desirable for clarity.
      (1)   North arrow and scale;
      (2)   Location of property boundaries, including adjacent public or
private streets and rights-of-way;
      (3)   Location of existing structures and natural features;
      (4)   Areas affected by the proposed development with slopes in excess of
10%;
      (5)   Location of existing utilities and facilities, or proposed
locations (sewer, water, fire hydrants, electricity, septic system, storm water
facilities and the like);
      (6)   Proposed landscaping;
      (7)   Exterior lighting;
      (8)   Proposed circulation plan for vehicles, pedestrians and bicyclists,
including existing and proposed points of access and sidewalks;
      (9)   Parking lot layout, with circulation plan and striping details;
      (10)   Sign location and details; and
      (11)   Evidence to demonstrate compliance with the review standards in
division (D) above.
   (F)   Application completeness/request for additional information. The
Planning Director or designee shall determine the application to be complete
based on the above submittal requirements within 14 days of the application
submittal. If the application is found to be incomplete or additional
information is needed it may be requested from the applicant. A request for
additional information beyond the standard review criteria cannot be used to
rule an application incomplete.
(Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.611 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose. Site plan review is an administrative development review
intended to review applications described in division (D) below that would
otherwise be allowed outright in the underlying zone.
   (B)   Administrative review. Applications processed under this section are
subject to the administrative review process described in §
156.694.
   (C)   Pre-application review. Prior to filing its application for site plan
review, the applicant may confer with the Planning Director or designee, who
shall identify and explain the relevant review procedures and standards.
   (D)   Applicability. Applications that require administrative review
include:
      (1)   Applications for uses that are identified in §§
156.035 through
156.583 as requiring site plan review;
      (2)   Applications anticipated to generate 400 passenger car equivalent
trips per day, which require a traffic impact analysis (TIA), unless an
approved development and/or mitigation agreement pursuant to O.R.S. 94.504
executed by the Board of Commissioners that addresses traffic impacts from the
proposed development is provided;
      (3)   Applications that require water service other than an exempt onsite
well (not exceeding 15,000 gallons per day) or an existing water right;
      (4)   Applications that require a DEQ permit for the proposed sewer and/
or wastewater systems (design capacity greater than 2,500 gallons per day);
      (5)   Applications for development outside of a city urban growth
boundary that rely on a municipal sewer source and/or require the offsite
extension of sewer facilities for connection, except where a Goal 11 exception
has been granted allowing the proposed extension of sewer for a non-residential
use;
      (6)   Applications for development within the Airport Safety and
Compatibility Overlay Zone (ASC);
      (7)   Applications for development within the Significant Resource
Overlay Zone (SRO); and
      (8)   Applications that include a variance request.
   (E)   Review criteria. Applications processed under this section shall
comply with the following criteria, as applicable:
      (1)   The standards listed in §
156.610(D) are, or can be, met;
      (2)   Water is or will be available to the site at a quantity and quality
adequate for the proposed use. New developments must either provide an
estimated annual water usage, and identify the necessary OWRD authorizations
required to serve the estimated water need or submit a letter, notice or
memorandum of understanding from the service provider evidencing a commitment
to serve the site, which shall indicate the source of the water (e.g., surface
water, existing water right and the like) and a targeted delivery for water to
the site;
      (4)   Adequate sewage disposal and wastewater management can be provided
for the proposed use as determined by the service provider or by demonstrating
compliance with applicable review authority standards, as set forth below. For
new developments that will rely on third-party service providers for sewer and/
or wastewater disposal, the applicant may satisfy this criterion by submitting
a letter, notice or memorandum of understanding from the service provider
evidencing a commitment to serve the site. For new developments that will rely
on on-site septic and/or industrial wastewater and/or non-contact cooling water
disposal and/or treatment, the applicant may satisfy this criterion by
identifying the necessary ODEQ permits, as required by the state regulations,
to be obtained prior to commencement of the proposed use or certificate of
occupancy being granted;
      (4)   Applicant’s proposed plans for electrical services and solid waste
disposal are adequate for the proposed use, as demonstrated by complying with
applicable submittal requirements in division (F) below;
      (5)   Development in hazard areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan,
Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan or Community Wildfire Protection Plan shall
comply with all applicable requirements;
      (6)   Development shall comply with §§
156.565 through
156.569 and
156.580 through
156.583 protecting inventoried significant natural and historic resources, if
applicable;
      (7)   Development in floodplains shall comply with §§
156.475 through
156.481;
      (8)   Development in the Airport Safety and Compatibility Overlay Zone
(ASC) is compliant with the standards and notice requirements identified in §
156.455 through 155.463; and
      (9)   The transportation system provides for the safe, orderly and
efficient circulation of traffic into and out of the proposed development, and
negative impacts to the transportation system are mitigated adequately to
achieve consistency with adopted county standards. County transportation
facilities shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with the
design and access standards in the Transportation System Plan. This review
criterion is satisfied if the applicant has entered into a development and/or
mitigation agreement(s) pursuant to O.R.S. 94.504, executed by the Board of
Commissioners, under which applicant has agreed to provide mitigation
proportional and reasonably related to the traffic impacts caused by the
proposed development or pay a fee-in-lieu of mitigation, equal to the estimated
cost of designing and constructing the identified mitigation.
   (F)   Submittal requirements. In addition to the applicable submittal
requirements identified in §
156.610, applications requiring site plan review must include the following, as
applicable:
      (1)   Project information including name of project, company and/or
property owner;
      (2)   A trip generation estimate identifying the number of anticipated
passenger car equivalent trips per day expected to access the site during
construction and during regular operations;
      (3)   Proposed road improvement plans and/or road use agreement, as
applicable;
      (4)   Electric, water, septic and industrial wastewater services plans,
including a description of any existing services and the applicant’s proposal
for provision of such utility services to the site;
      (5)   To demonstrate that electric, water and sanitary sewer/wastewater
services are available or can be made available at the site, either evidence
that facilities with adequate capacity are permitted, or can be permitted, to
serve the proposed development, or a will serve letter from the providing
utility demonstrating that service is available or can be made available to
serve the proposed development;
      (6)   Parking plans during construction and permanent parking plan with
layout; and
      (7)   A traffic impact analysis consistent with the requirements of §
156.495 if traffic impacts are anticipated to exceed the thresholds identified
in §
156.595, unless an approved development and/or mitigation agreement executed by
the Board of Commissioners that addresses traffic impacts from the proposed
development is provided.
   (G)   Conditions of approval.
      (1)   Site plan review approval may include clear and objective
conditions of approval necessary (precedent or subsequent to zoning permit
approval) to ensure compliance with the applicable review criteria. All
subsequent conditions of approval, including construction of improvements (if
any) shall be met prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
      (2)   The Planning Director may require an applicant to provide traffic
mitigation (or a fee-in-lieu of mitigation) as identified in or supported by
the traffic impacts analysis and/or Transportation System Plan. Mitigation
shall only be required to address level-of-service failures or safety concerns
and must be proportionate to the anticipated traffic impact from the proposed
development being reviewed. Traffic mitigation may include improvements to on-
or off-site circulation, public street dedication and improvement, private
street improvements, intersection improvements, signal or other traffic
management improvements, street crossing improvements, and transit improvement
plans.
   (H)   Minimum standards for roadway design plans submitted for county
review. Any transportation facility or transportation improvement to be
constructed as part of a private development and subsequently dedicated to the
county or the public must first receive design approval by the Public Works
Department, based on applicable design criteria. Design approval may also
include all other pertinent issues related to roadway construction and
operations, including, but not limited to, drainage, maintenance,
serviceability and pavement design. Street design plans submitted for county
approval shall be stamped by a registered professional engineer with
appropriate experience.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/35e8b7a669b5acb892f245aebd6615cd59ce190b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1646.png]
 
(O rd. M C- C- 2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-
2-2012, passed 2-22-2012; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2016-5,
passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-6, passed 10-25-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed
3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD- 2025-01, passed 1-8-
2025)
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 156.620 AUTHORIZATION TO GRANT OR DENY CONDITIONAL USES.
   A conditional use listed in this chapter shall be permitted, altered or
denied in accordance with the standards and procedures of this chapter and this
subchapter by action of the Planning Commission or §§
156.690 through
156.700 unless exempted by §
156.621. In the case of a use existing prior to the effective date of this
chapter and classified in this chapter as a conditional use, a change in use or
in lot area or an alteration of structure shall conform with the requirements
for a conditional use.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2010, passed 1-20-2010; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4,
passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03, passed 4-3-2024; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.621 REQUIREMENTS UNDER A STATE ENERGY FACILITY SITE CERTIFICATE.
   If a holder of a site certificate issued by the State Energy Facility Siting
Council requests a conditional use permit for an energy facility as outlined
under O.R.S. 469.401(3) and pays the requisite fee, the Planning Director shall
issue such conditional use permit. The conditional use permit shall incorporate
only the standards and conditions in the county’s land use and other ordinances
as contained in the site certificate. Issuance of the conditional use permit
shall be done promptly, not taking more than four weeks once it has been
determined that a valid site certificate has been issued, the applicant has
submitted a complete application and the fee has been received.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2010, passed 1-20-2010; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4,
passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.622 GENERAL CRITERIA.
   In judging whether or not a conditional use proposal shall be approved or
denied, the Commission shall weigh the proposal’s appropriateness and
desirability, or the public convenience or necessity to be served against any
adverse conditions that would result from authorizing the particular
development at the location proposed and, to approve such use, shall find that
the following criteria are either met or can be met by observance of
conditions.
   (A)   The proposal will be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the
objectives of the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable policies and
regulations of the county.
   (B)   If located within the urban growth boundary of a city, that said city
has had an opportunity to review and comment on the subject proposal.
   (C)   The proposal will not exceed carrying capacities of natural resources
or public facilities.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2010, passed 1-20-2010; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4,
passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.623 RESOURCE ZONE STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   In the Exclusive Farm Use Zone, a conditional use may be approved only
when the county finds that the use will not:
      (1)   Force a significant change in accepted farm or forest practices on
surrounding lands devoted to farm or forest use; or
      (2)   Significantly increase the cost of accepted farm or forest
practices on surrounding lands devoted to farm or forest use.
   (B)   In the Forest Use Zone, a conditional use may be approved only when
requirements that are designed to make the use compatible with forest
operations and agriculture and to conserve values found on forest lands are
met. A conditional use may be approved only when the county finds that the use
will not:
      (1)   Force a significant change in, or significantly increase the cost
of, accepted farming or forest practices on agriculture or forest lands;
      (2)   Significantly increase fire hazard or significantly increase fire
suppression costs or significantly increase risks to fire suppression
personnel; and
      (3)   A written statement recorded with the deed or written contract with
the county is obtained from the landowner that recognizes the rights of
adjacent and nearby landowners to conduct forest operations consistent with the
Forest Practices Act, being O.R.S. 527.610 et seq. and rules.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2010, passed 1-20-2010; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4,
passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.624 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   In addition to the standards and conditions set forth in a specific zone,
this subchapter and other applicable regulations; in permitting a new
conditional use or the alteration of an existing conditional use, the
Commission may impose conditions which it finds necessary to avoid a
detrimental impact and to otherwise protect the best interests of the
surrounding area or the county as a whole. These conditions may include the
following:
   (A)   Limiting the manner in which the use is conducted, including
restricting the time an activity may take place and restraints to minimize such
environmental effects as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare and odor;
   (B)   Establishing a special yard or other open space or lot area or
dimension;
   (C)   Limiting the height, size or location of a building or other
structure;
   (D)   Designating the size, number, location and nature of vehicle access
points:
      (1)   Where access to a county road is needed, a permit from the County
Public Works Department is required. Where access to a state highway is needed,
a permit from ODOT is required; and
      (2)   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in this
section, a traffic impact analysis (TIA) will be required for all projects
generating more than 400 passenger car equivalent trips per day. A TIA will
include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the project;
identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more peak hour
passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment, impacts of the
project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a state highway, use
ODOT standards.
   (E)   Increasing the amount of street dedication, roadway width or
improvements within the street right-of-way. It is the responsibility of the
landowner to provide appropriate access for emergency vehicles at the time of
development;
   (F)   Designating the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing or
other improvement of a parking area or loading area;
   (G)   Limiting or otherwise designating the number, size, location, height
and lighting of signs;
   (H)   Limiting the location and intensity of outdoor lighting and requiring
its shielding;
   (I)   Requiring diking, screening, landscaping or another facility to
protect adjacent or nearby property and designating standards for its
installation and maintenance;
   (J)   Designating the size, height, location and materials for a fence;
   (K)   Protecting and preserving existing trees, vegetation, water resources,
wildlife habitat or other significant natural resources; and
   (L)   Other conditions necessary to permit the development of the county in
conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter and the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01,
passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-2010, passed 1-20-2010; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-
4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021;
Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.625 PERMIT AND IMPROVEMENTS ASSURANCE.
   The Commission may require an applicant to furnish the county with a
performance bond or such other form of assurance that the Commission deems
necessary to guarantee development in accordance with the standards established
and the conditions attached in granting a conditional use permit.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2010, passed 1-20-2010; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4,
passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.626 STANDARDS GOVERNING CONDITIONAL USES.
   A conditional use shall comply with the standards of the zone in which it is
located and with the standards set forth in this section.
   (A)   Airports, aircraft landing fields, aircraft charter, rental, service
and maintenance facilities not located in an Aircraft Approach Zone. The
Planning Commission shall find that the location and site design of the
proposed facility will not be hazardous to the safety and general welfare of
surrounding properties, nor that the location will unnecessarily restrict
existing and future development of surrounding lands as designated by the
Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Automobile wrecking yard or junk yard. In considering a conditional
use application for an automobile wrecking yard or junk yard, the Commission
shall require that it be enclosed and screened from public view by a sight-
obscuring fence not less than six feet in height. If applicable, the Commission
shall be assured that the proposal is in conformance with applicable state
regulations.
   (C)   Cemeteries. The Commission shall require evidence and shall find that
the terrain and soil types of a proposed location are suitable for interment,
and that the nature of the subsoil and drainage will not have a detrimental
effect on groundwater sources or domestic water supplies in the area of the
proposed use.
   (D)   Church, hospital, nursing home, convalescent home, retirement home.
      (1)   Such uses may be authorized as a conditional use only after
consideration of the following factors:
         (a)   Sufficient area provided for the building, required yards and
off-street parking (related structures and uses such as a manse, parochial
school or parish house are considered separate principal uses and additional
lot areas shall be required therefore);
         (b)   Location of the site relative to the service area;
         (c)   Probable growth and needs therefor;
         (d)   Site location relative to land uses in the vicinity; and
         (e)   Adequacy of access to and from principal streets together with
the probable effects on the traffic volumes of abutting and nearby streets.
      (2)   Such uses or related buildings shall be at least 30 feet from a
side or rear lot line.
      (3)   Such uses may be built to exceed the height limitations of the zone
in which it is located to a maximum height of 50 feet if the total floor area
of the building does not exceed the area of the site and if the yard dimensions
in each case are equal to at least two-thirds of the height of the principal
structure.
   (E)   Clinics, clubs, lodges, fraternal organizations, community centers and
grange halls, golf courses, grounds and buildings for games or sports, country
clubs, swimming, boating, tennis clubs and similar activities, governmental
structures and land uses, parks, playgrounds. In considering the above, the
Planning Commission may authorize the conditional use after assurance that the
following are to be provided:
      (1)   Adequate access from principal streets;
      (2)   Adequate off-street parking; and
      (3)   Adequate building and site design provisions to minimize noise and
glare from the building and site.
   (F)   Dog pounds and kennels. The Planning Commission may authorize a dog
pound or kennel as a conditional use provided that building and site design
provisions are adequate to minimize noise and odor. When necessary to protect
surrounding properties, the Planning Commission may require a sight-obscuring
fence or hedge and may restrict vehicular access and loading facilities,
especially those required by trucks transporting large animals.
   (G)   Home occupations. Home occupations, when permitted as a conditional
use and conducted as an accessory use, shall be subject to the following
limitations:
      (1)   The home occupation is to be secondary to the main use of the
property as a residence and shall be conducted within the same dwelling or in
an accessory building on the same property;
      (2)   No structural alterations shall be allowed to accommodate the home
occupation except when otherwise required by law, and then only after the plans
for such alteration have been reviewed and approved. Such structural
alterations shall not detract from the outward appearance of the building as an
accessory structure to a residence;
      (3)   One non-illuminated sign not to exceed 200 square inches and
bearing only the name and occupation of the resident shall be permitted.
Applicant must show consistency with applicable sign provisions in §§
156.595 through
156.604;
      (4)   No materials or mechanical equipment shall be used which will be
detrimental to the residential use of the property or adjoining residences
because of vibration, noise, dust, smoke, odor, interferences with radio or
television reception or other factors;
      (5)   No materials or commodities shall be delivered to or from the
property which are of such bulk or quantity as to require delivery by a
commercial vehicle or a trailer or the parking of customer’s vehicles in a
manner or frequency as to cause disturbance or inconvenience to nearby
residents or so as to necessitate off-street parking;
      (6)   Retail sales shall be limited or accessory to a service;
      (7)   Be operated by a resident or employee of a resident of the property
on which the business is located;
      (8)   The permit allowing a home occupation shall be reviewed every 12
months following the date the permit was issued and may continue the permit if
the home occupation continues to comply with the requirements of this section;
      (9)   Employ on the site no more than five full-time or part-time
persons;
      (10)   Not unreasonably interfere with other uses permitted in the Zone
in which the property is located; and
      (11)   When a bed and breakfast facility is sited as a home occupation on
the same tract as a winery established pursuant to §§
156.035 through
156.050 and is operated in association with the winery:
         (a)   The bed and breakfast facility may prepare and serve two meals
per day to the registered guests of the bed and breakfast facility; and
         (b)   The meals may be served at the bed and breakfast facility or at
the winery.
   (H)   Landfill, solid waste disposal site. The Planning Commission may
authorize a landfill or other solid waste disposal site as a conditional use,
subject to the following standards.
      (1)   The facility shall be designed to minimize conflicts with existing
and permitted uses allowed under plan designations for adjacent parcels as
outlined in policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   The facility must be of a size and design to minimize noise or
other detrimental effects when located adjacent to farm, forest and grazing
dwellings or a Residential Zone.
      (3)   The facility shall be fenced when the site is located adjacent to
dwelling(s) or a Residential Zone, and landscaping, buffering and/or screening
shall be provided.
      (4)   If located in a forested area, the county shall condition approval
to ensure that minimum fire safety measures will be taken, including, but not
limited to, requiring that the area surrounding the facility is kept free from
litter and debris.
      (5)   Access roads or easements for the facility shall be improved to the
county’s Transportation System Plan standards and comply with grades
recommended by the Public Works Director.
      (6)   The county may limit hours of operation for the facility to be
compatible with adjacent uses.
      (7)   Comply with other conditions deemed necessary.
   (I)   Mining or other extraction activity. The following uses shall be
permitted subject to the review standards of this chapter: mining more than
1,000 cubic yards of material or excavation preparatory to mining of a surface
area of more than one acre on land zoned for farm use (EFU and RRI) and 5,000
cubic yards in other zones (i.e., PI, M-G, SAI and FU) of material, stockpiling
and processing of mineral and aggregate materials. Temporary use of offices,
shops or other accessory structures used for the management and maintenance of
mining and processing equipment; sale of mining products extracted and
processed on-site; storage of transportation equipment or storage of machinery
or equipment used in conjunction with on-site mining or processing; other
activities, including buildings and structures necessary and accessory to
development or reclamation of a mineral or aggregate resource should be part of
the overall conditional permit application.
      (1)   General permitting provisions.
         (a)   New permit. For an application for mining to be complete, an
applicant must provide a map and other documentation to show the permit area
boundary, property lines and other pertinent information that will address the
requirements of the approval criteria.
         (b)   Continuation. When a mine has been lawfully permitted in the
county, and the owner or operator was issued and continuously renewed a state
permit, the permit will remain valid as long as the operation still conforms to
the conditions of the local and state permits. After a period of inactivity of
12 years, and the owner or operator wishes to renew mine activity, a zoning
permit re-validation letter (along with the usual zoning permit fee) must be
submitted to the Planning Department in order to review the conditions of
approval. Approval of this type of request is not a land use decision and shall
be an administrative action by the Planning Director without a public hearing
but shall be subject to an at least 14-day notice to affected landowners.
         (c)   Alteration. Requests for permit alteration shall be made when
the operator or owner proposes changes to the mining activity that no longer
conform to the requirements of the original permit. For alterations if the
decision does not involve an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan, it shall be
an administrative decision by the Planning Director without a public hearing
but shall be subject to an at least 14-day public notice period to provide an
opportunity for any person adversely affected, or who is entitled to notice, to
file an appeal.
         (d)   Emergency permits. In concurrence with a DOGAMI emergency
operating permit, the Planning Director may issue an emergency aggregate mining
approval in response to a natural disaster with the intent to abate the
imminent threat. The permit will be valid for the duration of the concurrent
DOGAMI permit. If after termination of the emergency operating permit the
operator wishes to continue the mining operation, the operator shall follow the
procedures for an aggregate mine approval as required in the use zone the
mining operation is located in.
      (2)   Local permit approval criteria. An application for mineral or
aggregate mining must address provisions found in §§
156.622 and
156.623 and the following:
         (a)   Proposed hours and/or days of operation: The conditions as to
when the mining and processing would be restricted to specific hours of
operation or days when mining operations would be limited. For operations
conducted after dark, limiting the location and intensity of outdoor lighting
and requiring its shielding;
         (b)   Limiting or otherwise designating the number, size, location,
height and lighting of signs: Signs other than safety signs must comply with
the sign requirements in §
156.602;
         (c)   A rock crusher, washer or sorter shall not be located within 500
feet from a residential or commercial use unless it can be established that the
use will meet DEQ performance standards for noise and not be expected to cause
a noise nuisance at nearby residential or commercial uses. In Farm or Forest
Use Zones, the processing of rock, aggregate or minerals shall not be within
one-half mile of a noise sensitive area if the operation operates more than
nine hours per day or for more than five days per week;
         (d)   All water necessary for the proposed operation shall be
appropriated and legally available to the site;
         (e)   The discharge of airborne contaminants and dust created by
mining shall comply with applicable DEQ ambient air quality and emissions
standards, or approval shall be conditioned to ensure that such standards will
not be violated;
         (f)   A Reclamation Plan approved by DOGAMI will be required for
mining operations. When reviewing an applicant’s submittal regarding a proposed
Reclamation Plan, the county will review the plan against the following
criteria:
            1.   A description of the present land use and planned beneficial
use of the site following the mining activity. The applicant must demonstrate
that the planned beneficial use is compatible with
Chapter 154 and this chapter;
            2.   Provisions for the backfilling, re-contouring, topsoil
replacement, seed bed preparation, mulching, fertilizing, selection of plant
species, seeding or planting rates and schedules;
            3.   Provisions for adequate setbacks and slopes to protect
adjacent property and public safety; and
            4.   A proposed time schedule for surface mining and reclamation
procedures for the removal or disposal or all equipment, refuse, structures and
foundations from the permit area except permanent structures that are part of
an approved Reclamation Plan.
         (g)   In accordance with the Transportation System Plan, the
requirements of the Public Works Department or the State Department of
Transportation shall be complied with regarding the minimization of potential
conflicts to local roads used for access and egress to the mining site;
         (h)   Designating the size, number, location and nature of vehicle
access points:
            1.   Where access to a county road is needed, a permit from the
County Public Works Department is required. Where access to a state highway is
needed, a permit from ODOT is required; and
            2.   In addition to the other standards and conditions set forth in
this section, a traffic impact analysis (TIA) will be required for all projects
generating more than 400 passenger car equivalent trips per day. A TIA will
include: trips generated by the project; trip distribution for the project;
identification of intersections for which the project adds 30 or more peak hour
passenger car equivalent trips; and level of service assessment, impacts of the
project and mitigation of the impacts. If the corridor is a state highway, use
ODOT standards.
         (i)   Increasing the amount of street dedication, roadway width or
improvements within the street right-of-way: It is the responsibility of the
landowner to provide appropriate access for emergency vehicles at the time of
development;
         (j)   An application for a mining operation contiguous to an existing
operation approved under this section shall be evaluated in conjunction with
the existing site when it appears the sites will be managed and operated as
one;
         (k)   Ensuring adequate space for parking and loading;
         (l)   Approvals for or that include operations that batch and blend
mineral and aggregate into asphalt cement may not be authorized within two
miles of a planted vineyard (one or more vineyards totaling 40 acres or more
that are planted as of the date the application for batching and blending is
filed); and
         (m)   A plan for the control of noxious weeds.
   (J)   Commercial use or accessory use not wholly enclosed within a building
or a retail establishment, office, service commercial establishment, financial
institution or personal or business service establishment on a lot in a
Residential Zone. In any zone, permitting a commercial use or accessory use not
wholly enclosed within a building or a retail establishment, office, service
commercial establishment, financial institution or personal or business service
establishment on a lot abutting or across the street from a lot in a
Residential Zone may be permitted as a conditional use subject to the following
standards.
      (1)   A sight-obscuring fence or evergreen hedge may be required by the
Planning Commission when, in its judgment, such a fence or hedge or combination
thereof is necessary to preserve the values of nearby properties or to protect
the aesthetic character of the neighborhood or vicinity.
      (2)   In addition to the requirements of the applicable zone, the
Planning Commission may further regulate the placement and design of signs and
lights in order to preserve the values of nearby properties; to protect them
from glare, noise or other distractions; or to protect the aesthetic character
of the neighborhood or vicinity.
      (3)   In order to avoid unnecessary traffic congestion and hazards, the
Planning Commission may limit access to the property.
   (K)   Commercial amusement establishment. A commercial amusement
establishment may be authorized after consideration of the following factors:
      (1)   Adequacy of access from principal streets together with the
probable effect of traffic volumes of abutting and nearby streets;
      (2)   Adequacy of off-street parking; and
      (3)   Adequacy of building and site design provisions to maintain a
reasonable minimum of noise and glare from the building and site.
   (L)   Mobile home park. A mobile home park shall be built to state standards
in effect at the time of construction, the following provisions and any
additional conditions set forth in the Commission’s approval prior to
occupancy.
      (1)   Evidence shall be provided that the park will be eligible for a
certificate of sanitation as required by state law.
      (2)   The space provided for each mobile home shall be provided with
piped potable water and electrical and sewerage connections and shall not be
less than 30 feet in width nor less than 40 feet in length.
      (3)   The number of spaces for mobile homes shall not exceed 12 for each
acre of the total area in the mobile home park, except that the Commission may
vary this density as follows.
         (a)   If dedicated open space equals 50% or more of the total area of
the park, a maximum 10% increase in units per acre may be granted.
         (b)   If, in addition to division (L)(3)(a) above, a maintained
playground area with approved equipment, such as goal posts, swings, slides and
the like, is provided, the maximum increase in units per acre may be increased
an additional 5%.
         (c)   If, in addition to divisions (L)(3)(a) and (L)(3)(b) above, an
approved recreation/community building is provided, an additional 10% increase
of units/acre may be allowed (maximum total increase possible: 25%).
      (4)   A mobile home shall occupy not more than 40% of the contiguous
space provided for the exclusive use of the occupants of the mobile homes and
exclusive of space provided for the common use of tenants, such as roadways,
general use structures, parking spaces, walkways and areas for recreation and
landscaping.
      (5)   No mobile home in the park shall be located closer than 15 feet
from another mobile home or from a general use building in the park. No mobile
home accessory building or other building or structure on a mobile home space
shall be closer than ten feet from a mobile home accessory building or other
building or structure on another mobile home space. No mobile home or other
building or structure shall be within 25 feet of a public street property
boundary or ten feet of another property boundary.
      (6)   A mobile home permitted in the park shall meet the following
standards as determined by an inspection by the Building Official.
         (a)   It shall have a state insignia indicating compliance with the
state home construction standards in effect at the time of manufacture and
including compliance for reconstruction or equipment installation made after
manufacture.
         (b)   Notwithstanding deterioration which may have occurred due to
misuse, neglect, accident or other cause, the mobile home shall meet the state
standards for mobile home construction evidenced by the insignia.
         (c)   It shall contain not less than 225 square feet of space as
determined by measurement of the exterior of the unit exclusive of any trailer
hitch device.
         (d)   It shall contain a water closet, lavatory, shower or tub and a
sink in a kitchen or other food preparation space.
      (7)   A mobile home permitted in the park shall be provided with a
continuous skirting, and if a single-wide unit, shall be tied down with devices
that meet state standards for tie down devices.
      (8)   There shall be no outdoor storage of furniture, tools, equipment,
building materials or supplies belonging to the occupants or management of the
park.
      (9)   The land which is used for park purposes shall be surrounded,
except at entry and exit places, by a sight-obscuring fence or hedge not less
than six feet in height. The fence or hedge shall be maintained in a neat
appearance.
      (10)   If the park provides spaces for 50 or more mobile home units, each
vehicular way in the park shall be named and marked with signs which are
similar in appearance to those used to identify public streets. A map of the
named vehicular ways shall be provided to the appropriate Fire Department.
      (11)   If a mobile home space or permanent structure in a park within the
urban growth boundary of a city is more than 500 feet from a public fire
hydrant, the park shall have water supply mains designed to serve fire hydrants
and hydrants shall be provided within 500 feet of such space or structure. Each
hydrant within the park shall be located on a vehicular way and shall conform
in design and capacity to the public hydrants in the affected city.
      (12)   Open space:
         (a)   A minimum of at least 2,500 square feet plus 100 square feet per
mobile home space shall be provided for a recreational play area group or
community activities (no play area is required if the individual mobile home
spaces contain in excess of 4,000 square feet). The Planning Commission may
require this area to be protected from streets, parking areas or the like, by a
fence or the equivalent, that conforms to fence regulations, but at least 30
inches in height where allowed by fence ordinances. Unless otherwise approved,
no required open space area shall contain less than 2,500 square feet.
Recreation areas shall be improved with grass, plantings, surfacing or
buildings suitable for recreational use.
         (b)   No recreation facility created within a mobile home park wholly
to satisfy the requirements of this section shall be open to, or offered in
itself to, the general public.
      (13)   Parking space requirement: A parking space shall be provided for
each mobile home space on the site. In addition, guest parking spaces shall
also be provided in every mobile home park within 200 feet of the mobile home
spaces and at a ratio of one parking space for each two mobile home spaces.
Parking spaces shall have durable and dustless surfaces adequately maintained
for all-weather use and shall be properly drained.
      (14)   All mobile home parks over ten acres in size shall be located so
as to have access on a street designated as a collector street.
      (15)   All trailer parks containing a total site area of 20 acres or more
shall provide a secondary access to the trailer park. Such secondary access
shall enter the public street system at least 150 feet from the primary access.
      (16)   Lighting shall be installed along the access ways of the trailer
park and the recreation area with lights of 100 watts or better not over 100
feet apart. Wire for service to light poles and trailer spaces shall be
underground.
      (17)   Roadways within the park shall be improved with an all-weather
dustless surface and shall not be less than 30 feet in width if parking is
permitted on the margin of the roadway, or less than 20 feet in width if
parking is not permitted on the edge of the roadway and an adequate designated
area is provided and improved for guest parking and tenant recreational
vehicles (such area shall be designed and improved to provide not less than one
parking space per each two spaces in the park).
      (18)   No mobile home park shall be created on a site less than one acre.
   (M)   Multi-family dwelling complex. A multi-family dwelling complex shall
comply with the following provisions, and any additional conditions set forth
in the Commission’s approval, and shall be constructed pursuant thereto prior
to occupancy.
      (1)   The number of units permitted by the applicable zone per gross
square footage of a site may be increased as follows.
         (a)   If dedicated open space which is developed and landscaped equals
50% or more of the total area of the site, a maximum 10% increase in the number
of units may be granted.
         (b)   If in addition to division (M)(1)(a) above, a maintained
playground area with approved equipment, such as goal posts, swings, slides and
the like, is provided, the number of units permitted may be increased 5%.
         (c)   If in addition to divisions (M)(1)(a) and (M)(1)(b) above, an
approved recreational community building is provided, an additional 10%
increase of units may be granted (the maximum total increase possible is 25%).
      (2)   There shall be no outdoor storage of furniture, tools, equipment,
building materials or supplies belonging to the occupants or management of the
complex.
      (3)   If such a complex or any unit thereof is more than 500 feet from a
public fire hydrant, such shall be provided at appropriate locations on a
vehicular way and shall conform in design and capacity to the public hydrants
in the affected way.
      (4)   A minimum of at least 2,500 square feet plus 100 square feet per
dwelling unit shall be provided for a recreational play area, group or
community activities. Such area shall be improved with grass, plantings,
surfacing, equipment or buildings suitable for recreational use. The Commission
may require this area to be protected from streets, parking areas or the like,
by a fence or the equivalent. No play area is required if more than 70% of the
area is preserved as open space and is sufficiently developed and landscaped,
or the development is to be occupied solely by the elderly.
      (5)   All such complexes with more than 20 dwelling units shall be
located so as to have access on a street designated as a collector unless
otherwise approved by the Commission.
      (6)   All such complexes shall provide both an ingress and egress.
      (7)   All roadways and parking areas shall be paved, and roadways shall
not be less than 20 feet in width, except as approved by the Commission.
      (8)   A sight-obscuring fence or evergreen hedge may be required by the
Commission when, in its judgment, such screening is necessary to preserve the
values of nearby properties, protect the aesthetic character of the
neighborhood or vicinity and to provide security for occupants of the subject
complex.
      (9)   All accessory structures associated with such a complex shall be
set back 50 feet from the property line of an abutting single-family
residential lot or use.
   (N)   Recreational vehicle park (RV park). A recreational vehicle park shall
be built to State Building Code and public health standards in effect at the
time of construction, with the following provisions and any additional
conditions set forth in the Commission’s approval prior to occupancy. RV parks
constructed or operated on resource land to address temporary workforce housing
needs shall conform with state administrative rules.
      (1)   Roadways shall be not less than 30 feet in width if parking is
permitted on the margin of the roadway, or less than 20 feet in width if
parking is not permitted on the edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Roadways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or similar
impervious surface and designed to permit easy access to each RV space.
      (3)   Trash receptacles for the disposal of solid waste materials shall
be provided at a rate of one 30-gallon container for each four RV spaces and be
located within 300 feet of each RV space.
      (4)   Recreational vehicles may be permitted to stay in RV parks
indefinitely; provided, that the following conditions are met.
         (a)   It is lawfully connected to water and electrical supply systems
and a sewage disposal system.
         (b)   Winterizing and skirting shall be required.
         (c)   There shall be no outdoor storage.
         (d)   Occupancy of each RV shall not exceed the number of persons for
which the RV was designed and manufactured.
         (e)   A copy of the park rules shall be submitted by the park owner
and kept on file in the Planning Department.
      (5)   The total number of parking spaces in the park, exclusive of
parking provided for the exclusive use of the manager or employees of the park
shall be equal to one space per RV space. Parking spaces shall be covered with
crushed gravel or paved with asphalt, concrete or similar material.
   (O)   Radio, television tower, utility station or substation.
      (1)   In a Residential Zone, all equipment storage on the site may be
required to be within an enclosed building.
      (2)   The use may be required to be fenced and provided with landscaping.
      (3)   The minimum lot size for a public utility facility may be waived on
finding that the waiver will not result in noise or other detrimental effects
to adjacent property.
      (4)   Transmission towers, hoses, overhead wires, plumbing stations and
similar gear shall be so located, designed and installed as to minimize their
conflict with scenic values.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-1-01,
passed 2-21-2001; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-2010, passed 1-
20-2010; Ord. MC-08-2010, passed 11-3-2010; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013;
Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-
2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.627 PROCEDURE FOR TAKING ACTION ON A CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION.
   The procedure for taking action on a conditional use application shall
follow the procedures outlined in §§
156.690 through
156.700 and as further defined below.
   (A)   A property owner may initiate a request for a conditional use by
filing an application with the Planning Department, using forms prescribed
pursuant to §§
156.690 through
156.700. Applications shall be filed with the Planning Department at least 35
days prior to the Planning Commission meeting of submittal thereto.
   (B)   If an application for a conditional use involves property and a use
located within the urban growth boundary of an incorporated city the Joint
Management Agreement in place with that city will govern.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2010, passed 1-20-2010; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4,
passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.628 TIME LIMIT ON A PERMIT FOR A CONDITIONAL USE.
   (A)   On land zoned for farm use or forest use, a conditional use permit is
valid for two years from the date of the final decision. The county may grant
ministerially, where applicable, criteria for the decision have not changed an
extension period of up to 12 months on land zoned for farm use or forest use
if:
      (1)   An applicant makes a written request for an extension of the
development approval period;
      (2)   The request is submitted to the county prior to the expiration of
the approval period;
      (3)   The applicant states reasons that prevented the applicant from
beginning or continuing development within the approval period; and
      (4)   The county determines that the applicant was unable to begin or
continue development during the approval period for reasons for which the
applicant was not responsible.
   (B)   Non-farm dwelling and forest template dwelling permits are valid for
four years and an extension, when requested using the provisions above, is
valid for two years.
   (C)   On land zoned other than farm or forest use, a conditional use is
valid for two years. In the case of appeals, the two-year permit period shall
be tolled until a decision by a review authority with final jurisdiction is
made that is not appealed. Additional one-year extensions may be authorized by
county staff without providing notice and opportunity for a hearing under the
following conditions:
      (1)   An applicant makes a written request for an extension of the
development approval period;
      (2)   The request is submitted to the county prior to the expiration of
the approval period, excepting any request under consideration on the date of
adoption of this amendment; and
      (3)   Provisions of the county code applicable to the original approval
have not changed.
   (D)   Approval of an extension granted under this section is an
administrative decision, is not a land use decision as described in O.R.S.
197.015 and is not subject to appeal as a land use decision.
   (E)   The time periods described above do not take effect until all appeals
are complete.
   (F)   A zoning permit is required prior to building permit approval for all
structures approved through the conditional use permit process. A conditional
use permit is vested when an associated zoning permit has been approved for the
development.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2010, passed 1-20-2010; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4,
passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.629 LENGTH OF PERMITS, PERMIT HOLDER, RENEWAL AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Length of permit and permit holder.
      (1)   The county may evaluate how long a particular conditional use is
expected to remain valid. Some conditional uses may be considered “permanent”
as a fully developed use that “runs with the land” and it attaches to and
benefits the land and is not limited to a particular landowner. The county may
require the owner of the original conditional use permit to record the
permitted use on the deed record. The permit is the responsibility of the
current owner of the property, whether that is the original applicant or a
successor.
      (2)   A conditional use permit may allow a use that would benefit the
permit owner on a sporadic or temporary basis until the purpose for the
conditional use permit no longer exists. Upon termination of the use, the land
must be in a condition that it may be re-developed in compliance with its
current zoning designation. The county may authorize a conditional use permit
until a particular date, for a stated period of time or until the occurrence of
a particular event. Additionally, the county may stipulate that a conditional
use permit will be reviewed or renewable after a stated time period.
   (B)   Reviews and renewals.
      (1)   If a review or renewal date is included as a condition by which a
conditional use permit is granted, initial review would be ministerial and
completed by the Planning Director. The holder of the conditional use permit
will be required to make application and pay the requisite fee for review. The
review would evaluate the permit conditions and adherence to them, determine if
any changes had taken place with the uses allowed in the zone and determine
whether any complaints had been logged concerning the property or the
conditional use. If any concerns arise, further review will take place at a
public hearing with notice. If no concerns arise, the permit will be renewed.
      (2)   For conditional use permits without a review or renewal condition,
or if complaints are received concerning a conditional use permit, the county
may review any valid conditional use permit for compliance with the conditions
of the permit. This review would be a ministerial review done by the Planning
Director. If it is deemed necessary by the Planning Director to amend or revoke
the permit, a public hearing with notice must be held before the Planning
Commission. If action is based on a complaint, the complainant may be required
to pay any permit review or renewal application fees.
   (C)   Revocation or vacation. Any conditional use permit may be vacated by
the current landowner or by the county after appropriate notice and hearing
when:
      (1)   The use has been terminated and there is no expectation by the
landowner and the county that the use will continue;
      (2)   The use is not being conducted in compliance with the stated
conditions of the permit; or
      (3)   The county finds that the use jeopardizes the public health, safety
and welfare of the county and the use does not conform to the County Code
Enforcement Ordinance or other adopted ordinances.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2010, passed 1-20-2010; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4,
passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.630 ZONING PERMIT.
   A zoning permit is required prior to building permit approval for any
conditional use permitted and approved pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. A conditional use permit is vested when an associated zoning permit
has been approved for the development. The intent of the zoning permit
requirement is to ensure compliance with the requirements and conditions of the
approved conditional use permit.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. MC-01-
2010, passed 1-20-2010; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2017-4,
passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-
21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
DIMENSIONAL ADJUSTMENTS; VARIANCES; SPECIAL OR TEMPORARY USE PERMITS;
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 156.645 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subchapter provides standards and procedures for adjustments,
variances and special or temporary use permits, which are modifications to
development standards that are not otherwise permitted elsewhere in the County
Zoning Ordinance or are development standards for certain uses that would be
reviewed outside of a particular use zone’s criteria.
   (B)   (1)   The Planning Director or the Planning Commission, dependent upon
the criteria identified below, may authorize dimensional adjustments or
variances from the requirements of this chapter, or authorize special or
temporary use permits, where it can be shown that owing to special and unusual
circumstances related to a specific lot or desired activity, strict application
of the ordinance would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship.
      (2)   In granting these permits, Planning Director decisions would be
done either under clear and objective standards; or when discretion is applied
by providing notice as required by law. Those decisions identified to be
approved by the Planning Commission, conditions may be attached when the
Planning Commission finds it necessary to protect the best interest of the
surrounding property or vicinity and otherwise achieve the purpose of this
chapter.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.646 INTENT.
   Adjustments and variances are intended to provide relief to code standards
in specific situations. Both procedures are intended to ensure that the
resulting development is compatible with adjacent properties and is consistent
with the intent of the code. Temporary use permits are available to meet needs
that may not be available within the use zone for a certain limited duration to
meet a specific need identified by the landowner or user.
   (A)   Dimensional adjustments. Dimensional adjustments provide relief from
specific code provisions when a code provision has the unintended effect of
preventing reasonable development in conformance with all other code
requirements.
   (B)   Variances. Variances provide greater flexibility to code standards
than dimensional adjustments where special circumstances exist or the physical
characteristics of a site or its surroundings prevent reasonable development in
compliance with a code standard.
   (C)   Temporary use permits. Temporary permits tend to be short term or
seasonal in nature and may be for a special event or an emergent need. They are
generally defined by limited or no adverse impact on the surrounding area.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.647 DIMENSIONAL ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   When appropriate. The following define those instances that a
dimensional adjustment may be appropriate:
      (1)   The literal application of the ordinance would create practical
difficulties resulting in greater private expense than public benefit. An
unnecessary hardship will be found when the site cannot be put to any
beneficial use under the terms of the applicable ordinance;
      (2)   The condition creating the difficulty is not general throughout the
surrounding area but is unique to the applicant’s site; and
      (3)   The condition was not created by the applicant. A self-created
difficulty will be found if the applicant knew or should have known of the
restriction at the time the site was purchased.
   (B)   General exceptions to lot size requirements.
      (1)   (a)   The following lot size exceptions shall only apply to lots
within the Rural Service Center, Rural Residential, Farm Residential and
Suburban Residential Zones.
         (b)   Any parcel of land or portion thereof which is to be dedicated
to a public or semi-public entity for a road, canal, railroad, utility or other
public use shall be exempt from the minimum lot size requirements set forth by
this chapter, excepting that the area available for development must be able to
support the development and necessary infrastructure.
      (2)   (a)   The following lot size exceptions shall only apply to lots
within the Exclusive Farm Use, Small Farm-40 and Forest Use Zones.
         (b)   Whereas land sections in the county are affected by survey
adjustments, minimum requirements relative to lot sizes where applicable shall
be considered as standard metes and bounds land section divisions; i.e., 160,
80, 40, 20 and so forth. Lot sizes therefore, may be reasonably smaller than
set forth by this chapter if a total section acreage reduction is due to a
survey adjustment or other human-made barriers over which the applicant has had
no control. Applicability would be that a 158 acre parcel in the Exclusive Farm
Use Zone would be eligible for a farm dwelling under the acreage test if the
parcel adjustment was created by such a survey adjustment, or road or other
dedicated rights-of-way.
   (C)   General exceptions to yard requirements. The following exceptions to
yard requirements are authorized for a lot in any zone.
      (1)   Average front yard setback. If there are buildings on both abutting
lots which are within 100 feet of the intervening lot, and the buildings have
front yards of less than the required depth for the zone, the depth of the
front yard for the intervening lot need not exceed the average depth of the
front yards of the abutting lots.
      (2)   Non-building features. Steps, terraces, platforms and porches
having no roof covering, and fences not interfering with the vision clearance
requirements (see §§
156.595 through
156.604) may occupy a yard and not impact setback requirements.
      (3)   Signs. Signs conforming to the requirements of this chapter (see §§
56.595 through
156.604) and all other applicable ordinances may be permitted in required
yards.
      (4)   Canopies. A canopy installed as a temporary structure is allowable
within the setback requirement. Should a canopy become a permanent attachment
to the structure, necessary setback requirements will be required.
      (5)   Side and rear yards. A side yard or rear yard may be reduced to
three feet for an accessory structure erected more than 65 feet from a front
lot line; provided, that the structure is detached from other buildings by five
feet or more and does not exceed a height of one story nor an area of 450
square feet.
   (D)   Nonconforming lots of record. Any lot which is smaller than the
minimum area required in any zone may be occupied by an allowed use in the
zone; provided, that:
      (1)   The lot was a lot in a duly platted and recorded subdivision on or
before the date of this chapter, was a parcel created by an approved land
partitioning prior to such date or was held in a single ownership on a deed as
recorded in the office of the County Clerk at the time of the passage of this
chapter;
      (2)   The use conforms to all other requirements of that zone;
      (3)   If there is an area deficiency, residential use shall be limited to
a single dwelling unit; and
      (4)   Approval for sewage disposal is obtained and the approval has
provisions for any needed future replacement.
   (E)   Exception to building height limitations. The following types of
structures or structural parts are not subject to the building height
limitations of this chapter: chimneys; tanks; church spires; belfries; domes;
monuments; fire and hose towers; observation towers; transmission towers;
smokestacks; flagpoles; radio and television towers; masts; cooling towers;
elevator shafts; and other similar projections. This exception does not apply
within the Airport Approach or Hazard Zone.
   (F)   Projections from buildings. Architectural features, such as cornices,
eaves, canopies, sunshades, gutters, chimneys and flues, shall not project more
than three feet into a required yard. Any projection beyond three feet would
require additional setback to meet the setback requirements required within the
subject use zone.
   (G)   Planned unit development. In any Residential Zone, the stated minimum
lot area for residential purposes may be amended by ruling of the Planning
Commission; provided, that it is replaced by a planned unit development with
approval under §§
156.620 through
156.630.
   (H)   Approval criteria. The Planning Director or his or her designee may
grant a dimensional adjustment upon finding that the following criteria are
met. The burden is on the applicant to demonstrate compliance with the
criteria:
      (1)   Approval of the dimensional adjustment does not create a violation
(s) of any other adopted ordinance or code standard;
      (2)   An application for a dimensional adjustment is limited to one lot
or parcel per application;
      (3)   Requests for more than one dimensional adjustment on the same lot
or parcel shall be consolidated on one application and reviewed concurrently by
the county;
      (4)   Not more than three dimensional adjustments may be approved for one
lot or parcel in a continuous 12-month period; and
      (5)   All applicable Building Code requirements and engineering design
standards shall be met.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.648 VARIANCES.
   A variance can serve multiple purposes and is designed to provide relief
from the literal requirements of a regulation found within this chapter. The
result of approving a variance should result in improved planning that would
benefit the applicant and the broader community, and it may be the first step
in reevaluating requirements or allowed uses within a use zone.
   (A)   Minor variance.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, a MINOR VARIANCE is an area or
dimensional variance that meets one of the following conditions:
         (a)   A request involving a deviation from a minimum lot size
requirement of not more than 10%;
         (b)   A request involving a deviation from a yard or setback
requirement of not more than 25%; or
         (c)   A request for the expansion of a nonconforming use by not more
than 10%.
      (2)   A minor variance may be granted when the Planning Director or
designee provides notice to adjoining and affected landowners, offers the
opportunity to provide comment and request a hearing and determines the
following:
         (a)   Granting the minor variance will equally or better meet the
purpose of the regulation to be modified;
         (b)   If in a rural zone, that farm and forest uses or practices will
not be significantly affected; if in a Residential Zone, that the proposal will
not significantly detract from the livability or appearance of the residential
area; or if in a Commercial or Industrial Zone, that the proposal will be
consistent with the desired character of the area;
         (c)   Any identified impacts resulting from the minor variance are
mitigated to the extent practical; and
         (d)   Granting the minor variance is the minimum necessary deviation
from the requirement to satisfy the identified problem.
   (B)   Major variance. The following are examples of variances that could be
considered: siting a manufactured home that is not in compliance with current
manufactured home requirements, allowing for less frontage than required,
allowing for a smaller lot size than required, approve a variance when a
dimensional adjustment does not accomplish the needs of the property owner and
other similar or related instances. Use variances amend or change the use of a
property or structure. Area variances tend to amend or change the area needed
to validate a lot or parcel, or reduce necessary setbacks. Financial hardship
does not qualify for a use or area variance.
   (C)   Approval criteria. The Planning Commission may grant a major variance
upon finding that all of the following criteria are met. The burden is on the
applicant to demonstrate compliance with the criteria:
      (1)   The variance relates to a specific lot or parcel of land;
      (2)   The variance can be granted without substantial detriment to the
public good. It would allow for a building or site plan that is more compatible
with adjacent land and land uses, or it does not create a conflict with
adjacent uses;
      (3)   The variance does not hinder compliance with applicable Building
Code requirements or engineering design standards;
      (4)   Approval of the variance does not create a violation of this
chapter or any other adopted ordinance or code standard;
      (5)   Applicant shall provide evidence from the applicable fire district
that services can be provided in the event of an emergency;
      (6)   Application for a variance should include all necessary variances
anticipated for the proposed development; and
      (7)   Application for a variance is limited to one per year.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.649 MEDICAL HARDSHIP PERMITS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, MEDICAL HARDSHIP means special use of
a manufactured home, recreational vehicle or an existing building necessary for
a relative or other designated caregiver to care for or provide custody for an
elderly, mentally handicapped or infirm person whom a medical professional
certifies needs this kind of care or custody. This certification will be on the
medical professional’s stationery or stamped by the medical professional’s
office and will indicate that the patient is not physically or mentally capable
of maintaining himself or herself in a residence on a separate property and is
dependent on someone being close by for assistance. As an alternative, the
medical professional can stamp and sign the application form available through
the Planning Department for a medical hardship. Financial hardship conditions,
childcare and other convenience arrangements not relating to physical and/or
mental impairment are not considered an infirm condition.
   (B)   The provisions of this section are to apply when the proposed use does
not qualify as a continuation of a nonconforming use, not permitted by right,
nor permitted through the operations of other more pertinent procedures and
provisions of this chapter. Medical hardship permits for dwellings are not to
be construed, permitted nor utilized as a means to abrogate the intent, purpose
or procedures of the county’s Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Ordinance
regulations. A medical hardship permit shall be approved by the Planning
Director or their designee as an administrative decision in accordance with §§
156.690 through
156.700.
   (C)   No medical hardship permit shall be granted that would have the effect
of creating a permanent zone change or result in a hardship when the use is not
permitted to continue at the expiration of the permit period. Further, no
medical hardship permit will be granted which has the effect of conferring a
special privilege for which other property within the same zone would not be
equally eligible.
      (1)   As a medical hardship permit in any zone that allows dwellings, the
Planning Director may allow one manufactured home, recreational vehicle or
temporary use of an existing building complying with the standards of §
156.603, as applicable, and providing that no additions, except approaches or
handicapped ramps, to the temporary residence shall be permitted in conjunction
with a primary dwelling with the following findings:
         (a)   That an accessory dwelling is necessary to care for or provide
custody of an elderly, mentally handicapped or infirm person who a medical
professional certifies needs this kind of care or custody as required in this
division (D)(1);
         (b)   Electric, water and sewer utility connections shall be made to
the temporary residence. If the medical hardship dwelling will not use a public
sanitary sewer system, the dwelling shall use the same subsurface sewage
disposal system used by the existing dwelling if that disposal system is
adequate to accommodate the additional dwelling or as otherwise allowed and
conditioned by the Planning Director; and
         (c)   Within 90 days of the end of the medical hardship, the
manufactured dwelling or recreational vehicle shall be removed or, in the case
of an existing building, the building shall be removed, demolished or returned
to an allowed nonresidential use.
      (2)   As a medical hardship permit in a resource zone, the following are
also applicable:
         (a)   The medical hardship dwelling use will not force a significant
change in accepted farm or forest practices on surrounding lands devoted to
farm or forest use;
         (b)   The medical hardship dwelling use will not significantly
increase the cost of accepted farm or forest practices on lands devoted to farm
or forest use. Department of Environmental Quality review and removal
requirements also apply;
         (c)   The landowner for the hardship dwelling shall sign and record in
the deed records for the county a right-to-farm or a right-to-forest statement
binding the landowner and the landowner’s successors in interest, prohibiting
them from pursuing a claim for relief or cause of action alleging injury from
customary farm or forest practices; and
         (d)   A temporary residence approved under this division (D)(2) is not
eligible for replacement under §§
156.035 through
156.050 or
156.080 through
156.088.
      (3)   A medical hardship permit granted under this section is void when
the elderly, mentally handicapped or infirm existing resident or other person
who is the subject of the permit no longer needs care, moves to another
residence, is absent from the residence for more than 120 days or leaves the
residence with no likelihood of returning for continued residency of at least
30 days. Exception to the 120-day limit can be provided for in the case of
extraordinary circumstances such as extended hospitalization. These extensions
can be approved by the Planning Director for up to an additional 60 days
without Planning Commission approval. Additional extensions will require
Planning Commission review and approval.
      (4)   The County Planning Director or designee shall review permits
issued under this section every two years and may revoke permits when they are
found to be out of compliance. After the initial approval by the Planning
Director any required renewal shall be applied for as a medical hardship
extension. The decision to approve a medical hardship extension shall be an
administrative decision of the Planning Director.
      (5)   Any dwelling authorized by a medical hardship special use permit
must be located as close as possible to the primary dwelling. Unless there are
physical limitations of the land this should be within 100 feet of the primary
dwelling.
      (6)   County zoning and building permits will be required. A rural
address will also be required to facilitate emergency response.
      (7)   A medical hardship special use permit is valid for up to two years
from the date of initial issuance, i.e., permits issued in an odd-numbered year
will expire in the next odd-numbered year. All permits will have an expiration
date of January 31. The county will process all medical hardship permit renewal
requests once per year in January. The county will give permittees not less
than 30 calendar days’ written notice of the pending expiration of their
special use permits, advising that a renewal will be required. Failure to
receive notification of pending expiration does not constitute an extension of
time for the permit. The Planning Director shall not renew the medical hardship
special use permit until the permittee has shown compliance with the conditions
for issuance specified in this section at the time of renewal and the county
has received evidence of the continued validity of the medical hardship.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.650 TEMPORARY USES.
   A temporary use permit may be approved to allow the limited use of
structures or activities which are short-term or seasonal in nature and do not
conflict with the zoning designation in which they are located. No temporary
use permit shall be issued that would have the effect of permanently re-zoning
or granting a special use privilege not shared by other properties in the same
zoning designation. Examples of a temporary use may be special events or an
emergent need. Permanent improvements to the site or structures are not allowed
with a temporary permit. Reasonable conditions may be imposed.
   (A)   Temporary storage of a manufactured home. The Planning Director or his
or her designee can authorize storage of a manufactured or mobile home on an
individual bare lot or parcel for not more than six months. Authorization for
the storage of a manufactured home shall be obtained through application for a
zoning permit and must meet the following conditions:
      (1)   It will not be used for residential or other purposes;
      (2)   There will be no electrical, plumbing or sewer connections to the
stored manufactured or mobile dwelling;
      (3)   All normal setback standards of the zone will be met;
      (4)   The manufactured dwelling will not be located in a floodplain or
other natural hazard area; and
      (5)   Only one manufactured dwelling storage permit may be issued to a
property owner for a specific lot or parcel within any five-year period.
   (B)   Temporary use of a recreational vehicle. The Planning Director or his
or her designee can authorize the following uses of a recreational vehicle,
which are not designed for residential purposes according to standards and
specifications of the Uniform Building Code which has been established to
protect public health, safety and welfare. Recreational vehicles shall not be
used for housing or residential purposes except:
      (1)   When the recreational vehicle is located on an individual lot or
parcel during the construction of a dwelling not to exceed six months with one
extension period not to exceed six months. The zoning authorization for the
approved dwelling must also authorize this temporary use;
      (2)   For temporary housing to accommodate visitors of the primary
residence in a Residential or Farm Use Zone not to exceed 30 days in any 12-
month period. Property owners found in violation of this requirement will be
subject to enforcement action;
      (3)   For seasonal recreational (i.e., summer camping or hunting season)
use by the landowner or lessee in the Forest Use Zone after obtaining a zoning
permit and rural address; or
      (4)   When the recreational vehicle is on a lot or parcel with a
manufactured dwelling or single-family dwelling that is uninhabitable due to
damages from a natural disaster, including wildfires, earthquakes, flooding or
storms, until no later than the date:
         (a)   The dwelling has been repaired or replaced and an occupancy
permit has been issued;
         (b)   The local government makes a determination that the owner of the
dwelling is unreasonably delaying in completing repairs or replacing the
dwelling; or
         (c)   Twenty-four months after the date the dwelling first became
uninhabitable.
   (C)   Temporary uses generally. Temporary uses, other than those outlined
above, can be considered under this provision. To be eligible the temporary use
needs to be for a limited duration not to exceed 12 months, not addressed in
other portions of this chapter, be able to meet the limited or expanded
approval criteria below and not involve the construction or alternation of any
permanent building or structure.
   (D)   Approval criteria.
      (1)   The Planning Director or his or her designee may grant a temporary
use upon finding that the following criteria are met. The burden is on the
applicant to demonstrate compliance with the criteria:
         (a)   The proposed temporary use is not specified in this chapter and
is not so recurrent as to require a specific or general regulation to control
it;
         (b)   The proposed temporary use will not become permanent;
         (c)   Approval of the temporary use does not create a violation(s) of
any other adopted ordinance or code standard;
         (d)   An application for a temporary use is limited to one lot or
parcel per application;
         (e)   Requests for more than one temporary use on the same lot or
parcel shall be consolidated on one application and reviewed concurrently by
the county;
         (f)   Not more than three temporary uses may be approved for one lot
or parcel in a continuous 12-month period;
         (g)   Temporary uses will not exceed 12 months, can be renewed up to
two time, but will not exceed a total of 36 months; and
         (h)   All applicable Building Code requirements and engineering design
standards shall be met.
      (2)   Any temporary use permit shall clearly set forth the purpose for
which the permit is granted and shall clearly indicate the time period for
which the permit is issued. No temporary permit shall be transferable to any
other owner or occupant.
      (3)   Should the proposed temporary use not meet the above standards, or
should the Planning Director determine a public hearing is warranted, the
Planning Commission will further consider the temporary use and the additional
approval criteria below:
         (a)   Reasonable conditions may be imposed by the Planning Commission
to minimize the potential impact of the proposed use to other uses in the
vicinity, such as:
            1.   Special yards and spaces;
            2.   Control of points of vehicular ingress/egress;
            3.   Landscaping and maintenance thereof;
            4.   Control of noise, odors or other nuisances; and
            5.   Limitation of certain activities.
         (b)   All structures and uses for which a temporary use permit is
issued shall meet all other requirements of the zoning district in which they
are located and shall:
            1.   Meet all applicable health and sanitation requirements;
            2.   Meet all applicable Building Code requirements; and
            3.   Be removed upon expiration of the temporary permit.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03, passed
4-3-2024; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.651 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   A use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of this chapter, but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision
or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the Zoning District.
   (B)   Subject to the provisions of this section, a nonconforming use or
structure may be continued, but may not be altered or extended. The extension
of a nonconforming use to a portion of a structure which was arranged or
designed for the nonconforming use at the time of passage of this chapter is
not an enlargement or expansion of a nonconforming use. A nonconforming
structure which conforms with respect to use may be altered or extended if the
alteration or extension does not cause the structure to deviate further from
the standards of this chapter.
   (C)   If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of one year,
further use of the property shall conform to this chapter.
   (D)   If a nonconforming use is replaced by another use, the new use shall
conform to this chapter.
   (E)   If a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming
use is destroyed by any cause to an extent exceeding 80% of its fair market
value as indicated by the records of the County Assessor, and is not returned
to use and in actual operating condition within one year from the date of
destruction, a future structure or use on the site shall conform to this
chapter.
   (F)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the
plans, construction, alteration or designated use of a structure for which a
building permit has been issued by the county and construction has commenced
prior to the adoption of this chapter provided the structure, if nonconforming
or intended for a nonconforming use, is completed and in use within two years
from the time the permit is issued.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.652 PROCEDURE FOR TAKING ACTION ON AN APPLICATION.
   The procedure for taking action on an application shall follow the
procedures outlined in §§
156.690 through
156.700 and as further defined below.
   (A)   (1)   A property owner may initiate a request for a dimensional
adjustment, variance, special use or temporary permit by filing an application
with the Planning Department, using forms prescribed pursuant to this
subchapter and §§
156.690 through
156.700 where applicable.
      (2)   Applications shall be filed with the Planning Department timely,
and at least 35 days prior to a Planning Commission meeting should Planning
Commission action be required.
   (B)   If an application for a use is located within the urban growth
boundary of an incorporated city, the Joint Management Agreement in place with
that city will govern.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.653 TIME LIMIT TO INITIATE A PERMIT.
   (A)   On land zoned for farm use or forest use a permit may be valid for two
years from the date of the final decision. The county may grant ministerially
where applicable criteria for the decision have not changed an extension period
of up to 12 months on land zoned for farm use or forest use if:
      (1)   An applicant makes a written request for an extension of the
development approval period;
      (2)   The request is submitted to the county prior to the expiration of
the approval period; and
      (3)   Provisions of the county code applicable to the original approval
have not changed.
   (B)   On land zoned other than farm or forest use, a permit may be valid for
two years. In the case of appeals, the two-year permit period shall be tolled
until a decision by a review authority with final jurisdiction is made that is
not appealed. Additional one-year extensions may be authorized by county staff
without providing notice and opportunity for a hearing under the following
conditions:
      (1)   An applicant makes a written request for an extension of the
development approval period;
      (2)   The request is submitted to the county prior to the expiration of
the approval period, excepting any request under consideration on the date of
adoption of this amendment; and
      (3)   Provisions of the county code applicable to the original approval
have not changed.
   (C)   Approval of an extension granted under this section is an
administrative decision, is not a land use decision as described in O.R.S.
197.015 and is not subject to appeal as a land use decision.
   (D)   The time periods described above do not take effect until all appeals
are complete.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.654 LENGTH OF PERMITS, PERMIT HOLDER, RENEWAL AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Length of permit and permit holder.
      (1)   The county may evaluate how long a particular permit is expected to
remain valid. Some uses may be considered “permanent” as a fully developed use
that “runs with the land” and it attaches to and benefits the land and is not
limited to a particular landowner. The county may require the owner of the
original permit to record the permitted use on the deed record. The permit is
the responsibility of the current owner of the property, whether that is the
original applicant or a successor.
      (2)   A permit may allow a use that would benefit the permit owner on a
sporadic or temporary basis until the purpose for the permit no longer exists.
Upon termination of the use, the land must be in a condition that it may be re-
developed in compliance with its current zoning designation. The county may
authorize a permit until a particular date, for a stated period of time or
until the occurrence of a particular event. Additionally, the county may
stipulate that a permit will be reviewed or renewable after a stated time
period.
   (B)   Reviews and renewals.
      (1)   If a review or renewal date is included as a condition by which a
permit is granted, initial review would be ministerial and completed by the
Planning Director. The holder of the permit will be required to make
application and pay the requisite fee for review. The review would evaluate the
permit conditions and adherence to them, determine if any changes had taken
place with the uses allowed in the zone and determine whether any complaints
had been logged concerning the property or the conditional use. If any concerns
arise, further review will take place at a public hearing with notice. If no
concerns arise, the permit will be renewed.
      (2)   For permits without a review or renewal condition, or if complaints
are received concerning a permit, the county may review any valid permit for
compliance with the conditions of the permit. This review would be a
ministerial review done by the Planning Director. If it is deemed necessary by
the Planning Director to amend or revoke the permit, a public hearing with
notice must be held before the Planning Commission. If action is based on a
complaint the complainant may be required to pay any permit review or renewal
application fees.
   (C)   Revocation or vacation. Any permit may be vacated by the current
landowner or by the county after appropriate notice and hearing when:
      (1)   The use has been terminated and there is no expectation by the
landowner and the county that the use will continue;
      (2)   The use is not being conducted in compliance with the stated
conditions of the permit; or
      (3)   The county finds that the use jeopardizes the public health, safety
and welfare of the county and the use does not conform to the County Code
Enforcement Ordinance, codified in Chapter 93, or other adopted ordinances.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
§ 156.655 OCCUPANCY PERMIT.
   (A)   The county may require an occupancy permit for any permitted and
approved use pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The county shall
consider such a requirement for any use authorized by a permit for which
conditions have been established upon approval of such use. The requirement of
an occupancy permit shall be for the intent of ensuring permit compliance, and
said permit shall not be issued except as set forth by the county.
   (B)   The authority to issue an occupancy permit upon compliance with the
requirements and conditions of a permit may be delegated by the county at the
time of approval of a specific permit to the Planning Commission, the Planning
Director and/or the Building Official.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2016-5, passed 7-27-2016; Ord. ORD-2017-4, passed 7-5-2017; Ord. ORD-2021-1,
passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed
1-8-2025)
AMENDMENTS
§ 156.670 AUTHORIZATION TO INITIATE AMENDMENTS.
   An amendment to the text of this chapter or to a zoning map may be initiated
by the County Board of Commissioners, the County Planning Commission or by
application of a property owner. The request by a property owner for an
amendment shall be accomplished by filing an application with the Planning
Department using forms prescribed pursuant to §§
156.690 through
156.700.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.671 PUBLIC HEARINGS ON AMENDMENTS.
   The Planning Commission shall conduct at least one public hearing on the
proposed amendment within 60 days after the amendment is proposed and shall
recommend to the County Board of Commissioners approval, disapproval or
modified approval of the proposed amendment. After receiving the recommendation
of the Planning Commission, the County Board of Commissioners shall hold at
least one public hearing on the proposed amendment.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.672 NOTICE.
   Notice will be provided according to §§
156.690 through
156.700. It will be reasonably calculated to give actual notice to interested
persons, including news media as required, and to those which have requested
notice, of the time and place for any and all hearings.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.673 CRITERIA.
   The proponent of the application or permit has the burden of proving
justification for its approval. The more drastic the request or the greater the
impact of the application or permit on the neighborhood, area or county, the
greater is the burden on the applicant. The following criteria shall be
considered by the Planning Commission in preparing a recommendation and by the
County Board of Commissioners in reaching its decision:
   (A)   The local conditions have changed and would warrant a change in the
zoning of the subject property(ies);
   (B)   The public services and facilities are sufficient to support a change
in designation, including, but not limited to, water availability relevant to
both quantity and quality, waste and stormwater management, other public
services, and streets and roads:
      (1)   Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance or zone changes which
significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure that land uses are
consistent with the function, capacity and level of service of the facility
identified in the Transportation System Plan. This shall be accomplished by one
of the following:
         (a)   Limiting allowed land uses to be consistent with the planned
function of the transportation facility or roadway;
         (b)   Amending the Transportation System Plan to ensure that existing,
improved or new transportation facilities are adequate to support the proposed
land uses consistent with the requirement of the Transportation Planning Rule;
or
         (c)   Altering land use designations, densities or design requirements
to reduce demand for automobile travel to meet needs through other modes.
      (2)   A plan or land use regulation amendment significantly affects a
transportation facility if it:
         (a)   Changes the functional classification of an existing or planned
transportation facility;
         (b)   Changes standards implementing a functional classification;
         (c)   Allows types or levels of land use that would result in levels
of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of
a transportation facility; or
         (d)   Would reduce the level of service of the facility below the
minimal acceptable level identified in the Transportation System Plan.
   (C)   The proposed amendment is consistent with unamended portions of the
Comprehensive Plan and supports goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan,
there is a public need for the proposal and that the need will be best served
by allowing the request. If other areas in the county are designated for a use
as requested in the application, then a showing of the necessity for
introducing that use into an area not now so zoned and why the owners there
should bear the burden, if any, of introducing that zone into their area; and
   (D)   The request addresses issues concerned with public health and welfare,
if any.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-8-98, passed - -1998; Ord. MC-C-3-01,
passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-
24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.674 LIMITATIONS ON REAPPLICATIONS.
   No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of this
chapter or to the zoning map shall be considered by the Planning Commission
within the six-month period immediately following denial of a previous
application; if in the opinion of the Planning Commission, new evidence or a
change of circumstances warrant it, however, the Planning Commission may permit
a new application.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.675 FINAL DECISION.
   The decision of the County Board of Commissioners will be final unless
appealed. Eligibility to appeal is governed by state statutes and state
administrative rules.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
§ 156.690 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission and the County Planning Director have the
power and the duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Board of
Commissioners may appoint agents to issue zoning permits and to otherwise
assist the Planning Director in the processing of applications.
   (B)   Approval or denial of an application for a use permitted by this
chapter shall be based upon and accompanied by a brief statement that explains
the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision, states the
facts relied upon in rendering the decision and explains the justification for
the decision based on the criteria, standards and facts set forth.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.691 APPEALS.
   A person may appeal to the Board of Commissioners a decision or requirement
made by the Planning Commission. A person may appeal to the Planning Commission
a decision or requirement made pursuant to this chapter by the Planning
Director or other county official. Written notice of the appeal must be filed
with the county within 14 days after the decision or requirement is made. The
notice of appeal shall state the nature of the decision or requirement and the
grounds for appeal.
   (A)   An appeal or review proceeding shall be based upon, but not limited
to, the record of the decision being appealed or reviewed.
   (B)   Following the hearing, the Board of Commissioners or Planning
Commission may overrule or modify any decision or requirement and shall set
forth findings for such decision.
   (C)   The procedure, public notice and type of hearing for an appeal or
review shall be in the same manner as for any application under this chapter.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.692 FORM OF PETITIONS, APPLICATIONS AND APPEALS.
   Petitions, application and appeals provided for in this chapter shall be
made on forms prescribed by the county. Applications shall be accompanied by
plans and specifications, drawn to scale, showing the information listed in
this section and such other information as is needed to determine conformance
with this chapter such as the following:
   (A)   One copy of a completed application form that includes the following
information:
      (1)   An accurate legal description, tax account number(s), map and
location of all properties that are the subject of the application; and
      (2)   Name, address, telephone number and authorization signature of all
record property owners or contract owners, and the name, address and telephone
number of the applicant, if different from the property owner(s).
   (B)   A complete list of the permit approvals sought by the applicant;
   (C)   A current preliminary title report for the subject property(ies);
   (D)   A complete and detailed narrative description of the proposed
development that describes existing site conditions, existing buildings, public
facilities and services, presence of wetlands, steep slopes and other natural
features, a discussion of the approval criteria for all permits required for
approval of the development proposal that explains how the criteria are or can
be met and any other information indicated by the county as being required;
   (E)   Up to 20 copies of all reports, plans, site plans and other documents
required by the section of the code corresponding to the specific approval(s)
sought. At least one copy of the site plan and all related drawings shall be in
a readable/legible eight and one-half by 11 inch format for inclusion into the
county’s bound record of the application;
   (F)   A site plan shall include the following information. All site plans
shall have dimensions clearly indicated. An applicant may provide the
information on separate sheets, if necessary or desirable for clarity.
      (1)   North arrow and scale;
      (2)   Location of property boundaries, including adjacent public or
private streets and rights-of-way;
      (3)   Location of existing structures and natural features;
      (4)   Location of utilities and facilities, or proposed locations (sewer,
water, fire hydrants, electricity, septic system, stormwater facilities and the
like);
      (5)   Proposed landscaping;
      (6)   Exterior lighting;
      (7)   Circulation plan for vehicles, pedestrians and bicyclists,
including existing and proposed points of access and sidewalks;
      (8)   Parking lot layout, with circulation plan and striping details; and
      (9)   Sign location and details.
   (G)   All required application fees, including a deposit for costs of
consultant review when required.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.693 COMPLETENESS REVIEW.
   (A)   Upon submission, the County Planning Department shall date stamp the
application form and verify that the appropriate application fee has been
submitted. The Planning Director shall review the application and all
information submitted with it and evaluate whether the application is complete
pursuant to the requirements in §
156.692(A). Within 30 days of receipt of the application, the Planning Director
shall complete this initial review and issue to the applicant a written
statement indicating whether the application is complete, and, if not, what
information must be submitted to make the application complete.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a letter indicating the application is incomplete, the
applicant has 180 days from the date the application was filed within which to
submit the missing information, or to provide written notice to the county that
only some of the missing information or none of the information will be
provided (see O.R.S. 215.427(2)), or the application shall be rejected and all
materials and the unused portion of the application fee returned to the
applicant. If the applicant submits the requested information within the 180-
day period, the county shall again verify whether the application, as
augmented, is complete. An application shall be rejected if it has not been
made complete within the 180-day time period, unless the applicant refuses in
writing to submit additional information.
   (C)   Once the county determines the application is complete enough to
process, or the applicant provides written notice that some or all of the
missing information will not be provided, the county shall declare the
application complete and take final action on the application within 150 days
of that date unless the applicant waives or extends the 150-day period. The
150-day period, however, does not apply in the following situations.
      (1)   Any hearing continuance or other process delay requested by the
applicant shall be deemed an extension or waiver, as appropriate, of the 150-
day period.
      (2)   The 150-day period does not apply to any application for a permit
that is not wholly within the county’s authority and control.
      (3)   The 150-day period does not apply to any application for an
amendment to the county’s Comprehensive Plan or land use regulations nor to any
application for a permit, the approval of which depends upon a plan amendment.
   (D)   The approval standards which control the county’s review and decision
on a complete application are those which were in effect on the date the
application was first submitted.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.694 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   (A)   Uses allowed with standards that are authorized by this chapter are
identified as administrative land use decisions and shall be processed in the
manner described in O.R.S. 215.416.
   (B)   (1)   The Planning Director may approve or deny an application for a
permit without a hearing if the Planning Director or designee gives notice of
the application and provides an opportunity for any person who is adversely
affected or aggrieved, or who is entitled to notice under division (B)(2)
below, to request a hearing before the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Notice of application:
         (a)   1.   Written notice of the application shall be mailed to those
persons described herein. The notice shall inform the applicant and the
surrounding property owners that the Planning Director will issue a decision,
with or without conditions at the conclusion of the 14-day comment period;
unless a public hearing is requested.
            2.   Notice of a decision of this division (B)(2) shall be provided
to the applicant and to the owners of record of property on the most recent
property tax assessment roll where such property is located:
               a.   Within 100 feet of the property that is the subject of the
notice when the subject property is wholly or in part within an urban growth
boundary;
               b.   Within 250 feet of the property that is the subject of the
notice when the subject property is outside an urban growth boundary and not
within a farm or forest use zone; or
               c.   Within 750 feet of the property that is the subject of the
notice when the subject property is within a Farm or Forest Zone.
         (b)   Notice shall also be provided to any identified affected
agencies of the proposal, per O.R.S. 197.180.
         (c)   When a proposal includes a parcel or parcels in an Interchange
Area Management Plan (IAMP) Management Area, the county shall provide written
or email notification to ODOT prior to the decision.
         (d)   Notice shall also be provided to any neighborhood or community
organization recognized by the governing body whose boundaries include the site
(O.R.S. 215.716).
         (e)   Notice shall be provided to the Department of Land Conservation
and Development for lands within the Farm or Forest Use Zone.
   (C)   The purpose of the notice is to provide affected property owners and
agencies the opportunity to review the request and to either offer comments or
requested conditions, or request a public hearing be held to deliberate on
issues they deem are significant.
   (D)   The notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The nature of the application and the proposed use or uses which
could be authorized;
      (2)   Street address or other easily understood location of the subject
property and county-assigned planning file number;
      (3)   A statement that a copy of the application, all documents and
evidence submitted by or on behalf of the applicant and applicable criteria are
available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost, at
the Planning Department during normal business hours; and
      (4)   The name and telephone number of the planning staff person
responsible for the application or is otherwise available to answer questions
about the application.
      (5)   A statement that any person who is adversely affected or aggrieved
or who is entitled to notice under division (B)(1) above may request a hearing
before the Planning Commission.
      (6)   In addition to the above, if the county receives an application for
a permit for a renewable energy facility, upon receipt of the application, the
county shall provide notice including, at a minimum:
         (a)   A description of the proposed renewable energy facility;
         (b)   A description of the lots or parcels subject to the permit
application;
         (c)   The dates, times and location where public comments or public
testimony on the permit application can be submitted; and
         (d)   The contact information for the governing body of the county and
the applicant.
      (7)   The notice for renewable energy facilities must be delivered to:
         (a)   The State Department of Fish and Wildlife;
         (b)   The State Department of Energy;
         (c)   The State Historic Preservation Officer;
         (e)   The Oregon Department of Aviation;
         (f)   The United States Department of Defense; and
         (g)   Federally recognized Indian tribes that may be affected by the
application.
   (E)   After the conclusion of the 14-day comment period, the Planning
Director shall issue a tentative decision and provide a copy of the findings to
the applicant and any property owner, person or agency that commented on the
request, and to any other persons who requested such notice. A decision by the
Planning Director to approve, modify or deny a land use request shall include
written modifications and conditions, if any, and findings and conclusions
which shall specifically address the relationship between the proposal and the
applicable criteria for approval listed elsewhere in this chapter.
   (F)   The final decision of the Planning Department on a land use request
may be appealed within 14 days to the Planning Commission. If no appeal is
received within 14 days of the mailing of the notice of decision, then the
Planning Director’s tentative decision shall become the final decision.
   (G)   Failure of a property owner to receive notice as provided in this
section shall not invalidate such proceedings if the mailing affidavit
demonstrates that the notice was mailed to the address listed on the County
Assessor’s tax records.
   (H)   Within the Planning Director’s sole discretion, or at the applicant’s
request, the Director may refer any application to the Planning Commission for
consideration and decision, following notice and a public hearing consistent
with the public hearing procedures in §
156.695. Considerations the Director may base such a referral upon include,
without limitation, the following:
      (1)   The application warrants evaluation and comment by an outside
agency such as the Fire Marshal’s Office, State Department of Transportation, a
city and the like;
      (2)   The application presents impacts to public facilities, systems or
services that are difficult to quantify or evaluate or which may exceed current
or planned system capacities and would benefit from public testimony, agency
comment or the development of a more detailed factual record;
      (3)   The application presents impacts to, or conflicts with, other
properties, property owners and users that are difficult to evaluate without
public testimony, the development of a more detailed factual record and the
formulation of conditions to mitigate, reduce or eliminate anticipated impacts;
      (4)   The application presents impacts to protected resources or lands
with special status with which the proposal may conflict, and which would
benefit from public testimony, the development of a more detailed factual
record and the formulation of conditions to mitigate, reduce or eliminate
anticipated impacts;
      (5)   The application involves the interpretation of ambiguous terms of
the County Development Code, the County Comprehensive Plan, state law,
conflicting regulations or otherwise requires the exercise of legal or policy
judgment in evaluating the proposal; and
      (6)   Any other factor or consideration that, in the Director’s opinion,
warrants broader public comment or review.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2024-03,
passed 4-3-2024; Ord. ORD-2025-1, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.695 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   (A)   Notice.
      (1)   Each notice of hearing authorized by this chapter shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 20 days
prior to the date of hearing, except that a notice for a hearing before the
Planning Commission on an amendment that requires two public hearings as
specified in §§
156.670 through
156.675, may be given no less than ten days in advance of the first public
hearing.
      (2)   In addition:
         (a)   A notice of hearing shall be provided at least 20 days prior to
the date of the hearing to the applicant and to owners of record of property on
the most recent property tax assessment roll where such property is located:
            1.   Within 100 feet of the property which is the subject of the
notice where the subject property is wholly or in part within an urban growth
boundary;
            2.   Within 250 feet of the property which is the subject of the
notice where the subject property is outside an urban growth boundary and not
within a farm or forest zone; or
            3.   Within 500 feet of the property which is the subject of the
notice where the subject property is within a farm or forest zone.
         (b)   When a proposal includes a parcel or parcels in an Interchange
Area Management Plan (IAMP) Management Area, the county shall provide written
notification to ODOT at least 20 days prior to the date of hearing; and
         (c)   Notice shall also be provided to any identified affected
agencies of the proposal, per O.R.S. 197.180.
      (3)   Failure of a person to receive the notice prescribed in this
section shall not impair the validity of the hearing.
      (4)   The notice provisions of this section shall not restrict the giving
of notice by other means, including mail, email, the posting of property or the
use of radio and television.
      (5)   The notice shall include the following information:
         (a)   The time, date and location of the public hearing;
         (b)   Street address or other easily understood location of the
subject property and county-assigned planning file number;
         (c)   A description of the applicant’s proposal, along with a list of
citations of the approval criteria that the county will use to evaluate the
proposal;
         (d)   A statement that any interested party may testify at the hearing
or submit written comments on the proposal at or prior to the hearing and that
a staff report will be prepared and made available to the public at least seven
days prior to the hearing;
         (e)   A statement that any issue which is intended to provide a basis
for an appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals must be raised before the close
of the public record. Issues must be raised and accompanied by statements or
evidence sufficient to afford the county and all parties to respond to the
issue;
         (f)   A statement that the application and all supporting materials
and evidence submitted in support of the application may be inspected at no
charge, and that copies may be obtained at cost, at the Planning Department
during normal business hours; and
         (g)   The name and telephone number of the planning staff person
responsible for the application or is otherwise available to answer questions
about the application.
      (6)   The Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners may recess a
hearing in order to obtain additional information or to serve further notice
upon other property owners or persons it decides may be interested in the
proposal being considered. Upon recessing, the time and date when the hearing
is to be resumed shall be announced.
   (B)   General rules for hearing.
      (1)   The hearing body conducts the hearing in a quasi-judicial capacity;
there shall be no audience demonstration or other conduct which would disrupt
the hearing.
      (2)   Persons may speak only after being recognized by the Chair and must
state their full name and address for the record.
      (3)   The hearing body considers only testimony and information that is
relevant to the issue of the requested change and will not allow immaterial or
repetitious testimony.
   (C)   Order of procedure.
      (1)   Call for abstentions;
      (2)   Staff report and summary;
      (3)   Proponent’s case. The proponent and those favoring the proposal
will be heard first;
      (4)   Cross-examination of each proponent by the hearing body;
      (5)   Opponent’s case. Those opposed shall be heard next. Groups who are
represented by a spokesperson or who were entitled to receive notice of the
hearing are requested to proceed first. Opponents may submit questions of the
proponent to the Chair;
      (6)   Cross-examination of each opponent by the hearing body;
      (7)   Rebuttal. Both the proponents and opponents may submit rebuttal
testimony; the proponent shall have final opportunity; and
      (8)   Close the hearing.
   (D)   Decision of the hearing body. Upon closing the hearing, the hearing
body will deliberate the question and reach a decision or continue the matter
for further study or decision, to a time and place then announced.
   (E)   Recess of hearing. The hearing body may recess a hearing in order to
obtain additional information or to serve further notice upon other property
owners or persons it decides may be interested in the proposal being
considered. Upon recessing, the time and date when the hearing is to be resumed
shall be announced. If a hearing is recessed, the record shall be left open in
accordance with the time frames identified in O.R.S. 197.797.
   (F)   Notice of decision. The county shall send, by first class mail, a
notice of all decisions rendered under this chapter to all persons with
standing, i.e., the applicant, all others who participated either orally or in
writing before the close of the public record and those who specifically
requested notice of the decision. The notice of decision shall include the
following information:
      (1)   The file number and date of decision;
      (2)   The name of the applicant, owner and appellant (if different);
      (3)   The street address or other easily understood location of the
subject property;
      (4)   A brief summary of the decision, and if an approval, a description
of the permit authorized or approval granted;
      (5)   A statement that the decision is final unless appealed, and
description of the requirements for perfecting an appeal; and
      (6)   The contact person, address and a telephone number whereby a copy
of the final decision may be inspected or copies obtained.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.696 SEWAGE DISPOSAL APPROVAL.
   No zoning permit shall be issued for any use or structure which will have an
individual sanitary subsurface disposal system until written approval is
obtained by the applicant for said system.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.697 FILING FEES.
   An application required by this chapter shall be accompanied by a filing fee
in the amount as set forth by the Board of Commissioners in a County Fee
Ordinance. Said permit fees may be amended by the Board of Commissioners order
after conducting a hearing thereon.
   (A)   All fees shall be due and payable at the time the application or
appeal is submitted. No application or appeal shall be accepted without the
proper fee being paid.
   (B)   At its sole discretion, the county may contract for review of an
application by appropriate professionals, including, but not limited to, a
civil engineer, planner, traffic engineer, wildlife biologist or other
specialist, and may require an applicant to reimburse the county for costs of
such services. The county may require a deposit from the applicant, to cover
estimated costs of consulting services.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.698 PERMIT EXPIRATION AND EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   In accordance with O.A.R. 660-033-0140, the following permit
expiration dates shall apply in the Exclusive Farm Use and Forest Use Zones:
      (1)   A discretionary decision, except land divisions and those
residential developments listed in division (A)(4) below approving a proposed
development on agricultural or forest land outside an urban growth boundary
under O.R.S. 215.211 through 215.293 and 215.317 through 215.438 or under
county legislation or regulation adopted pursuant thereto is void two years
from the date of the final decision if the development action is not initiated
in that period.
      (2)   An extension of up to one year may be granted if:
         (a)   The applicant makes a written request for an extension of the
development approval period;
         (b)   The request is submitted to the county prior to the expiration
of the approval period; and
         (c)   Applicable criteria for the decision have not changed.
      (3)   Permits approved for a proposed residential development on resource
land outside of an urban growth boundary shall be valid for four years. An
extension of two years may be granted subject to the provisions of division (A)
(2).
   (B)   For all permits not in the Farm or Forest Zones, the following permit
expirations shall apply.
      (1)   (a)   A zoning permit shall become void after one year unless the
building permit has been issued, or, if not building permit is required, if the
development action has commenced.
         (b)   A 12-month extension may be granted when submitted to the
Planning Department prior to the expiration of the approval period.
      (2)   A conditional use or an administrative land use decision is valid
for two years. An additional one-year extensions may be authorized by county
staff without providing notice and opportunity for a hearing under the
following conditions:
         (a)   An applicant makes a written request for an extension of the
development approval period;
         (b)   The request is submitted to the county prior to the expiration
of the approval period, excepting any request under consideration on the date
of adoption of this amendment; and
         (c)   Provisions of this code applicable to the original approval have
not changed.
      (3)   Final plats for partitioning will be completed within two years
from the date of the Commission action or the approval of the partitioning will
expire and said approval will be declared null and void. A one-year extension
may be granted when a written request is made prior to the expiration of the
approval.
   (C)   Approval of an extension granted under this section is a ministerial
decision, is not a land use decision as described in O.R.S. 197.015 and is not
subject to appeal as a land use decision.
   (D)   The time periods described above do not take effect until all appeals
are complete.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. OR-1-
2013, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. ORD-2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3,
passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01, passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.699 REVOCATION.
   The Planning Commission may revoke or modify any permit granted under the
provisions of this chapter on any one or more of the following grounds.
   (A)   A permit may be revoked on the basis of fraud, concealment or
misrepresentation or on the basis of wrong information supplied on the
application, or wrong information given to the Commission at a public hearing.
   (B)   A permit may be revoked on the basis that the use for which such
permit was granted is not being exercised within the time limit set forth by
the Commission or this chapter.
   (C)   A permit may be revoked on the basis that the use for which such
permit was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for one year or
more.
   (D)   A permit may be revoked or modified on the basis that the permit
granted is being, or recently has been exercised contrary to the terms or
conditions of such approval, or in violation of any statute, code, resolution,
law or regulation.
   (E)   A permit may be revoked or modified on the basis that the use for
which the permit was granted was so exercised as to be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare, or in such a manner to constitute a nuisance.
   (F)   Any permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall become null and void
if not exercised within the time period specified in such permit, or if no time
period is specified in the permit, within one year from the date of approval of
said permit.
   (G)   The Commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed revocation
after giving written notice to the permittee and other affected persons as set
forth in this chapter. The Commission shall render its decision within 45 days
after the conclusion of the hearing. In the case where the permittee is not
satisfied with the action of the Commission, he or she may appeal the
Commission’s decision to the Board of Commissioners in the manner provided in §
156.691.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.700 INTERPRETATION.
   Where the conditions imposed by a provision of this chapter are less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions which
are more restrictive, the more restrictive shall govern.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter are subject to the provisions set forth in the
code enforcement ordinance.
(Ord. MC-C-2, passed 6-25-1980; Ord. MC-C-3-01, passed 11-7-2001; Ord. ORD-
2021-1, passed 3-24-2021; Ord. ORD-2021-3, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. ORD-2025-01,
passed 1-8-2025)
CHAPTER 157: LEXINGTON AIRPORT MASTER PLAN
Section
   
157.01   Adopted by reference
§ 157.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Lexington Airport Master Plan is hereby adopted by reference as if set
in full herein. A full copy of the Plan can be found in the County Clerk’s
Office.
(Ord. ORD-2018-4, passed 11-28-2018)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FUNDS
      
II.   INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
      
III.   STREET VACATIONS
      
IV.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: FUNDS
 
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
MC-C-2-86  5-28-1986   Establishes the Public Land Corner Preservation Account
                       and a fee for recording certain documents.
MC-JC-3-91 11-29-1991  Establishing a special justice court Continuing Legal
                       Education (CLE) Fund.
 
TABLE II: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
MC-C-6-94  7-27-1994   Intergovernmental agreement establishing the Umatilla
                       Army Depot Conversion Task Force.
MC-C-1-95  2-1-1995    Ratifying the intergovernmental agreement establishing
                       the Umatilla Army Depot Reuse Authority.
                       Intergovernmental agreement between Marrow, Wasco,
MC-C-5-95  3-22-1995   Gilliam, Sherman, Hood River and Wheeler Counties to
                       establish a regional jail and juvenile detention
                       facility.
MC-C-4-95  5-17-1995   Intergovernmental agreement establishing the Umatilla
                       Army Depot Reuse Authority.
MC-C-1-96  2-7-1996    Intergovernmental agreement establishing the Central and
                       Eastern Oregon Juvenile Justice Consortium.
MC-02-2007 10-29-2007  Intergovernmental agreement to create the Community
                       Renewable Energy Association.
                       Intergovernmental agreement creating the Umatilla Basin
MC-5-2009  12-2-2009   Water Commission and approving the Umatilla Basin
                       Aquifer Restoration Project.
ORD-2016-1 2-17-2016   Intergovernmental agreement creating the Oregon
                       Association of County Engineers and Surveyors.
                       Intergovernmental agreement creating the County
ORD-2023-4 5-17-2023   Broadband Action Team, a broadband public improvement
                       consortium
.
TABLE III: STREET VACATIONS
 
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
                       Vacating Racetrack Street between Hager and Matlock
559-06     8-14-2006   Streets and vacating a portion of Matlock Street in the
                       City of Heppner.
MC-06-2010 8-25-2010   Vacating a portion of County Road 91.
                      
 
TABLE IV: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
MC-C- 2-25-  Rezoning all land within the East Boardman Exception to SF.
1-86  1986
MC-C- 2-25-  Rezoning all land within the West Boardman Exception to SF.
2-86  1986
MC-C- 7-2-   Rezoning all land within Sections 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15, Township 3
4-86  1986   North, Range 24 East to be zoned M-G.
MC-C- 7-19-  Rezoning land marked on the map in this ordinance from SF to RSC.
3-89  1989
MC-C- 2-14-  Rezoning land marked on the map in this ordinance from M-G to PI.
1-90  1990
MC-C- 5-20-  Rezoning tax lots marked on the map in this ordinance to remove from
4-92  1992   City of Irrigon Urban Growth to SR-1.
MC-C- 4-14-  Rezoning Tax Lot 200 in Township 5 North, Range 26, Section 31 from EFU
2-93  1993   to RR.
MC-C- 3-16-  Rezoning Tax Lot 400 in Township 4 North, Range 25, Section 11 from SF
1-94  1994   to RSC.
MC-C- 7-20-  Rezoning Tax Lot 1300, Township 5 North, Range 26, Section 25B from SR-
5-94  1994   1 to C-G.
MC-C- 10-5-  Rezoning Tax Lots 400, 500, 700, 800, 801, 802, 900, 1000, 1003 and
9-94  1994   1005, Township 4 North, Range 25, Section 17 from unzoned to FR.
MC-C- 10-5-  Rezoning Tax Lot 205, Township 5 North, Range 26, Section 36 from
10-94 1994   unzoned to RR.
MC-C- 6-12-  Rezoning property in the Wenholz Zone from SR to C-G.
7-96  1996
MC-C- 8-28-  Rezoning property in the Rod Osgood Zone from SR to C-G.
10-96 1996
MC-C- 4-2-   Rezoning the 1997 West Boardman Area from unzoned to FR.
3-97  1997
MC-C- 7-22-  Applying the Parkland Overlay Zone to Anson Wright Park and Cutsforth
6-98  1998   Park.
MC-C- 9-14-  Expanding the City of Irrigon Urban Growth Boundary for the county
4-99  1999   school district parcel.
MC-C- 6-28-  Rezoning property in the Sandford Zone from residential to C-G.
4-00  2000
MC-C- 7-10-  Applying the Limited Use Overlay Zone to the approximately 1,400 acres
2-02  2002   identified for speedway and speedway-related uses at the Boardman
             Airport.
MC-C- 8-10-  Expanding the City of Irrigon Urban Growth Boundary Expansion.
1-04  2004
MC-   10-27- Rezoning Tax Lot 203 of Assessor’s Map 5N 26, 26 to SRO.
02-04 2004
MC-   10-27- Rezoning Tax Lots 1000 and 1005 of Assessor’s Map 4N 25, 17 to LU.
03-04 2004
MC-   7-12-  Rezoning property in the Wenholz Zone to C-G
04-06 2006
MC-   9-26-
01-   2007   Rezoning property in the Aylett Zone to RLI.
2007
MC-   1-7-
01-   2009   Rezoning Tax Lot 3420 of Assessor’s Map 4N 26 to RRI.
2009
MC-   7-21-  2010 Britt Aggregate Goal 5 Significant Site amendment, to indicate the
04-   2010   site as an aggregate site and to apply the SRO designation.
2010
MC-   8-4-   2010 Willow Farms Aggregate Goal 5 Significant Site amendment, to
05-   2010   indicate the site as an aggregate site and to apply the SRO designation.
2010
MC-1- 1-19-  2010 Port of Morrow update, to rezone 510 acres from Agricultural to
2011  2011   Industrial; 515 acres from Industrial to Agricultural; 510 acres to PI;
             and 515 acres to EFU.
MC-2- 2-16-  Applying the Parkland Overlay Zone to the OHV Park.
2011  2011
MC-4- 10-26- Approving request from Love’s Travel Stops & Country Stores to apply a
2011  2011   Limited Use Overlay to change sites from SAI to TC.
ORD-  7-2-   Applying the Significant Resource Overlay Zone to the site outlined in
2014- 2014   the map attached to this ordinance and the surrounding 1,500-foot impact
3            area.
ORD-  7-9-   Rezoning the Umatilla Army Depot according to the 2014 Planning and
2014- 2014   Zoning document.
4
ORD-  8-27-  Applying the Significant Resource Overlay Zone to the site and
2014- 2014   surrounding 1,500-foot impact area as shown on the map attached to this
5            ordinance.
ORD-  8-27-  Applying the Significant Resource Overlay Zone to the site and
2014- 2014   surrounding 1,500-foot impact area as shown on the map attached to this
6            ordinance.
ORD-  6-10-  The 2015 Lexington Urban Growth Boundary amendment, rezoning the subject
2015- 2015   property to RLI.
3
ORD-  5-18-  The 2016 Boardman Airport Rezone, rezoning the subject property from AI
2016- 2016   to ALI.
3
ORD-  5-18-
2016- 2016   The 2016 Airport Overlay Zones Update, applying the ASC designation.
4
ORD-  12-21- The 2016 ODOT-Donaldson Canyon Aggregate Goal 5 Significant Site
2016- 2016   amendment, applying the Significant Resource Overlay Zone to the site
6            and surrounding 1,500-foot impact area.
ORD-  12-21- The 2016 ODOT-Threemile Canyon Aggregate Goal 5 Significant Site
2016- 2016   amendment, applying the Significant Resource Overlay Zone to the site
7            and surrounding 1,500-foot impact area.
ORD-  10-25- The 2017 Ione UGB Expansion, identifying and reflecting areas designated
2017- 2017   as RLI.
7
ORD-  2-20-  The 2019 Columbia Mill Site Rezone, rezoning the subject property from
2019- 2019   RRI to PI.
2
ORD-  2-5-   The Paterson Ferry Zone Change and Swap, changing the subject property
2020- 2020   from M-G to EFU at the Bombing Range Road property and changed from EFU
1            to PI with the Limited Use Overlay at the Paterson Ferry Road property.
ORD-  9-20-
2023- 2023   Rezoning Parcel 2 of Partition Play No. 2023-3 from EFU to M-G.
6
ORD-  3-6-
2024- 2024   Rezoning 318-are parcel in Threemile Canyon Farms from SAI to EFU.
1
            
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Oregon Revised Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OREGON REVISED STATUTES
O.R.S. Section Code Section
O.R.S. Section            Code Section
19.270                    93.109
19.330                    93.109
30.260 et seq.            51.21
30.315                    51.43
30.930(2),(4)             156.047
                          156.040; 153.085;
30.936                    156.086;
                          156.088
                          156.040;
30.937                    156.085;
                          156.086;
                          156.088
Chapter 34                35.009;
                          37.11
34.010 through 34.100     51.25;
                          93.173
34.010 et seq.            51.21
34.030                    93.109
34.070                    93.109
34.102                    93.174
Chapter 65                156.040
87.142                    93.018
87.152 through 87.212     93.018
                          155.001;
                          155.021;
Chapter 92                155.074;
                          155.092;
                          155.093;
                          155.101
92.010                    155.095;
                          156.535
92.010(9)(b)              155.097
92.050(5)                 155.094
92.050(7)                 155.094
92.050(8)                 155.094
92.060                    155.068
92.080                    155.094
92.100                    155.069
92.120(3)                 155.069
92.180                    155.095
92.225                    155.095
94.504                    156.611
Chapter 100               155.005
131.305                   90.06
131.315                   90.06
153.058                   93.168
153.090(1)(e)             93.171
164.775 through 164.805   51.19
167.310 through 390       93.110
183.310                   93.126
183.413 through 183.502   93.126
183.745                   93.126
Chapter 190               35.003
192.610 through 192.705   30.01
195.120                   156.048;
                          156.088
195.300                   156.039;
                          156.040
195.300(10)               156.047
195.300(10)(f)(C)         156.047
196.800 through 196.900   156.003
Chapter 197               156.002;
                          156.537
                          156.045;
                          156.046;
                          156.088;
197.015                   156.610;
                          156.628;
                          156.653;
                          156.698
                          156.037;
                          156.061;
                          156.082;
197.015(10)               156.136;
                          156.196;
                          156.236;
                          156.281;
                          156.322
197.015(10)(d)            156.046
197.180                   156.694;
                          156.695
197.435 to 197.467        156.083
197.435 through 197.467   156.088
197.660                   156.038
197.660(2)                156.048
                          156.040;
197.732                   156.047;
                          156.085
197.732(1)(a),(b)         156.061
197.732(1)(c)             156.495
197.770(2)                156.084;
                          156.088
197.797                   156.695
Chapter 203               93.001
                          71.02;
203.035                   92.02;
                          150.08
203.065                   93.001
210.120                   31.01
                          50.99;
                          155.001;
                          156.002;
Chapter 215               156.035;
                          156.039;
                          156.041;
                          156.080
215.110                   151.060
                          51.16;
                          156.003;
215.203                   156.036;
                          156.042;
                          156.082
215.203(2)(b)(K)          156.003
215.211 through 215.293   156.698
215.213                   156.040;
                          156.086
215.246                   156.040
215.246 through 215.251   156.063
215.247                   156.040
215.249                   156.040
215.251                   156.040
215.263                   156.048
215.263(4)                156.044
215.263(5)                156.044
215.275                   156.063;
                          156.323
215.278                   156.042
                          156.040;
215.283                   156.045;
                          156.086
                          156.036;
215.283(1)                156.061;
                          156.062;
                          156.082
215.283(1)(r)             156.003
215.283(1)(u)             156.062
215.283(1)(Y)             156.063
215.283(2)(a)             156.003
215.283(4)                156.003
215.284                   156.086
215.284(4)                156.044
215.291                   156.045;
                          156.085
215.298                   156.039
215.306                   156.036;
                          156.038
215.317 through 215.438   156.698
215.402                   156.610
                          156.037;
                          156.062;
                          156.083;
                          156.197;
                          156.217;
215.416                   156.237;
                          156.282;
                          156.323;
                          156.342;
                          156.394;
                          156.694
215.417                   156.045
215.427(2)                156.693
215.451                   156.037
215.452 through 215.456   156.037
215.716                   156.694
215.740                   156.085
215.750                   156.085
215.780                   156.042
215.783                   156.088
Chapter 279A              35.001
279A.010                  35.002
279A.065                  35.001
279A.065(6)               35.003
279A.110                  35.085
279A.120                  35.004
279A.125                  35.004
Chapter 279B              35.001;
                          35.009
279B.033                  35.009
279B.036                  35.009
279B.055                  35.027
279B.060                  35.027
279B.080                  35.058
279B.130                  35.085
279B.130(1)(b)            35.085
279B.220                  35.044
279B.230                  35.044
279B.235                  35.044
279B.400                  35.086;
                          35.087
279B.420                  35.088
Chapter 279C              35.001
279C.360                  35.005
279C.440                  35.085
279C.836                  35.058
294.305 et seq.           51.24
315.163                   156.042
Chapter 321               156.003
321.359                   156.086
Chapter 329A              156.003
329A.280                  156.003
358.480                   156.038
Chapter 368               151.061
368.001                   156.085
368.016                   71.02
374.305                   151.007
Chapter 377               156.244;
                          156.601
419B.558                  131.03
431.150                   93.050
                          156.003;
433.735                   156.082;
                          156.083
433.735(2)                156.037
433.763                   156.039;
                          156.084
Chapter 446               156.603
446.003(17)               156.003
446.245                   156.603
446.310 through 446.320   93.126
446.322 through 446.349   93.126
448.005 through 448.060   93.126
448.095 through 448.100   93.126
Chapter 454               93.128
454.605 through 454.779   93.126
454.695                   156.040
455.010                   156.199
455.020                   150.04
455.055                   156.045
455.100 through 455.450   156.003
455.150 et seq.           150.04
455.315                   156.082
Chapter 459A              51.21 
                          51.23
459.015                   51.16
459.015(2)                51.17
459.205                   156.040
                          156.039;
                          156.063;
459.245                   156.084;
                          156.085;
                          156.088
459.320                   51.16
459.386                   93.002
459.992                   51.99
459.995                   51.99
Chapter 459A              51.21;
                          51.23
459A.010                  51.16
Chapter 465               51.16
465.550                   51.16
465.555                   51.16
Chapter 466               51.16
466.005 through 466.385   51.16
466.020                   51.16
467.120(2)(a)             51.16
Chapter 468               51.23
468A.020                  51.19
468B.050                  51.16
468B.050                  156.040 
                          156.042
468B.053                  156.040
468B.055                  156.040
468B.095                  156.040
468B.200 through 468B.230 156.041;
                          156.042
469.401(3)                156.621
469A.052(2)               156.047
469A.052(3)               156.047
475B.100                  111.02
475B.110                  111.02
475C.065                  111.02
475C.085                  111.02
475C.093                  111.02
475C.097                  111.02
475C.121                  111.02
475C.125                  111.02
475C.129                  111.02
475C.133                  111.02
476.030 et seq.           93.050
Chapter 483               71.32
483.534                   71.11;
                          71.13
483.536                   71.11;
                          71.13
483.991                   71.13
484.110                   71.11;
                          71.13
                          156.082;
Chapter 517               156.084;
                          156.088
517.702 through 517.987   152.01
                          156.003;
517.750                   156.037;
                          156.039
Chapter 520               156.084;
                          156.088
                          156.036;
520.005                   156.039;
                          156.062
                          156.036;
522.005                   156.039;
                          156.061;
                          156.062
522.005(11)               156.157
522.405 to 522.545        156.003
526.215                   156.084
527.610 et seq.           156.086;
                          156.623
527.620                   156.088
537.545                   156.086
540.505                   156.036
565.210                   156.039
603.038                   156.040
609.035 through 609.110   93.109
609.093                   93.109
609.095(2)                93.109
609.095(3)                93.109
609.098                   93.109
609.162                   93.111
609.163                   93.111
609.166                   93.111
609.990                   93.109;
                          93.111
621.072                   156.041;
                          156.042
624.010 through 624.029   93.126
624.060 through 624.106   93.126
624.130                   93.126
624.310 through 624.430   93.126
624.992                   93.126
658.750                   156.042
671.318                   156.039
671.520                   156.039
Chapter 682               92.04
682.031                   92.02;
                          92.03
682.051                   92.13
682.062                   92.02
757.300                   156.003;
                          156.047
757.365                   156.003;
                          156.047
772.210                   156.084
777.250(1) through (3)    156.341
801.305                   156.003
801.580                   156.040
819.100 through 819.200   93.015
819.220                   93.018
819.480                   93.016
822.110                   51.16;
                          93.016
                          
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
1.08.010           10.99
2.08.010           31.01
2.08.020           31.01
2.08.030           31.01
2.08.040           31.01
2.08.050           31.01
2.08.060           31.01
2.12.010           32.001
2.12.020           32.002
2.12.030           32.003
2.16.010           33.01
2.16.020           33.02
2.16.030           33.03
2.16.040           33.03
2.20.010           32.015
2.20.020           32.016
2.20.030           32.017
2.20.040           32.018
2.20.050           32.019
2.20.060           32.020
2.20.070           32.021
2.20.080           32.022
2.20.090           32.022
2.20.100           32.023
2.20.110           32.024
2.28.010           32.050
2.28.020           32.051
2.28.030           32.052
2.28.040           32.053
2.28.050           32.054
2.28.060           32.055
2.28.070           32.056
2.28.080           32.057
2.32.010           36.35
2.32.020           36.36
2.32.030           36.37
2.32.040           36.38
2.32.050           36.39
2.36.010           34.01
2.36.020           34.02
2.36.030           34.03
2.36.040           34.04
2.36.050           34.05
2.36.060           34.06
3.04.010           36.01
3.04.020           36.02
3.04.030           36.03
3.04.040           36.04
3.04.050           36.05
3.08.010           36.20
3.08.020           36.21
3.08.030           36.22
3.08.040           36.23
3.16.010           110.01
6.04.010           130.01
6.04.020           130.02
6.04.030           130.03
6.04.040           130.04
6.04.050           130.05
6.04.060           130.06
6.04.070           130.07
6.04.080           130.08
6.04.090           130.09
6.04.100           130.10
6.04.110           130.11
6.04.120           131.99
6.08.010           131.01
6.08.020           131.02
6.08.030           131.03
6.08.040           131.04
8.04.010           71.01
8.04.020           71.02
8.04.030           71.03
8.04.040           71.04
8.04.050           71.05
8.04.060           71.06
8.04.070           71.07
8.04.080           71.08
8.04.090           71.09
8.04.100           71.10
8.04.110           71.11
8.04.120           71.12
8.04.130           71.13
8.04.140           71.13
8.04.150           71.13
8.04.160           71.14
8.04.170           71.15
8.04.180           71.99
8.08.030           151.004
8.08.040           151.005
8.08.050           151.006
8.08.060           151.007
8.12.010           71.30
8.12.020           71.31
8.12.030           71.32
8.16.010           151.020
8.16.020           151.021
8.16.030           151.022
8.16.040           151.023
8.16.050           151.024
8.16.060           151.025
8.16.070           151.026
8.16.080           151.027
8.16.090           151.028
8.16.100           151.029
8.16.110           151.030
8.16.120           151.031
8.16.130           151.032
8.16.140           151.033
8.16.150           151.034
8.16.160           151.035
8.16.170           151.036
8.16.180           151.037
8.16.190           151.038
8.16.200           151.039
8.16.210           151.040
8.16.220           151.040
8.16.230           151.041
8.16.240           151.042
8.16.250           151.043
8.16.260           151.044
8.16.270           151.045
8.16.280           151.046
8.16.290           151.047
8.16.300           151.999
9.04.010           50.01
9.04.020           50.02
9.04.030           50.03
9.04.040           50.03
9.04.050           50.04
9.04.060           50.99
10.04.010          150.01
10.04.020          150.02
10.04.030          150.03
10.04.040          150.04
10.04.050          150.05
10.04.060          150.06
10.04.070          150.07
                   
 
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.    Date Passed Code Section
-           1-6-1906    110.01
-           4-6-1960    32.001 
                        32.003
-           11-6-1963   71.30 
                        71.32
-           8-2-1967    151.004 
                        151.007
                        50.01 
MC U-1      - -1979     50.04;
                        50.99
MC-PP-1-80  - -1980     34.01 
                        34.06
                        156.001 
                        156.006;
                        156.020 
                        156.023;
                        156.035 
                        156.050;
                        156.060 
                        156.065;
                        156.080;
                        156.081;
                        156.084 
                        156.090;
                        156.100 
                        156.108;
                        156.120 
                        156.123;
                        156.135 
                        156.143;
                        156.155 
                        156.163;
                        156.175 
                        156.182;
                        156.195;
                        156.196;
                        156.198 
                        156.203;
                        156.215;
                        156.216;
                        156.218 
                        156.223;
                        156.235;
                        156.236;
                        156.238 
                        156.246;
                        156.260 
                        156.269;
                        156.280;
                        156.281;
                        156.283 
                        156.286;
                        156.300 
                        156.305;
                        156.320 
MC-C-2      6-25-1980   156.326;
                        156.340;
                        156.341;
                        156.343 
                        156.347;
                        156.360 
                        156.364;
                        156.375;
                        156.376;
                        156.378;
                        156.390 
                        156.396;
                        156.410 
                        156.420;
                        156.435 
                        156.442;
                        156.455 
                        156.463;
                        156.475 
                        156.481;
                        156.495 
                        156.498;
                        156.510 
                        156.513;
                        156.525 
                        156.537;
                        156.550 
                        156.554;
                        156.565 
                        156.569;
                        156.580 
                        156.583;
                        156.595 
                        156.604;
                        156.611;
                        156.620 
                        156.630;
                        156.645 
                        156.655;
                        156.670 
                        156.675;
                        156.690 
                        156.700;
                        156.999
MC-C4       - -1981     33.01 
                        33.03
MC-C6       - -1981     131.01 
                        131.04
                        151.020 
MC-PW-1-81  - -1981     151.047;
                        151.999
                        151.023;
MC-PW-2-81  - -1981     151.046;
                        151.047;
                        151.999
MC-A-1-82   - -1982     31.01
C-9-82      - -1982     150.01 
                        150.07
MC-C-1-83   - -1983     36.01 
                        36.05
MC-C-2-83   - -1983     150.01 
                        150.07
MC-C-4-83   - -1983     36.35 
                        36.39
                        32.015 
MC-H-1-83   - -1983     32.024;
                        32.050 
                        32.057
                        71.01 
MC-C-1-84   - -1984     71.15;
                        71.99
                        130.01 
MC-C-2-84   - -1984     130.11;
                        131.99
MC-C-3-84   - -1984     36.20 
                        36.23
MC-C-2-85   - -1985     36.35 
                        36.39
                        32.001;
MC-C-3-85   - -1985     32.003;
                        131.99;
                        151.999
MC-C-5-85   - -1985     10.99
-           9-4-1985    154.01
MC-C-1-86   2-25-1986   TSO Table IV
MC-C-2-86   2-25-1986   TSO Table IV
MC-C-2-86   5-28-1986   TSO Table I
MC-C-3-86   7-2-1986    154.01
MC-C-4-86   7-2-1986    TSO Table IV
                        154.01;
MC-C-1-88   5-11-1988   156.340;
                        156.341; 1546.343
                        156.347
                        153.01 
                        153.09;
                        153.20 
MC-C-1-89   1-13-1989   153.23;
                        153.35 
                        153.37;
                        153.99
MC-C-3-89   7-19-1989   TSO Table IV
MC-C-4-89   10-4-1989   30.02
MC-C-1-90   2-14-1990   TSO Table IV
MC-H-2-90   8-15-1990   32.035 
                        32.039
MC-C-2-90   12-5-1990   156.035 
                        156.050
MC-JC-3-91  11-29-1991  TSO Table I
                        151.060 
MC-C-3-92   5-13-1992   151.066;
                        151.080 
                        151.085
MC-C-4-92   5-20-1992   156.222;
                        TSO Table IV
                        90.01 
MC-C-6-92   7-29-1992   90.08;
                        90.99
MC-C-2-93   4-14-1993   TSO Table IV
MC-C-1-94   3-16-1994   TSO Table IV
MC-C-5-94   7-20-1994   TSO Table IV
MC-C-6-94   7-27-1994   TSO Table II
MC-C-9-94   10-5-1994   TSO Table IV
MC-C-10-94  10-5-1994   TSO Table IV
MC-C-1-95   2-1-1995    TSO Table II
MC-C-3-95   3-8-1995    32.070 
                        32.073
MC-C-5-95   3-22-1995   TSO Table II
MC-C-4-95   5-17-1995   TSO Table II
MC-C-1-96   2-7-1996    TSO Table II
MC-C-2-96   4-3-1996    131.15 
                        131.19
                        156.195;
MC-C-4-96   4-24-1996   156.196;
                        156.198 
                        156.203
                        154.01;
MC-C-6-96   6-12-1996   156.320 
                        156.326
MC-C-7-96   6-12-1996   TSO Table IV
                        156.003;
                        156.100 
                        156.108;
                        156.235;
                        156.236;
                        156.238 
                        156.246;
MC-C-8-96   8-7-1996    156.280;
                        156.281;
                        156.283 
                        156.286;
                        156.340;
                        156.341;
                        156.343 
                        156.347
MC-C-10-96  8-28-1996   TSO Table IV
                        51.40 
MC-C-1-97   3-5-1997    51.44;
                        51.99
MC-C-2-97   4-2-1997    154.01
MC-C-3-97   4-2-1997    TSO Table IV
MC-C-4-97   7-9-1997    154.01
MC-C-5-97   7-16-1997   154.01
MC-C-6-97   8-6-1997    154.01
MC-C-7-97   8-20-1997   154.01
                        156.003;
                        156.050;
                        156.065;
                        156.090;
                        156.108;
                        156.143;
                        156.163;
                        156.182;
MC-C-8-98   - -1998     156.203;
                        156.223;
                        156.246;
                        156.286;
                        156.305;
                        156.326;
                        156.420;
                        156.624;
                        156.626;
                        156.673
MC-C-3-98   3-4-1998    152.01;
                        152.02
                        92.01 
MC-C-4-98   4-15-1998   92.13;
                        92.99
                        156.138;
MC-C-5-98   7-22-1998   156.178;
                        156.199;
                        156.219
                        91.01;
                        154.01;
MC-C-6-98   7-22-1998   156.550 
                        156.554;
                        TSO Table IV
                        156.235;
MC-C-7-98   10-7-1998   156.236;
                        156.238 
                        156.246
                        156.035 
                        156.050;
MC-C-9-98   12-23-1998  156.080;
                        156.081;
                        156.084 
                        156.090
MC-C-3-99   3-17-1999   154.01
MC-C-4-99   9-14-1999   154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
MC-C-5-99   10-6-1999   154.01
MC-C-3-00   6-21-2000   150.08
MC-C-4-00   6-28-2000   TSO Table IV
MC-C-3-00   12-6-2000   37.01 
                        37.11
MC-C-1-01   2-21-2001   154.01;
                        156.626
                        155.001 
                        155.005;
                        155.020 
                        155.025;
                        155.040 
                        155.050;
                        155.065 
                        155.075;
                        155.090  
                        155.102;
                        155.115 
                        155.133;
                        155.145 
                        155.148;
                        155.160 
                        155.167;
                        155.180 
                        155.186;
                        155.200;
                        155.201;
                        155.215;
                        155.216;
                        155.230 
                        155.232;
                        156.001 
                        156.006;
                        156.020 
                        156.023;
                        156.035 
                        156.050;
                        156.060 
                        156.065;
                        156.080;
                        156.081;
                        156.084 
                        156.090;
                        156.100 
                        156.108;
                        156.120 
                        156.123;
                        156.135 
                        156.143;
                        156.155 
                        156.163;
                        156.175 
                        156.182;
                        156.195;
                        156.196;
                        156.198 
                        156.203;
                        156.215;
                        156.216;
                        156.218 
                        156.223;
                        156.235;
MC-C-3-01   11-7-2001   156.236;
                        156.238 
                        156.246;
                        156.260 
                        156.269;
                        156.280;
                        156.281;
                        156.283 
                        156.286;
                        156.300 
                        156.305;
                        156.320 
                        156.326;
                        156.340;
                        156.341;
                        156.343 
                        156.347;
                        156.360 
                        156.364;
                        156.375;
                        156.376;
                        156.378;
                        156.390 
                        156.396;
                        156.410 
                        156.420;
                        156.435 
                        156.442;
                        156.455 
                        156.463;
                        156.475 
                        156.481;
                        156.495 
                        156.498;
                        156.510 
                        156.513;
                        156.525 
                        156.537;
                        156.550 
                        156.554;
                        156.565 
                        156.569;
                        156.580 
                        156.583;
                        156.595 
                        156.604;
                        156.611;
                        156.620 
                        156.630;
                        156.645 
                        156.655;
                        156.670 
                        156.675;
                        156.690 
                        156.700;
                        156.999
MC-C-1-02   3-13-2002   156.604
                        70.01;
MC-C-2-02   7-10-2002   154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
MC-C-3-02   8-7-2002    70.01;
                        154.01
MC-C-1-03   10-15-2003  70.01;
                        154.01
MC-C-1-04   8-10-2004   154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
MC-02-04    10-27-2004  154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
MC-03-04    10-27-2004  154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
                        156.003;
                        156.035 
                        156.050;
MC-03-05    9-28-2005   156.135 
                        156.143;
                        156.155 
                        156.163
                        155.001 
                        155.005;
                        155.020 
                        155.025;
                        155.040 
                        155.050;
                        155.065 
                        155.075;
                        155.090 155.102;
                        155.115 
                        155.133;
MC-04-05    10-12-2005  155.145 
                        155.148;
                        155.160 
                        155.167;
                        155.180 
                        155.186;
                        155.200;
                        155.201;
                        155.215;
                        155.216;
                        155.230 
                        155.232
MC-05-05    11-8-2005   154.01
                        156.260 
                        156.269;
MC-02-06    3-15-2006   156.375;
                        156.376;
                        156.378
                        51.01;
MC-03-06    4-19-2006   51.15 
                        51.25
MC-04-06    7-12-2006   154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
559-06      8-14-2006   TSO Table III
                        156.215;
                        156.216;
MC-05-2006  10-18-2006  156.218 
                        156.223;
                        156.603
MC-06-2006  10-18-2006  70.01
MC-01-2007  9-26-2007   154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
MC-02-2007  10-29-2007  TSO Table II
                        70.01;
MC-03-2007  11-28-2007  154.01;
                        156.475 
                        156.481
                        156.280;
                        156.281;
                        156.283 
MC-04-2007  12-5-2007   156.286;
                        156.340;
                        156.341;
                        156.343 
                        156.347
MC-05-2007  12-12-2007  70.01
MC-C-5-08   - -2008     156.158
MC-01-2008  1-9-2008    156.060 
                        156.065
MC-02-2008  1-23-2008   156.525 
                        156.537
MC-03-2008  2-27-2008   70.01
                        156.300 
                        156.305;
MC-04-2008  3-5-2008    156.410 
                        156.420;
                        156.435 
                        156.442
MC-05-2008  7-9-2008    154.01
MC-01-2009  1-7-2009    TSO Table IV
MC-3-2009   6-24-2009   70.01
MC-4-2009   6-24-2009   156.320 
                        156.326
MC-5-2009   12-2-2009   TSO Table II
MC-7-2009   12-23-2009  154.01
MC-8-2009   12-23-2009  156.020 
                        156.023
MC-01-2010  1-20-2010   156.620 
                        156.630
MC-2-2010   3-17-2010   154.01
MC-04-2010  7-21-2010   154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
MC-05-2010  8-4-2010    154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
MC-06-2010  8-25-2010   TSO Table III
MC-07-2010  10-13-2010  70.01
                        156.003;
                        156.100 
                        156.108;
                        156.235;
                        156.236;
                        156.238 
MC-08-2010  11-3-2010   156.246;
                        156.280;
                        156.281;
                        156.283 
                        156.286;
                        156.475 
                        156.481;
                        156.626
MC-09-2010  11-10-2010  154.01
MC-10-2010  11-10-2010  154.01
MC-1-2011   1-19-2011   TSO Table IV
                        154.01;
MC-2-2011   2-16-2011   156.550 
                        156.554;
                        TSO Table IV
MC-3-2011   9-14-2011   154.01
MC-4-2011   10-26-2011  TSO Table IV
MC-5-2011   12-21-2011  154.01
MC-1-2012   1-11-2012   70.01
                        70.01;
                        70.02;
                        155.001 
                        155.005;
                        155.020 
                        155.025;
                        155.040 
                        155.050;
                        155.065 
                        155.075;
                        155.090  
                        155.102;
                        155.115 
MC-2-2012   2-22-2012   155.133;
                        155.145 
                        155.148;
                        155.160 
                        155.167;
                        155.180 
                        155.186;
                        155.200;
                        155.201;
                        155.215;
                        155.216;
                        155.230 
                        155.232;
                        156.595 
                        156.604
MC-3-2012   10-17-2012  154.01
                        154.01;
                        156.001 
                        156.006;
                        156.035 
                        156.050;
                        156.060 
                        156.065;
                        156.080;
                        156.081;
                        156.084 
OR-1-2013   9-4-2013    156.090;
                        156.320 
                        156.326;
                        156.565 
                        156.569;
                        156.595 
                        156.604;
                        156.620 
                        156.630;
                        156.670 
                        156.675;
                        156.698
ORD-2-2013  11-25-2013  70.01
                        156.340;
ORD-2014-1  1-22-2014   156.341;
                        156.343 
                        156.347
ORD-2014-3  7-2-2014    154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
                        154.01;
ORD-2014-4  7-9-2014    TSO Table IV;
                        156.035 
                        156.050
ORD-2014-5  8-27-2014   154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
ORD-2014-6  8-27-2014   154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
ORD-2015-2  5-20-2015   70.01
ORD-2015-3  6-10-2015   154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
ORD-2015-4  9-23-2015   111.01
ORD-2015-5  12-16-2015  154.01
ORD-2016-1  2-17-2016   TSO Table II
ORD-2016-2  4-27-2016   154.01
ORD-2016-3  5-18-2016   154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
                        156.410 
                        156.420;
                        156.435 
ORD-2016-4  5-18-2016   156.442;
                        156.455 
                        156.463;
                        TSO Table IV
                        156.035 
                        156.050;
                        156.080;
                        156.081;
ORD-2016-5  7-27-2016   156.084 
                        156.090;
                        156.595 
                        156.604;
                        156.645 
                        156.655
ORD-2016-6  12-21-2016  154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
ORD-2016-7  12-21-2016  154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
ORD-2017-1  6-14-2017   70.01
ORD-2017-2  6-21-2017   151.001 
                        151.003
ORD-2017-3  7-5-2017    156.020 
                        156.023
                        156.001 156.0067;
                        156.035 
                        156.050;
                        156.080;
                        156.081;
ORD-2017-4  7-5-2017    156.084 
                        156.090;
                        156.620 
                        156.630;
                        156.645 
                        156.655
ORD-2017-5  10-25-2017  111.02
                        156.525 
ORD-2017-6  10-25-2017  156.537;
                        156.595 
                        156.604
ORD-2017-7  10-25-2017  154.01;
                        TSO Table IV
ORD-2018-1  6-13-2018   154.01
ORD-2018-2  9-5-2018    91.01
ORD-2018-3  9-5-2018    154.01
ORD-2019-1  1-3-2019    70.01
ORD-2019-2  2-20-2019   TSO Table IV
ORD-2019-5  4-24-2019   154.01
ORD-2020-1  2-5-2020    TSO Table IV
                        156.001 
                        156.006;
                        156.020 
                        156.023;
                        156.035 
                        156.050;
                        156.060 
                        156.065;
                        156.080;
                        156.081;
                        156.084 
                        156.090;
                        156.100 
                        156.108;
                        156.120 
                        156.123;
                        156.135 
                        156.143;
                        156.155 
                        156.163;
                        156.175 
                        156.182;
                        156.195;
                        156.196;
                        156.198 
                        156.203;
                        156.215;
                        156.216;
                        156.218 
                        156.223;
                        156.235;
                        156.236;
                        156.238 
                        156.246;
                        156.260 
                        156.269;
                        156.280;
                        156.281;
                        156.283 
                        156.286;
                        156.300 
                        156.305;
                        156.320 
ORD-2021-1  3-24-2021   156.326;
                        156.340;
                        156.341;
                        156.343 
                        156.347;
                        156.360 
                        156.364;
                        156.375;
                        156.376;
                        156.378;
                        156.390 
                        156.396;
                        156.410 
                        156.420;
                        156.435 
                        156.442;
                        156.455 
                        156.463;
                        156.475 
                        156.481;
                        156.495 
                        156.498;
                        156.510 
                        156.513;
                        156.525 
                        156.537;
                        156.550 
                        156.554;
                        156.565 
                        156.569;
                        156.580 
                        156.583;
                        156.595 
                        156.604;
                        156.611;
                        156.620 
                        156.630;
                        156.645 
                        156.655;
                        156.670 
                        156.675;
                        156.690 
                        156.700;
                        156.999
ORD-2021-2  4-21-2021   154.01
                        156.001 
                        156.006;
                        156.020 
                        156.023;
                        156.035 
                        156.050;
                        156.060 
                        156.065;
                        156.080;
                        156.081;
                        156.084 
                        156.090;
                        156.100 
                        156.108;
                        156.120 
                        156.123;
                        156.135 
                        156.143;
                        156.155 
                        156.163;
                        156.175 
                        156.182;
                        156.195;
                        156.196;
                        156.198 
                        156.203;
                        156.215;
                        156.216;
                        156.218 
                        156.223;
                        156.235;
                        156.236;
                        156.238 
                        156.246;
                        156.260 
                        156.269;
                        156.280;
                        156.281;
                        156.283 
                        156.286;
                        156.300 
                        156.305;
                        156.320 
ORD-2021-3  4-21-2021   156.326;
                        156.340;
                        156.341;
                        156.343 
                        156.347;
                        156.360 
                        156.364;
                        156.375;
                        156.376;
                        156.378;
                        156.390 
                        156.396;
                        156.410 
                        156.420;
                        156.435 
                        156.442;
                        156.455 
                        156.463;
                        156.475 
                        156.481;
                        156.495 
                        156.498;
                        156.510 
                        156.513;
                        156.525 
                        156.537;
                        156.550 
                        156.554;
                        156.565 
                        156.569;
                        156.580 
                        156.583;
                        156.595 
                        156.604;
                        156.611;
                        156.620 
                        156.630;
                        156.645 
                        156.655;
                        156.670 
                        156.675;
                        156.690 
                        156.700;
                        156.999
                        93.001 
                        93.003;
                        93.015 
                        93.020;
                        93.035 
                        93.038;
                        93.050 
                        93.056;
                        93.070 
                        93.076;
                        93.090 
ORD 2021-4  6-2-2021    93.092;
                        93.105 
                        93.111;
                        93.125 
                        93.132;
                        93.145 
                        93.150;
                        93.165 
                        93.176;
                        93.190 
                        93.192;
                        93.999
ORD-2022-1  4-20-2022   70.01
                        155.001 
                        155.005;
                        155.020 
                        155.025;
                        155.040 
                        155.050;
                        155.065 
                        155.075;
                        155.090  
                        155.102;
                        155.115 
ORD-2022-3  9-21-2022   155.133;
                        155.145 
                        155.148;
                        155.160 
                        155.167;
                        155.180 
                        155.186;
                        155.200;
                        155.201;
                        155.215;
                        155.216;
                        155.230 
                        155.232
ORD-2022-4  9-21-2022   70.02
ORD-2023-2  2-8-2023    30.01
ORD-2023-1  2-22-2023   154.01
ORD-2023-3  4-5-2023    151.001 
                        151.007
ORD-2023-4  5-17-2023   TSO Table II
                        35.001 
                        35.012;
                        35.025 
                        35.027;
                        35.040 
ORD-2023-5  7-19-2023   35.044;
                        35.055 
                        35.059;
                        35.070 
                        35.073;
                        35.085 
                        35.089
ORD-2023-6  9-20-2023   TSO Table IV
ORD-2024-1  3-6-2024    TSO Table IV
                        156.003;
                        156.038;
                        156.040;
                        156.047;
                        156.048;
                        156.085;
                        156.138;
ORD-2024-3  4-3-2024    156.158;
                        156.178;
                        156.199;
                        156.219;
                        156.603;
                        156.620;
                        156.650;
                        156.694
ORD-2024-05 5-15-2024   154.01
                        156.001 156.007;
                        156.020 
                        156.023;
                        156.035 
                        156.050;
                        156.060 
                        156.065;
                        156.080 
                        156.090;
                        156.135 
                        156.143;
                        156.195 
                        156.203;
                        156.215 
                        156.223;
                        156.235 
                        156.246;
                        156.280 
                        156.286;
                        156.320 
                        156.326;
                        156.340 
ORD-2025-01 1-8-2025    156.347;
                        156.375 
                        156.378;
                        156.390 
                        156.396;
                        156.435 
                        156.442;
                        156.455 
                        156.463;
                        156.475 
                        156.481;
                        156.595 
                        156.604;
                        156.610;
                        156.611;
                        156.620 
                        156.630;
                        156.645 
                        156.655;
                        156.670 
                        156.675;
                        156.690 
                        156.700;
                        156.999
                       
 
 
 
