
ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY CODE, 2005
County Code adopted by Bill No. 82-05, effective November 9, 2005.
County Code is current through July, 2025.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6513.png]
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
 
COPYRIGHT © 2025
ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY, MARYLAND
 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced or distributed by any means or stored in a
database or retrieval system without prior written
permission of Anne Arundel County, Maryland.
COUNTY OFFICIALS
2024
Steuart Pittman, County Executive
County Council
District 1: Peter Smith
District 2: Allison M. Pickard
District 3: Nathan Volke
District 4: Julie Hummer
District 5: Amanda Fiedler
District 6: Lisa Brannigan Rodvien
District 7: Shannon Leadbetter
Kaley Schultze, Administrative Officer
Marcia Alvarado, Assistant Administrative Officer
Meredith Beach, Legislative Counsel
Gregory J. Swain, County Attorney
CHARTER

Editor's note – The Charter is printed herein as passed, but words in brackets
have been editorially supplied.
Section
Preamble
Article I. Name and Rights of the County
   
101.   Body corporate and politic.
   
102.   Exercise of powers.
   
103.   Name and boundaries.
Article II. The County Council
   
201.   Composition.
   
202.   Qualifications.
   
203.   Term of office.
   
204.   Compensation.
   
205.   Vacancies.
   
206.   Councilmanic districts.
   
207.   Revision of councilmanic districts.
   
208.   Legislative sessions; meetings of the County Council; quorum; rules of
procedure.
   
209.   Removal from office.
Article III. The Legislative Branch
   
301.   Composition.
   
302.   Officers.
   
303.   Action by Council.
   
304.   Enumerated powers not to be exclusive.
   
305.   Limitation on exercise of County Council's powers.
   
306.   Legislative powers of County Council.
   
307.   Legislative Procedure.
   
308.   The Referendum.
   
309.   Noninterference with executive branch.
   
310.   County Auditor.
   
311.   Duties of the County Auditor.
   
312.   Independent audit.
   
313.   Special audits.
   
314.   Special assistance.
Article IV. The County Executive
   
401.   Nature and term of office; mode of election; qualification; salary.
   
402.   Vacancy.
   
403.   Temporary absence or disability of County Executive.
   
404.   Conviction or failure to perform duties.
   
405.   Powers and duties of the office.
   
406.   Change in compensation of County Executive.
Article V. The Executive Branch
   
501.   Composition.
   
502.   General supervision.
   
503.   Composition; restrictions on creation of additional offices and
departments.
   
504.   Chief Administrative Officer.
   
505.   Same; qualifications; mode of selection; salary.
   
506.   Offices.
   
507.   Departments.
   
507A.   Repealed by Res. No. 55-96.
   
508.   Term and compensation of officers and employees in the executive branch.
   
509.   Temporary appointments.
   
510.   Organization staffing.
The Service Offices
   The Office of Finance
   
511.   The Controller.
   
512.   General powers and duties of the Controller.
   
513.   Specific powers and duties.
   
514.   Appropriation to control expenditures.
   The Office of the Budget
   
515.   The Budget Officer.
   
516.   Powers and duties.
   The Office of Personnel
   
517.   Composition of office.
   
518.   Qualifications of the Personnel Officer.
   
519.   Powers and duties of the Personnel Officer.
   
520.   Appointment of the Personnel Board.
   
521.   Powers and duties of the Personnel Board.
   The Office of Emergency Management
   
522.   Emergency Management Director.
   
522A.   Office of Emergency Management.
   The Office of Central Services
   
523.   Central Service Officer.
   
524.   Duties and functions of the Office of Central Services.
   The Office of Law
   
525.   The County Attorney.
   
526.   Powers and duties of the County Attorney.
   
527.   Assistants to the County Attorney.
   
528.   Temporary additional legal assistance.
   
529.   Prohibitions.
   Office of Information Services
   
529A.   Information Services Officer.
   
529B.   Duties of the office.
   The Office of Planning and Zoning
   
530.   Organization of office.
   
531.   Duties of the office.
   
532.   The Planning Advisory Board.
   
533.   Duties and functions of the Planning Advisory Board.
   Office of Administrative Hearings
   
534.   Organization of office.
   
535.   General powers and duties.
   
536.   Appeals from orders of the Administrative Hearing Officer.
   [Office of Criminal Justice and Corrections]
   
536A.   Criminal Justice and Corrections Officer.
   
536B.   Office of Criminal Justice and Corrections.
   [Office of Detention Facilities]
   
536C.   Superintendent of Detention Facilities.
   
536D.   Office of Detention Facilities.
The Operating Departments
   Department of Public Works
   
537.   Director of Public Works.
   
538.   Functions of the Department of Public Works.
   
539.   Repealed by Res. No. 20-06.
   
539A.   Repealed by Res. No. 20-06.
   Department of Inspections and Permits
   
540.   Director of Inspections and Permits.
   
541.   Functions and duties of the Department.
   
542.   Licensing and examining boards.
   Police Department
   
543.   Chief of Police.
   
544.   Functions of the Police Department.
   Fire Department
   
545.   Fire Chief.
   
546.   Fire Advisory Board.
   
547.   Functions and duties of the Fire Department.
   Department of Recreation and Parks
   
548.   Director of Recreation and Parks.
   
549.   Functions of the Department.
   
550.   Recreation Advisory Board.
   Department of Aging
   
550A.   Director of Aging.
   
550B.   Functions of the Department.
   Department of Education
   
551.   Composition; administration under State law.
   Department of Libraries
   
552.   Composition; administration under State law.
   Department of Health
   
553.   Composition; functions; administration under State and County law.
   Department of Social Services
   
554.   Composition; functions; administration under State and County law.
   Reorganization of Departments under State Law
   
555.   Furthering legislation.
Article VI. Special Boards, Commissions, and Committees
   County Board of Appeals
   
601.   County Board of Appeals; appointment; term; compensation.
   
602.   Power and functions of County Board of Appeals.
   
603.   Rules of practice and procedure.
   
604.   Appeals from decisions of the Board.
   
605.   Furthering legislation.
   Pension Oversight Commission
   
606.   Composition of Commission; terms; removal and compensation of members.
   
607.   Duties of the Commission.
   
608.   Budgeting requirements.
   
609.   Terms of the initial members of the Commission; creation of staggered
terms.
   Spending Affordability Comm
ittee
   
610.   Composition of Committee; terms; compensation.
   Human Relations Commission
   
611.   Human Relations Commission.
   Veterans Affairs Commission
   
612.   Veterans Affairs Commission.
Article VII. Budgetary and Fiscal Procedures
   
701.   Fiscal year and tax years.
   
702.   Definition of terms used in this Article.
   
703.   Comprehensive scope of budget.
   
704.   Formulation of current expense budget.
   
705.   Formulation of capital budget and capital program.
   
706.   Pre-submission meetings; submission and contents of the County budget.
   
707.   Filing of proposed budget; copies.
   
708.   Public hearing.
   
709.   Action on the budget by the County Council.
   
710.   Reproduction of budget; effective date; tax levy; appropriations.
   
711.   Transfer of appropriations.
   
712.   Supplementary and emergency appropriations.
   
713.   Lapsed appropriations.
   
714.   Budget reduction amendment.
   
715.   Appropriation control and certification of funds.
   
716.   Restrictions on capital projects; amendment to capital budget-after
adoption of budget.
   
717.   Enterprise accounting.
   
718.   Composition and limitation upon County funds and levies; special taxes;
bond obligation.
   
719.   Borrowing limitations.
   
720.   Term of bonds; disbursement of premiums.
   
721.   Contents of Bond Issue Authorization Ordinances; interim notes.
   
722.   Supplemental legislation by County Council.
Article VIII. Merit System
   
801.   Classification and pay plan and rules affecting costs.
   
802.   Exempt positions.
   
803.   Classified positions.
   
804.   Appointing authority.
   
805.   Eligibility lists.
   
806.   Probationary period.
   
807.   Permanent status.
   
808.   Grounds for removal of permanent employee.
   
809.   Repealed by Res. No. 40-88.
   
810.   Abolition of position in budget.
   
811.   Right to organize and collective bargaining.
   
812.   Binding arbitration for law enforcement employees and for uniformed
firefighters of the Fire Department.
   
813.   Prohibited practices.
   
814.   Pensions of persons not a part of the Maryland State Retirement and
Pension Systems.
   
815.   Retiree Health Benefits Trust.
Article IX. Centralized Purchasing
   
901.   Responsibility for purchasing.
   
902.   County purchasing policies and practices.
   
903.   Application of this Article to departments and agencies under State law.
   
904.   Competitive bidding.
   
905.   Conformity with budget limitations.
   
906.   Service contracts.
   
907.   Uniform bidding.
   
908.   Contract execution.
   
909.   Cooperative purchasing.
   
910.   Negotiations with vendors.
   
911.   Furthering Legislation.
   
912.   Repealed by Bill No. 93-80.
Article X. Miscellaneous
   
1001.   County Ethics Commission.
   
1001A.   County Public Ethics Law.
   
1001B.   Authority, duties and functions of Commission.
   
1001C.   Repealed by Res. No. 48-92.
   
1002.   Repealed by Res. No. 48-92.
   
1002A.   Repealed by Res. No. 48-92.
   
1003.   Additional compensation prohibited.
   
1004.   Copies of books and papers on demand.
   
1005.   Inspection of books, accounts and papers.
   
1006.   Surety bonds.
   
1007.   Compilation of laws.
   
1008.   County Seal.
   
1009.   Subpoena power.
   
1010.   Definitions and rules of construction.
   
1011.   Custody of papers and records.
   
1011A.   Publication and distribution of Charter.
   
1012.   [Existing laws.]
   
1013.   [Reference in State Constitution and laws to County Commissioners.]
   
1014.   Construction of "local governing body."
   
1015.   Separability.
   
1016.   Citation.
   
1017.   [Effective date of this Charter.]
Article XI. [Transition Schedule]
   
1101 -
1110. Repealed.
   
1111.   Existing County seal.
Article XII. Termination of Charter; Amendments to Charter
   
1201.   Termination.
   
1202.   Amendment.
   
1203.   Decennial Redistricting and Charter Revision Commission.
Reference Table
PREAMBLE
   We, the People of Anne Arundel County, State of Maryland, in order to form a
more orderly County government, establish separate legislative and executive
branches, insure responsibility of and accountability for public funds, promote
the general welfare and secure the benefits of home rule, do, in accordance
with the Constitution and the laws of the State of Maryland, adopt, ordain and
establish as our Charter and form of government this CHARTER OF ANNE ARUNDEL
COUNTY, MARYLAND.
Article I. Name and Rights of the County
Sec. 101. Body corporate and politic.
   Anne Arundel County as it now exists constitutes a body corporate and
politic. Under this Charter it shall have all rights and powers of local self-
government and home rule as are now or may hereafter be provided or necessarily
implied by this Charter and by the Constitution and laws of the State of
Maryland.
Sec. 102. Exercise of powers.
   The powers mentioned in the preceding section shall be exercised only by the
County Council of Anne Arundel County, the County Executive and other agents,
officers and employees of the County acting under their respective authorities
or under such other authority as may be provided by this Charter or the laws of
this State.
Sec. 103. Name and boundaries.
   The corporate name shall be "Anne Arundel County, Maryland", and it shall
thus be designated in all actions and proceedings touching its rights, powers,
properties, liabilities and duties. Its boundaries and county seat shall be and
remain as they are at the time this Charter takes effect unless otherwise
changed in accordance with law.
Article II. The County Council
Sec. 201. Composition.
   (a)   Residence Requirement. There shall be a County Council of Anne Arundel
County composed of seven members, each one of whom, at the time of their
election and for six months immediately prior thereto and during their full
term of office, shall reside in a different one of the seven councilmanic
districts described in Section
206 of this Article.
   (b)   Mode of Election. Each member of the County Council shall be nominated
and elected by the qualified voters of the Councilmanic district in which the
member resides, at the same time as members of the General Assembly and in the
manner provided by law.
(Bill No. 56-80; Bill No. 93-80; Bill No. 120-80; Res. No. 77-84)
Sec. 202. Qualifications.
   (a)   In General. In addition to the requirement of residence as provided in
Section
201(a) of this Article, each member of the County Council shall be a qualified
voter of the County and not less than twenty-five years of age at the time of
their election and shall have resided within the County for a period of one
year immediately preceding this election.
   (b)   Other Offices. No person shall qualify or serve as a member of the
County Council while holding any other office, position, or employment for
compensation or profit of or under the County government, or any State or
Federal government office, except for service with a reserve component of the
United States Armed Forces. After qualifying as such, no member of the County
Council, notwithstanding the fact that they may thereafter resign, shall during
the whole period of time for which they were elected be eligible for
appointment to any County office, position or employment carrying compensation.
   (c)   Change of Residence. If any member of the County Council during their
term of office shall move their residence from the councilmanic district in
which they resided at the time of their election, their office shall be
forthwith vacated; but no member of the County Council shall be required to
vacate their office by reason of any change in the boundary lines of their
councilmanic district made during their term.
(Bill No. 56-80; Res. No. 28-10; Res. No. 30-22)
   Attorney’s note – Resolution No. 28-10 modified this Section. The title of
the Resolution indicated that it was proposing an amendment to the Charter “to
allow service on the County Council by an employee of the State or federal
government...”. The body of the Resolution made changes only related to the
exception for reserve duty, and did not modify the prohibition for service on
the Council while holding an office, position, or employment with the State or
federal government. The Resolution passed, and the question presented to the
voters stated:
To amend the Anne Arundel County Charter to allow State and federal employees
and members of the reserve components of the United States Armed Services to
serve on the Anne Arundel County Council, provided that any member ordered to
active federal or State service for a period of time longer than 180 days shall
vacate his or her office as a member of the Council, and the vacancy will be
filled in the manner provided in the County Charter.
   (Emphasis added.) The question passed by an overwhelming majority. It is the
opinion of the County Attorney that, despite the language in the body of the
Section, the ballot question as passed controls, and State and federal
employees may serve on the Anne Arundel County Council.
Sec. 203. Term of office.
   Each member of the County Council shall hold office for a term of four years
commencing on the first Monday in December following election, or as soon
thereafter as practicable, and shall enter upon the duties of the office
immediately upon qualification and serve until a successor shall qualify. No
Council member may serve more than three consecutive terms.
(Res. No. 69-86; Res. No. 55-92; Res. No. 48-12; Res. No. 18-22)
   Editor’s note – The 2012 amendment added the provision that a member of the
County Council serves until the member's successor qualifies for office.
Sec. 204. Compensation.
   Each member of the County Council shall be paid after consideration of the
recommendations of the Salary Standard Commission adopted by ordinance of the
County Council in full compensation for all services required by law or by this
Charter to be performed by the members of the County Council. No member of the
County Council shall be entitled to any other allowance of any kind, except,
subject to approval of the Council, actual necessary expenses incurred in
representing the County beyond the geographical boundaries thereof.
(Res. No. 19-22)
Sec. 205. Vacancies.
   (a)   A vacancy occurring in the office of member of the County Council
prior to the expiration of the term shall be filled as provided in this
section.
   (b)   If a vacancy occurs during the first 12 months of a term, a new member
shall be nominated and elected by the qualified voters of the councilmanic
district in which the vacancy occurs, at the same time as members of the House
of Representatives of the Congress of the United States are nominated and
elected and in the manner provided by law. In the interim until a new member is
elected, the vacancy shall be temporarily filled by a majority vote of the
remaining members of the County Council, within 30 days after the vacancy
occurs. If the County Council fails to appoint a temporary member within 30
days, the State Central Committee of Anne Arundel County representing the
political party to which the previous member belonged at the time of the
member's most recent election shall, within ten days, select and present to the
County Executive an appointee from the remaining applicants receiving at least
one vote at the last ballot roll call of the County Council. The County
Executive shall immediately appoint the person selected by the Central
Committee. If the previous member belonged to a political party without a
Central Committee, the County Council shall provide a list of the remaining
applicants receiving at least one vote at the last ballot roll call of the
County Council, one of whom shall be appointed by the County Executive within
five days.
   (c)   If a vacancy occurs after the first 12 months of a term, the vacancy
shall be permanently filled within 30 days of the vacancy by a majority vote of
the remaining members of the County Council. If the County Council fails to
appoint a new member within 30 days, the State Central Committee of Anne
Arundel County representing the political party to which the previous member
belonged at the time of the member's most recent election shall, within ten
days, select and present to the County Executive an appointee from the
remaining applicants receiving at least one vote at the last ballot roll call
of the County Council. The County Executive shall immediately appoint the
person selected by the Central Committee. If the previous member belonged to a
political party without a Central Committee, the County Council shall provide a
list of the remaining applicants receiving at least one vote at the last ballot
roll call of the County Council, one of whom shall be appointed by the County
Executive within five days.
   (d)   A new member appointed by the County Council or the County Executive,
either temporarily or permanently, or elected by the voters shall be a resident
of the councilmanic district in which the vacancy occurs.
   (e)   If the former member whose position is being filled was a member of a
political party, a new member appointed by the County Council or the County
Executive, either temporarily or permanently, shall be registered in the same
political party as the former member for the 12-month period immediately prior
to the appointment by the County Council or the County Executive.
   (f)   The County Council shall hold public interviews of candidates to fill
the vacancy, whether temporary or permanent, and the Council shall appoint the
new member from among those persons interviewed.
   (g)   A new member appointed permanently by the County Council or the County
Executive, or elected by the voters shall serve the unexpired term of the
former member and until a successor is duly elected and qualified.
   (h)   For a member of the County Council who is a member of a reserve
component of the United States Armed Forces a vacancy shall be deemed to occur,
for purposes of this section, on the date that begins active federal or State
service based on an order calling the member of the County Council to active
service for a period of time exceeding 180 consecutive days.
(Bill No. 69-72; Res. No. 67-86; Res. No. 28-10; Res. No. 45-12)
   Editor's notes –
   The 2010 amendment provided that any member of the County Council ordered to
active federal or State service in a reserve component of the United States
Armed Forces for a period of time longer than 180 days shall vacate office.
   The 2012 added the provisions governing the appointment of a new or
temporary member of the County Council if a vacancy in office is not filled by
a majority vote of the remaining members of the County Council within 30 days
after the vacancy occurs.
Sec. 206. Councilmanic districts.
   Anne Arundel County is hereby divided into seven councilmanic districts
composed of the following election districts and precincts or portions thereof
in effect on November 6, 1962:
Councilmanic District Election District(s) or Parts Thereof in Effect on
                      November 6, 1962
                      The second precinct of the fourth election district
   I               The second precinct of the fifth election district
                      The fourth precinct of the fifth election district
                      The third precinct of the fifth election district
   II              The third precinct of the third election district
                      All that part of the third precinct of the fourth
                      election district which is north and west of New Cut Road
                      The first precinct of the fifth election district
   III             The first precinct A of the fifth election district
                      The first precinct of the third election district
   IV              The first precinct of the fourth election district
                      The second precinct of the second election district
                      All that part of the third precinct of the fourth
                      election district which is south and east of New Cut Road
   V               The second precinct of the third election district
                      The fourth precinct of the third election district
                      The fifth precinct of the third election district
   VI              The sixth election district
                      The first precinct of the second election district
                      The first election district
   VII             The seventh election district
                      The eighth election district
 
   The councilmanic districts above are created solely for the purpose of
establishing districts in which the members of the County Council shall reside
in accordance with the provisions of Section
201(a) of this Article and for no other purpose.
Sec. 207. Revision of councilmanic districts.
   After receiving the report of the Charter Revision Commission as provided in
Section
1203 of
Article XII of this Charter, the County Council is hereby empowered by
ordinance enacted by the affirmative vote of not less than five members, to
revise, amend or reconstitute councilmanic districts then in effect but not to
change the number thereof. Any such ordinance shall not be subject to executive
veto and shall become law on the date of its enactment by the Council. Any such
ordinance shall not be an emergency ordinance and shall be subject to the
referendum provisions of
Article III of this Charter.
Sec. 208. Legislative sessions; meetings of the County Council; quorum; rules
of procedure.
   (a)   Total Session Days. The County Council may sit at the County seat
forty-five days in each year for the purpose of enacting legislation. Such
legislative session-days may but need not be consecutive.
   (b)   Annual Legislative Session. The County Council shall convene for an
annual legislative session on the first day of May (except if said date falls
on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday of the State or Nation, at which time
the County Council shall convene the first working day thereafter) and may
continue its session for a period of not longer than twenty-two (22) days,
exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays of the State or Nation.
   (c)   Monthly Legislative Session – Day. The County Council shall also
convene on the first and third Mondays of each month except August, and in a
councilmanic election year, November, for the purpose of enacting legislation,
but if said session days shall be holidays, the said session days shall be held
on the next succeeding day which is not a holiday. The Council may schedule a
legislative session in August by a resolution approved by a majority of the
Council. In the event of inclement weather or other natural disaster, the Chair
of the County Council at the request of any three members may cancel any
scheduled meeting, and may reschedule same as soon as practicable. If in
advance of a scheduled meeting the Chair determines that a quorum will not be
present, the Chair may cancel and reschedule the meeting as soon as
practicable.
   (d)   Emergency Legislative Session. The County Council may be called into
emergency session in any month either by the County Executive or by the Chair
at the request of any three members of the Council for the purpose of enacting
emergency ordinances. As used in this subsection (d) the term “emergency
ordinance” shall mean one which deals with an actual acute emergency necessary
for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety and welfare;
provided, however, that before any bill shall be passed at such emergency
session, it shall require the affirmative vote of five members of the County
Council.
   (e)   Meetings. The County Council may meet for the purpose of performing
other duties properly exercisable by the County Council under the provisions of
this Charter other than enacting ordinances at such other times and at such
places as the Council may determine.
   (f)   Quorum. At all legislative sessions and meetings four members thereof
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
   (g)   Rules of Procedure. It shall be the duty of the County Council to
adopt Rules of Procedure not inconsistent with this Charter.
(Bill No. 56-70; Bill No. 14-75; Res. No. 68-86; Res. No. 40-12; Res. No. 30-
22)
   Editor's note – The 2012 amendment added the provisions regarding monthly
legislative session-days in August, and clarifying that the County Council may
be called into emergency session during any month of the year.
Sec. 209. Removal from office.
   (a)   The office of a member of the County Council may be declared vacant by
ordinance of the County Council with an affirmative vote of not less than five
members if, during their elected term, the Councilmember:
      (1)   fails to meet the requirements of Section 202 of this Article;
      (2)   is found guilty of, or pleads nolo contendere to, and is convicted
of, a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or misfeasance or malfeasance
in office; or
      (3)   fails to perform or is incapable of performing the duties of their
office for 180 consecutive days.
   (b)   A vacancy occurring under subsection (a)(3) shall be filled in the
manner provided in Section
205 of this Article.
   (c)   To the fullest extent allowed by law, a County Council member removed
from office under subsection (a)(2) may be ineligible to receive post-
employment County benefits earned as a result of their tenure as a County
Council member, subject to an ordinance enacted by the County Council providing
for the conditions of removal and reinstatement of benefits.
(Res. No. 33-12; Res. No. 30-22)
   Editor's note – Sec. 209 was added by amendment in 2012.
Article III. The Legislative Branch
Sec. 301. Composition.
   The legislative branch of the County government shall be composed of the
County Council and the officers and employees thereof.
Sec. 302. Officers.
   (a)   Presiding Officer. The County Council at its regular meeting or
session in December of each year shall elect from its membership a Chair and a
Vice Chair. The Chair, or in their absence the Vice Chair, shall preside at all
meetings and legislative sessions. In the event of the death, resignation, or
disqualification of the Chair, the Vice Chair shall serve as Chair until a new
Chair is elected as provided in this section. On all questions before the
County Council the Chair and Vice Chair shall have and may exercise the vote to
which each is entitled as a Councilmember. In the event of the absence of both
the Chair and Vice Chair, the members present, shall select one of their member
to act as Chair pro tem, who, while so acting shall have all the authority and
voting rights of the Chair.
   (b)   Other Officers and Duties. There shall be an Administrative Officer to
the County Council, appointed by the County Council, who shall keep minutes of
its meetings and maintain its Journal. There may be such other officers of the
County Council as may be provided in its Rules of Procedure. Officers of the
Council shall perform duties and functions not inconsistent with those assigned
to the legislative branch by this Charter or the Rules of Procedure of the
Council.
(Res. No. 69-86; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 303. Action by Council.
   In all of its functions and deliberations, the County Council shall act as a
body and shall have no power to create standing committees or to delegate any
of its functions and duties to a smaller number of its members than the whole.
The Council may, however, appoint special ad hoc committees solely for the
purpose of inquiry and fact finding.
Sec. 304. Enumerated powers not to be exclusive.
   The enumeration of powers in this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be
exclusive, but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby,
or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the County Council shall have and may
exercise all legislative powers which, under the Constitution and laws of this
State, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate.
Sec. 305. Limitation on exercise of County Council's powers.
   In the exercise of all its powers, the County Council shall be subject to
the express limitations imposed by this Charter and by all applicable
provisions of the Constitution and laws of this State.
Sec. 306. Legislative powers of County Council.
   The County Council is the elected legislative body of the County and is
vested with the law-making power thereof, including all such powers as may
heretofore have been exercised by the General Assembly of Maryland and
transferred to the people of the County by the adoption of this Charter. The
County Council shall also have and may exercise all legislative powers
heretofore vested in the County Commissioners of Anne Arundel County, including
the power to accept gifts and grants. The County Council may enact public local
laws hereinafter called ordinances for the County and is authorized to repeal
or amend such local laws as have heretofore been enacted by the General
Assembly of Maryland upon matters covered by the Express Powers Act of 1918
(Local Government Article, §§ 1-702 through 1-706, 9-102, 9-201 through 9-207,
10-102, 10-202 through 10-206, 10-302 through 10-330, and 18-301 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, 1957 Edition as supplemented) as now in force or
hereafter amended, provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to
authorize or empower the County Council to enact ordinances for any
incorporated town, village or municipality in said County on any matter covered
by the powers granted to said town, village or municipality by the act
incorporating it, or any subsequent act or acts amendatory thereto. The County
Council may also provide for the enforcement of all ordinances and resolutions
adopted by fines, penalties and imprisonment, within the limits prescribed by
law.
Sec. 307. Legislative Procedure.
   (a)   Public Meetings. All meetings and legislative sessions of the County
Council shall comply with the Maryland Open Meetings Act.
   (b)   Enacting Clause. The style of the enacting clause for all ordinances
of the County Council shall be: "Be it enacted by the County Council of Anne
Arundel County, Maryland."
   (c)   Titles. Each ordinance enacted by the County Council shall embrace but
one subject and no ordinance or resolution or any section thereof shall be
revised or amended by reference to its title or section only.
   (d)   Ordinances and Resolutions. The County Council shall proceed only by
ordinance or resolution which shall be introduced in written or printed form.
This requirement shall not apply to procedural motions, the election of a
presiding officer and motions for adjournment. In addition to other acts
required by law or by specific provision of this Charter to be done by
ordinance, those acts of the County Council shall be done by ordinance which
adopt or amend a law, create new bureaus or divisions of any department or
office of the County government, which provide for a fine or other penalty or
establish a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty
is imposed, which levy taxes, which grant, renew or extend a franchise, which
set the rate charged for sewer and water services, which fix the compensation
of any officer or employee of the County, which make an appropriation, which
authorize the borrowing of money, which convey or lease, or authorize the
conveyance or lease of any lands of the County. A resolution shall mean a
measure adopted by the County Council, not subject to executive veto, which is
of a temporary or administrative nature such as the making of appointments, the
declaration of testimonials, the direction of officers and employees of the
County Council, requests for information from the executive branch and such
other actions which this Charter requires to be taken by resolution.
   (e)   Procedure for Passing Ordinances.
      (1)   A proposed ordinance may be introduced by bill by any member of the
Council on any legislative session-day of the Council. Not later than the next
calendar day following the introduction of a bill the Chair of the Council
shall schedule a public hearing thereon which shall not be less than seven days
after its introduction; providing that the Council may reject any ordinance on
it introduction without a hearing by a vote of five members. The hearing may,
but need not be, held on a legislative session-day and may be adjourned from
time to time. After the public hearing as herein provided, a bill may be
finally passed on a legislative session-day with or without amendment, except,
that if any bill, other than one that levies a tax or assessment to fund the
annual budget and appropriation ordinance, is amended before final passage and
the amendment constitutes a change of substance, the bill shall not be passed
until it is reprinted or reproduced as amended and a hearing shall be set
thereon. A change of zoning by amendment to a comprehensive zoning ordinance,
that is not requested by application to or proposed by the Office of Planning
and Zoning prior to introduction of the comprehensive zoning ordinance, may not
be added by amendment to the bill until one or more signs are posted on the
subject property in the manner provided in the County Code.
      (2)   The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable to
emergency ordinances and the Annual Budget and Appropriation Ordinance of Anne
Arundel County as defined in Section
709 of this Charter.
   (f)   Procedure for Passing Emergency Ordinances. Upon introduction by bill
of an emergency ordinance the Chair shall schedule a public hearing thereon
which shall not be less than three days after its introduction. The public
hearing may but need not be held on a legislative session- day and may be
adjourned from time to time. After public hearing the bill may be passed with
or without amendment on a legislative session-day by an affirmative vote of
five members of the County Council.
   (g)   Votes Required. No ordinance shall become law unless it be passed by
the affirmative vote of not less than four members of the County Council, or
such greater number as may elsewhere be required in this Charter, and on its
final passage the yeas and nays shall be recorded in the Journal.
   (h)   Publication of County Laws. On the introduction of any bill, an
electronic copy thereof and notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be posted by the Administrative Officer to the County Council as soon as
practicable on the County Council website. Printed copies of the bill shall be
made available to the public and to the press. Every copy of each bill shall
bear the name of the member of the Council introducing it and the date it was
introduced for the consideration of the Council; and no bill, unless it be an
emergency bill, shall be passed before the seventh calendar day after such
date. Each bill shall receive such publication as may from time to time be
required by law.
   (i)   Effective Date of Ordinances. Except as provided in
Section 710 of this Charter for the Annual Budget and Appropriation Ordinance
and ordinances levying taxes or assessments to support the budget, and except
for any ordinance related to transfers of appropriations under Charter
Section 711, supplementary appropriations under Charter
Section 712, and amendments of the capital budget under Charter
Section 716, any ordinance enacted by the County Council shall take effect
forty-five days after it becomes law, unless declared to be effective on a
later date. Ordinances related to transfers of appropriations under Charter
Section 711, supplementary appropriations under Charter
Section 712, and amendments of the capital budget under Charter
Section 716 shall take effect from the date they become law. If an ordinance is
an emergency ordinance as defined in Section 208(d) it shall take effect from
the date it becomes law. The County Council may declare an ordinance passed at
an annual legislative session or a monthly legislative session-day to be an
emergency ordinance necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health, safety and welfare, and it shall take effect from the date it
becomes law. An emergency ordinance under subsection 208(d) or this subsection
may not levy taxes, create revenue, or grant a franchise or special privilege,
or abolish or create any office or change any salary, term or duty of any
officer or create any vested right or interest or create or expand any Capital
Project, or increase the funding thereof (except in cases where the increase in
funding is required solely to meet cost escalation and does not affect the
scope of the project as originally budgeted).
   (j)   Executive Veto and Failure of Bills. Upon the passage of any ordinance
by the County Council, with the exception only of such measures as may in this
Charter be made expressly exempt from the executive veto, the same shall be
presented within five (5) days (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays of the State or Nation) to the County Executive for approval or
disapproval, and, within ten (10) days after such presentation, the County
Executive shall return any such ordinance to the County Council with the County
Executive’s approval endorsed thereon or with a statement in writing of the
County Executive’s reasons for not approving the same. Upon approval by the
County Executive any such ordinance shall become law. Any such ordinance
presented to the County Executive and returned with the County Executive’s veto
may be reconsidered by the County Council. The County Executive’s objections
shall be entered upon the Journal of the Council, and, not later than at its
next legislative session-day, the County Council may reconsider the enactment
thereof notwithstanding the executive veto, and, if five (5) members of the
Council vote in the affirmative, the ordinance shall become law. Whenever the
County Executive shall fail to return any such ordinance within ten (10) days
after the date of its presentation to the County Executive, or returns the
ordinance unsigned without a written statement of approval or disapproval, the
ordinance shall become law as of the tenth day after presentation, and the
Administrative Officer to the County Council shall forthwith record the fact of
such failure in the Journal. The County Executive may disapprove of one or more
parts of a comprehensive zoning ordinance while approving others, and the part
or parts approved shall become law, and the parts disapproved shall be returned
to the Council as prescribed and shall not take effect unless passed over the
County Executive’s veto as set forth herein. Any bill not passed within ninety-
five days after its introduction, or prior to November in a councilmanic
election year, shall fail.
(Bill No. 56-70; Bill No. 73-72; Bill No. 72-82; Res. No. 69-86; Res. No. 33-
02; Res. No. 39-12; Res. 47-12; Res. No. 7-16; Res. No. 48-17; Res. 21-22; Res.
No. 22-22; Res. No. 30-22; Res. No. 20-24)
Editor's notes –
The 2012 amendment added the provision clarifying that, when a bill is passed
by the County Council but returned unsigned by the County Executive without a
statement of approval or disapproval, the bill becomes law on the 10th day
after presentation of the bill to the County Executive. The 2012 amendment also
limited the County Executive's line item veto authority to comprehensive zoning
ordinances.
Resolution No. 22-22 amended subsection (i) but incorrectly referenced
subsection (e) as the Charter provision that describes “emergency legislative
session”. The reprint includes the correct reference to subsection (d).
Sec. 308. The Referendum.
   (a)   Scope of the Referendum. The people of Anne Arundel County reserve to
themselves the power known as "The Referendum, " by petition to have submitted
to the registered voters of the County, to approve or reject at the polls, any
ordinance or part of any ordinance of the County Council. The referendum
petition against any such ordinance shall be sufficient if signed by ten per
centum of the qualified voters of the County calculated upon the whole number
of votes cast in the County for Governor at the last preceding gubernatorial
election. Such petition shall be filed with the Board of Supervisors of
Elections of Anne Arundel County within forty-five days after the ordinance
becomes law. If such a petition is filed as aforesaid, the ordinance or part
thereof to be referred shall not take effect until thirty days after its
approval by a majority of the qualified voters of the County voting thereon at
the next ensuing election held for members of the House of Representatives of
the United States; provided, however, that if more than one-half but less than
the full number of signatures required to complete any referendum petition
against such ordinance be filed within forty-five days from the date it becomes
law, the time for the ordinance to take effect and the time for filing the
remainder of signatures to complete the petition shall be extended for an
additional thirty days with like effect. Any emergency ordinance shall remain
in force from the date it becomes law notwithstanding the filing of such
petition, but shall stand repealed thirty days after having been rejected by a
majority of the qualified voters voting thereon. No ordinance making any
appropriation for current expense for maintaining the County government, or for
maintaining or aiding any public institution, not exceeding the next previous
appropriation for the same purpose, shall be subject to rejection or repeal
under this section. The increase in any such appropriation for maintaining the
County government or for maintaining or aiding any public institution specified
in the petition may be referred to a vote of the people of the County upon
petition as above provided.
   (b)   Form of Petition. A petition may consist of several papers, but each
paper shall contain the full text of the ordinance or the part of the ordinance
petitioned upon; and there shall be attached to each such paper an affidavit of
the person procuring the signatures thereon that, to the said person's own
personal knowledge, each signature thereon is genuine and bona fide, and that
to the best of their knowledge, information and belief the signers are
registered voters of the State of Maryland and Anne Arundel County, as set
opposite their names.
(Res. No. 7-16; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 309. Noninterference with executive branch.
   Neither the Council nor any of its members shall direct or request the
appointment of any person to or removal from any office or employment by the
County Executive or by any of the County Executive’s subordinates or in any way
take part in the appointment of or removal of officers and employees of the
County except as specifically provided in this Charter. Except for the purpose
of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the executive branch
solely through the County Executive, and neither the Council nor any member
thereof shall give orders either publicly or privately to any subordinate of
the County Executive. Any member of the Council violating the provisions of
this section or voting for a motion, resolution or ordinance in violation of
this section shall upon conviction be punishable by imprisonment for not more
than six months or a fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00). The violator
shall thereafter cease to be a member of the Council.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 310. County Auditor.
   The County Council shall, by resolution, appoint a County Auditor who shall
hold office for an indefinite term at the pleasure of the Council and shall
receive such compensation as the Council may determine. The County Auditor
shall be a certified public accountant licensed for the practice of their
profession under the laws of this State, and shall be appointed on the basis of
their knowledge of governmental accounting and auditing and shall have at least
five years experience pertaining to the duties of the office.
(Bill No. 93-80; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 311. Duties of the County Auditor.
   (a)   Annual audits. The County Auditor, not later than six months after the
close of each fiscal year, shall submit to the County Council and to the County
Executive, a complete financial audit for the preceding fiscal year, of all
offices, departments, institutions, boards, commissions, corporations, courts
and other agencies of the County government. The audit shall be performed by
the County Auditor or, subject to the availability of funds in the budget, by
an independent firm of certified public accountants whose members are licensed
for the practice of their profession under the laws of this State. The County
Council, in its discretion, may except those agencies whose entire records,
accounts and affairs are completely audited each year by the State government
and those special taxing districts which are required by State law or County
law to have independent audits performed on a periodic basis. The audit shall
include a report, together with explanatory comments as the Auditor may deem
appropriate. Copies of the complete audit shall be open for the inspection of
the public and the press in the County Auditor’s office and a reasonable number
of copies shall be available for public distribution.
   (b)   Other specific duties. All records and files pertaining to the receipt
and expenditure of County funds, and all records and files maintained by all
officers, agents and employees of the County, including those that are
confidential by law, shall at all times be open to the inspection of the County
Auditor. The County Auditor shall devote full time to the duties of the office.
The County Auditor shall make a current post audit of all County offices,
departments, institutions, boards, commissions, courts, corporations and other
agencies as previously specified and, with the approval by resolution of the
Council, may examine and audit all accounts, books and records involving
activities and affairs of the County including those for which the County has a
responsibility as an agent, custodian or trustee. The County Auditor shall have
the authority to conduct other financial or performance audits or reviews of
any office, department, or agency funded in whole or in part by County funds
and to conduct a separate investigation of an act or allegation of fraud,
waste, or abuse in the obligation, expenditure, receipt, or use of County
resources. The County Auditor shall promptly call to the attention of the
County Council and the County Executive any irregularity or improper procedure
which the County Auditor, from time to time, may discover and to take exception
to such practices, and it shall be the duty of the County Executive to cause
corrective action to be taken promptly, such action to include, as appropriate,
the withholding of funds. Any special examination or audit shall be available
for public inspection and shall be reported promptly to the County Executive,
the County Council and the offices, departments, institutions, boards,
commissions, courts, corporations and other agencies covered thereby. The
County Auditor shall receive a copy of any allegation or investigation related
to employee fraud, waste, or abuse in the County government and may inspect the
records relating to the allegation or investigation and shall forward any
exception to the findings of the fraud, waste, or abuse allegation or
investigation to the County Council and the County Executive. An employee and
other persons associated in any manner with the expenditure of County funds
shall cooperate with the County Auditor in the performance of the Auditor’s
duties under this section. An employee or other person who assists or provides
information to the employees or authorized representative of the Office of the
County Auditor may not be retaliated against, penalized, or threatened in any
manner as a result of assisting with or providing information to the Office of
the County Auditor or the Auditor’s staff.
   (c)   County Council – power to assign additional duties. The County Council
shall have the power to implement the provisions of this section and to assign
additional functions, duties and personnel to the County Auditor by resolution
consistent with those provided herein. The County Council to the extent
permitted by law may by resolution authorize the County Auditor to examine and
audit the books and records of persons or firms contracting with the County
when in its judgment such action is needed to protect the interests of the
County. All actions of the County Council pursuant to this section shall be
exempt from the executive veto.
(Res. No. 26-98; Res. No. 27-98; Res. No. 24-18; Res. No. 36-19; Res. No. 23-
22; Res. No. 30-22; Res. No. 27-24)
Sec. 312. Independent audit.
   The County Council shall annually cause to be made a financial audit of all
offices, departments, institutions, boards, commissions and other agencies of
the County government, by an independent firm of certified public accountants
whose members are licensed for the practice of their profession under the laws
of this State. The completed audit shall be submitted to the County Council and
to the County Executive and copies shall be made available to the public and
the press no later than six months after the close of the fiscal year of the
audit. All records of the County Auditor and all records and files pertaining
to the receipt and expenditure of County funds by all officers, agents and
employees of the County, and all offices, departments, institutions, boards,
corporations, courts, commissions and other agencies thereof shall be open to
the inspection of the accountants conducting the audit. The County Council
shall have the power to implement the provisions of this section by ordinance
not inconsistent herewith, and to require such additional independent audits as
it shall deem necessary. The designated firm of certified public accountants
and any of its members shall have no personal or financial interest, direct or
indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the County, or any of its departments,
offices or agencies. The Council may in its discretion except from this audit
those agencies whose entire records, accounts and affairs are completely
audited each year by the State government or by an independent Certified Public
Accountant and those special taxing districts which are required by State law
or County law to have independent audits performed on a periodic basis.
(Bill No. 73-82; Res. No. 38-12)
   Editor's note – The 2012 amendment replaced the requirement for a
quadrennial audit with the requirement that an annual financial audit be
performed by an independent firm of certified public accountants, and excluded
from the annual financial audit requirement an audit of those special taxing
districts that are required by State or County law to have independent audits
performed on a periodic basis.
Sec. 313. Special audits.
   (a)   The County Council or the County Executive at any time may order the
examination or audit by the County Auditor of the accounts of any County
department, office, or agency.
   (b)   If, as a result of an audit conducted under this or any other section
of this Charter, any person shall be found to be indebted to the County, the
County Executive shall proceed to collect the amount due.
(Bill No. 73-82)
Sec. 314. Special assistance.
   The Council may at its discretion, and subject to the provisions in its
budget or supplementary appropriation, by resolution engage the services of
experts, consultants or attorneys to aid it in its inquiries, investigations or
the drafting or codification of legislation.
Article IV. The County Executive
Sec. 401. Nature and term of office; mode of election; qualification; salary.
   There shall be a County Executive who shall be the chief executive and
administrative officer of the County and the official head of the County
government. In such capacity the County Executive shall be the elected officer
mentioned in Section 3 of Article XI-A of the Constitution of this State.
Pursuant to public general law, the County Executive shall be nominated in the
primary elections in the same manner as other elected County officials and
shall be elected in the general ticket by the qualified voters of the County to
serve for a term of four years and until a successor shall be elected and
qualified. The County Executive shall qualify on the first Monday in December
following election, or as soon thereafter as practicable and shall enter upon
the duties of the office immediately upon qualification. The County Executive
shall be a qualified voter of the County, not less than twenty-five years of
age, and shall have been a resident of the County for at least four years next
preceding election. The County Executive shall devote full time to the duties
of the office and, subject to any increase authorized by the County Council
under the provisions of Section
406 of this Article, shall be paid an annual salary of Thirty Thousand Dollars
($30,000.00). No person elected or appointed to the office of County Executive
shall be eligible to succeed themself if they have served in such office for
two consecutive four-year terms.
(Bill No. 118-73; Bill No. 93-80; Bill No. 77-82; Res. No. 33-90; Res. No. 30-
22)
Sec. 402. Vacancy.
   (a)   A vacancy occurring in the Office of the County Executive prior to the
expiration of the term shall be filled as provided in this section.
   (b)   If a vacancy occurs during the first 12 months of a term, a new County
Executive shall be nominated and elected by the qualified voters of the County
at the same time as Members of the House of Representatives of the Congress of
the United States are nominated and elected and in the manner provided by law.
In the interim until a new County Executive is elected, the vacancy shall be
temporarily filled by resolution by a majority vote of the Members of the
County Council, within 30 days after the vacancy occurs.
   (c)   If a vacancy occurs after the first 12 months of a term, the vacancy
shall be permanently filled by resolution by a majority vote of the Members of
the County Council, within 30 days after the vacancy occurs.
   (d)   A new County Executive appointed by the County Council either
temporarily or permanently shall possess the same qualifications for office as
provided in Section
401 of this Charter.
   (e)   If the former County Executive whose position is being filled was a
member of a political party, the new County Executive, either temporarily or
permanently, shall be registered in the same political party as the former
County Executive for the 12-month period immediately prior to their election by
the County Council.
   (f)   The County Council shall hold public interviews of candidates to fill
the vacancy, whether temporary or permanent, and the Council shall elect the
new County Executive from among those persons interviewed.
   (g)   The new County Executive elected permanently by the County Council or
by the voters shall serve the unexpired term of the former County Executive and
until a successor is duly elected and qualified.
(Res. No. 40-02; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 403. Temporary absence or disability of County Executive.
   The County Executive may, during their temporary disability or absence from
the County, designate in writing the head of one of the County departments or
offices as Acting County Executive to perform the duties of the office. In the
event that the County Executive is temporarily disabled or absent from the
County and fails to designate as above provided, the Chief Administrative
Officer shall serve as Acting County Executive. If both the County Executive
and Chief Administrative Officer are temporarily disabled or absent and the
County Executive has failed to designate an Acting County Executive, the Budget
Officer shall serve as Acting County Executive unless the County Council
designates the head of another department or office of the County government.
An acting County Executive shall have the same rights, duties, powers and
obligations as an elected incumbent in said office except the power to veto.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 404. Conviction or failure to perform duties.
   (a)   The office of the County Executive may be declared vacant by ordinance
of the County Council with an affirmative vote of not less than five (5)
members if, during their elected term, the County Executive:
      (1)   fails to meet the requirements of Section 401 of this Article;
      (2)   is found guilty of, or pleads nolo contendere to, and is convicted
of, a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or misfeasance of malfeasance
in office; or
      (3)   fails to perform or is incapable of performing the duties of their
office for 180 consecutive days.
   (b)   A vacancy occurring under subsection (a) shall be filled in the manner
provided in Section
402 of this Article.
   (c)   To the fullest extent allowed by law, a County Executive removed from
office under subsection (a)(2) may be ineligible to receive post-employment
County benefits earned as a result of their tenure as County Executive, subject
to an ordinance enacted by the County Council providing for the conditions of
removal and reinstatement of benefits.
(Bill No. 76-72; Res. No. 32-12; Bill No. 30-22)
Editor's note – The 2012 amendment substantially revised the provisions
governing the removal of the County Executive from office, and added the
provision regarding ineligibility to receive post-employment County benefits.
Sec. 405. Powers and duties of the office.
   The County Executive shall be responsible for the proper and efficient
administration of such affairs of the County as are placed in the charge or
under the jurisdiction and control of the County Executive under this Charter
or by law. In addition to and not by way of limitation of the County
Executive's general duties of supervision and management of the executive
branch of the County government, the County Executive shall have the following
express responsibilities, duties and powers:
   (a)   To supervise, direct and control, subject to law and the provisions of
this Charter, the executive branch of the County and to appoint and remove the
Chief Administrative Officer, Public Information Officer, Legislative Liaison
Officer, Economic Development Officer, Planning and Zoning Officer,
Administrative Hearing Officer, Director of Public Works, Director of
Inspections and Permits, Director of Recreation and Parks, and Director of
Aging;
   (b)   To appoint, subject to confirmation by resolution of the County
Council, the County Attorney, Chief of Police, and Fire Chief;
   (c)   To present to the County Council the annual County budget in the
manner and form hereinafter in this Charter provided;
   (d)   To communicate to the County Council at least once a year a general
statement of the finances, government and affairs of the County, with a summary
statement of the activities of the several departments and offices thereof;
   (e)   To present to the County Council from time to time such other
information concerning the business and affairs of the County as the County
Executive may deem necessary, or as the County Council by resolution may
request, and to recommend such measures for legislative action as the County
Executive may deem to be in the best interests of the County;
   (f)   To assure that the County officers, boards, agencies, commissions,
departments and employees faithfully perform their duties;
   (g)   To assure that the laws of the State pertaining to the affairs, good
order and government of the County, and the acts, resolutions, ordinances and
public local laws of the County are duly executed and enforced within the
County;
   (h)   To make or cause to be made any study or investigation concerning the
operation of the executive branch, the development of a legislative program,
the means of financing County requirements, the social and economic development
of the County, including but not limited to investigations of the affairs,
functions, acts, methods, personnel or efficiency of any department, office or
officer under the County Executive’s jurisdiction;
   (i)   To veto, in the County Executive’s discretion, ordinances of the
County Council, in the manner, at the times and subject to the limitations of
this Charter and to return the same to the Council with the County Executive’s
reasons therefor;
   (j)   Unless otherwise specified in this Charter, to appoint and to remove
for cause the members of all boards, commissions, authorities and corporations
created in or pursuant to this Charter or by law, except the County Board of
Appeals and the Fire Advisory Board;
   (k)   To serve on all boards and commissions on which State law requires a
County Commissioner to serve and on all boards and commissions for which State
or County law requires the County Executive to serve, however, when permitted
by law, the County Executive may designate someone else to serve in the County
Executive's place;
   (l)   To sign or cause to be signed on the County's behalf all deeds,
contracts and other instruments and to affix the County seal thereto unless
otherwise authorized by law or by this Charter;
   (m)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Charter, to issue, or
cause to be issued, all executive orders, directives, licenses and permits;
   (n)   To prepare and issue, or cause to be prepared and issued rules and
regulations to carry out the provisions of this Charter that relate to the
functions of the Executive Branch, provided that before taking effect, all such
rules and regulations, other than those affecting the internal operating
procedures of the executive branch of the County government, shall be approved
by the County Council by ordinance;
   (o)   To appoint pursuant to
Article VIII of this Charter a Secretary to the County Executive, who shall
have and may exercise all powers and functions heretofore conferred on the
Clerk of the Board of County Commissioners, not otherwise fixed by this
Charter, including but not limited to the power to attest the signatures of all
County officials;
   (p)   To perform such other executive duties as may be prescribed by this
Charter or required by ordinance of the County Council not inconsistent with
this Charter or as may be necessarily implied from the powers and duties herein
specified.
(Bill No. 94-80; Bill No. 96-80; Bill No. 12-82; Bill No. 72-82; Res. No. 69-
86; Res. No. 39-88; Res. No. 20-06; Res. No. 31-16; Res. No. 37-19; Res. No.
30-22)
Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted provisions relating to the
Department of Utilities that became obsolete as a result of a reorganization
ordinance enacted in 1993 by the County Council pursuant to Sec. 503 of the
Charter.
Sec. 406. Change in compensation of County Executive.
   The County Council, by the affirmative vote of not less than five of its
members, shall have power to increase the compensation provided in this Charter
for the County Executive, and thereafter, upon a similar vote to reduce such
compensation; provided, however, that in no event shall such compensation be
reduced to a figure lower than that provided in this Charter, except by
amendment thereto, nor shall the compensation of the County Executive be
increased or reduced during the County Executive’s current term.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Article V. The Executive Branch
Sec. 501. Composition.
   The executive branch of the County government shall consist of the County
Executive and all officers, agents and employees under the County Executive’s
supervision and authority.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 502. General supervision.
   Except as otherwise provided herein or in the public general laws of this
State, the executive branch of the County shall be subject to the supervision
and control of the County Executive, who shall be responsible for its efficient
operation and management and for the faithful execution of the law.
Sec. 503. Composition; restrictions on creation of additional offices and
departments.
   On the recommendation of the County Executive, the County Council, by an
ordinance known as a reorganization ordinance, may create new offices,
departments, bureaus, divisions or other units of the executive branch; may
reorganize, reassign or abolish existing offices, departments, bureaus,
divisions or other units of the executive branch of the County government; and
may provide for any unit of the executive branch to report directly to the
County Executive. Except as provided otherwise by a reorganization ordinance,
the executive branch shall consist of the offices and departments hereinafter
enumerated and described. Existing or additional duties and functions may,
however, from time to time be assigned to or reassigned among existing offices
or departments by directive of the County Executive or by ordinance of the
County Council. The Council shall create no body corporate nor give financial
support to any entity for the purpose of evading the provisions of this
section.
(Res. No. 34-92)
Sec. 504. Chief Administrative Officer.
   There shall be a Chief Administrative Officer appointed by and responsible
directly to the County Executive. Except as provided otherwise in a
reorganization ordinance, the Chief Administrative Officer shall have
supervisory authority over the executive branch offices and departments as
provided in this Article and over other executive offices as the County
Executive may direct.
(Bill No. 96-80; Bill No. 81-82; Res. No. 39-88; Res. No. 34-92)
Sec. 505. Same; qualifications; mode of selection; salary.
   The Chief Administrative Officer shall be appointed solely on the basis of
the individual's integrity, managerial ability, technical knowledge, qualities
of leadership, professional attitude and of the individual's executive and
administrative qualifications for the performance of the duties of the office
as hereinafter set forth. The individual shall have had, prior to appointment,
a Master's Degree in Business or Public Administration from an accredited
college or university and at least five years' experience as an executive
either in public administration or private business, or both; or an equivalent
combination of education and experience. The Chief Administrative Officer shall
also be thoroughly familiar with modern budget and accounting methods. At the
time of appointment, the individual may, but need not be, a resident of Anne
Arundel County or of the State of Maryland; but during the tenure of office,
the Chief Administrative Officer shall at all times reside within the County.
The Chief Administrative Officer shall devote full time to the duties of the
office. The salary of the Chief Administrative Officer shall be fixed by an
executive pay plan as provided in Section
508 of this Charter.
(Bill No. 77-82; Res. No. 39-88)
Sec. 506. Offices.
   There shall be the following offices under the immediate direction and
control of the Chief Administrative Officer: Office of Finance, Office of the
Budget, Office of Personnel, Office of Emergency Management, Office of Central
Services, Office of Law, Office of Planning and Zoning, Office of Information
Services, Office of Criminal Justice and Corrections, and Office of Detention
Facilities.
(Res. No. 39-88)
Sec. 507. Departments.
   There shall be the following departments under the immediate direction and
control of the Chief Administrative Officer: Department of Public Works,
Department of Inspections and Permits, Police Department, Fire Department,
Department of Recreation and Parks, Department of Aging, and to the extent
permitted to public general law, Department of Education, Department of
Libraries, Department of Health and Department of Social Services.
(Bill No. 96-80; Bill No. 12-82; Bill No. 85-82; Res. No. 39-88; Res. No. 20-
06)
   Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted provisions relating to the
Department of Utilities that became obsolete as a result of a reorganization
ordinance enacted in 1993 by the County Council pursuant to Sec. 503 of the
Charter.
Sec. 507A. Repealed by Res. No. 55-96.
Sec. 508. Term and compensation of officers and employees in the executive
branch.
   Subject to the applicable merit system provisions of this Charter and other
laws, all officers, agents and employees in the executive branch of the County
shall hold such terms and receive such compensation as may from time to time be
provided by this Charter or by ordinance not inconsistent therewith. Officers
and employees, in the exempt service as defined in Section
802 of this Charter shall have their compensation fixed by an executive pay
plan adopted by the County Council by ordinance upon recommendation of the
County Executive. In the development, adoption or amendment of the executive
pay plan ordinance the County Executive and County Council shall give due
consideration to prevailing salaries for similar positions in other appropriate
United States jurisdictions of generally comparable population. The executive
pay plan shall exclude the County Executive and other elected officials whose
salaries may not be changed during their term of office.
Sec. 509. Temporary appointments.
   (a)   Chief Administrative Officer. During the temporary absence of the
Chief Administrative Officer, or if the office of Chief Administrative Officer
shall become vacant, the Budget Officer shall serve as acting Chief
Administrative Officer pending, in the case of a vacancy, the appointment of a
successor. In their capacity as Acting Chief Administrative Officer, the Budget
Officer need not possess, but the successor shall possess, all those
qualifications hereinabove in this Article specified for an original appointee.
   (b)   Other Officers. The County Executive, in the case of a vacancy or
temporary absence, may designate any person to serve as acting head of any
office or department in the executive branch until the appointment of a
successor. Unless at the time of such appointment the temporary appointee is a
subordinate officer in the office or department to which they are designated as
acting head, they shall possess all the qualifications for the office specified
in Article V of this Charter for an original appointee.
   (c)   Limitation on Term of Temporary Appointees. No person shall serve as
Acting Chief Administrative Officer or acting head of any office or department
for a period longer than one hundred and twenty days; provided, however, such
limit may be extended for up to two additional periods of six months by
separate resolutions of the County Council.
(Res. No. 20-20; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 510. Organization staffing.
   Subject to the provisions of
Article VIII of this Charter and other law and the provisions of the annual
budget, the head of each office or department may appoint staff and clerical
personnel to positions authorized by the County Executive, but no such
appointment shall be made if the cost thereof exceeds the budgetary
appropriation therefor.
(Res. No. 19-06)
   Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted the reference to budgetary
allotments and substituted a reference to appropriations. Although former Sec.
714 pertaining to work programs and allotments was eliminated from the Charter
in 1988, references to allotments remained throughout various articles and
sections of the Charter.
The Service Offices
THE OFFICE OF FINANCE
Sec. 511. The Controller.
   The Office of Finance shall be administered by the Controller, who shall be
appointed on the basis of their knowledge and experience in governmental
accounting and financial administration, of which at least five years shall be
in an executive or supervisory capacity, and their demonstrated capacity to
discharge the duties set forth in Sections
512 and
513 of this Charter. The Controller shall be responsible directly to the Chief
Administrative Officer.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 512. General powers and duties of the Controller.
   The Controller shall have and exercise all the fiscal powers and duties now
vested in or imposed upon other County officers not otherwise fixed by this
Charter and upon the County Treasurer, and the Controller is hereby designated
as the Collector of State and County taxes in the County. The Controller shall
have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the County,
including the collection of State and County taxes, special assessments,
utility assessments and charges, fees and other revenues and funds of every
kind due to the County; the enforcement of the collection of taxes in the
manner provided by law; the custody and safekeeping of all funds and securities
belonging to or by law deposited with, distributed to or handled by the County;
the disbursement of County funds; the keeping and supervision of all accounts;
and such other functions as may be prescribed by the Chief Administrative
Officer or by ordinance of the County Council not inconsistent herewith.
(Bill No. 96-80; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 513. Specific powers and duties.
   The Controller shall have the following specific powers and duties:
   (a)   To keep accounts for each item of appropriation made by the County
Council so that each account shall show in detail the appropriations made
thereto, the amounts drawn thereon and the unencumbered balance;
   (b)   To submit monthly to the Chief Administrative Officer, the County
Executive and the County Council a summary of revenues and expenditures
detailed as to appropriations and funds in such manner as to show the current
financial condition of each office and department of the County government;
   (c)   To submit at least once a year to the County Council a complete
financial statement showing the assets, liabilities and financial condition of
the County;
   (d)   To control all County expenditures on the basis of authorized
budgetary appropriations and to report monthly thereon to the several offices,
departments, boards, commissions and other agencies of the County government;
   (e)   To examine, audit and approve all payrolls, contracts, purchase
orders, bills, demands or charges against the County and to determine the
regularity, legality and correctness of the same before disbursement upon
proper voucher and no money shall be drawn from any bank accounts except by
warrant or check signed by the controller;
   (f)   To deposit and have custody of all funds of the County in such banks
or trust companies as the County Executive may designate, subject to such
adequate requirements as to security and interest as may be provided by law;
   (g)   In consultation with the Budget Officer to plan, install and prescribe
accounting systems throughout the County government;
   (h)   To prepare for bond sales and advise on debt management and the
investment of funds;
   (i)   To collect and bill for all taxes, fees and other charges and to fix
the time for the deposit of receipts;
   (j)   To maintain a comprehensive system of accounting for all funds of the
government in accordance with accepted principles of governmental and utility
accounting;
   (k)   To administer tax sales;
   (l)   To designate, with the approval of the Chief Administrative Officer,
an employee to act as Controller with authority to perform the Controller’s
duties and to affix their own signature to checks and other documents in the
absence of the Controller;
   (m)   To perform such other duties not inconsistent with those herein
enumerated as may be required by the Chief Administrative Officer or otherwise
by law.
(Res. No. 19-06; Res. No. 30-22)
Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted the reference to budgetary
allotments and substituted a reference to appropriations. Although former Sec.
714 pertaining to work programs and allotments was eliminated from the Charter
in 1988, references to allotments remained throughout various articles and
sections of the Charter.
Sec. 514. Appropriation to control expenditures.
   No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the County, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money by the County be incurred by any
officer, board or commission authorized to expend County money, except in
pursuance of law or of the appropriation therefor. All fees received by all
County officers or employees in connection with their official duties shall be
accounted for and paid into the County treasury. Any officer or employee
failing to comply with these provisions shall be considered to have vacated
their office or employment.
(Res. No. 19-06; Res. No. 30-22)
Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted the reference to budgetary
allotments. Although former Sec. 714 pertaining to work programs and allotments
was eliminated from the Charter in 1988, references to allotments remained
throughout various articles and sections of the Charter.
THE OFFICE OF THE BUDGET
Sec. 515. The Budget Officer.
   The Office of the Budget shall be administered by the Budget Officer. The
Budget Officer shall be appointed solely on the basis of their administrative
experience, skill in public administration and governmental budgeting and
technical training for the duties of the office. The Budget Officer shall be
responsible directly to the Chief Administrative Officer who shall be the Chief
Budget Officer of the County.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 516. Powers and duties.
   The Budget Officer shall be responsible for the formulation of the budget
under the supervision of the Chief Administrative Officer in accordance with
the procedures set out in
Article VII of this Charter, including the control of positions; research on
economic trends and long-term fiscal plans; the study of the organization,
methods and procedures of each office, department, board, commission,
institution and agency of the County government; the submission to the Chief
Administrative Officer of periodic reports on their efficiency and economy; and
such other duties and functions as may be assigned to the Budget Officer by the
Chief Administrative Officer or by ordinance of the County Council. The Budget
Officer shall be responsible, upon their own initiative or upon request, for
assisting agencies in the preparation of their budgets and in improving budget
execution and reducing costs.
(Res. No. 19-06; Res. No. 30-22)
Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted the reference to budgetary
allotments and work programs. Although former Sec. 714 pertaining to work
programs and allotments was eliminated from the Charter in 1988, references to
work programs and allotments remained throughout various articles and sections
of the Charter.
THE OFFICE OF PERSONNEL
Sec. 517. Composition of office.
   The Office of Personnel shall consist of the Personnel Officer, their
subordinate officers, agents and employees, and the Personnel Board. The Office
shall be administered by the Personnel Officer. The Personnel Officer shall be
responsible directly to, and appointed by the Chief Administrative Officer.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 518. Qualifications of the Personnel Officer.
   The Personnel Officer shall be trained and skilled in personnel
administration, and at the time of appointment must have had five years'
experience in personnel administration in an executive capacity with the
knowledge of public personnel administration; or an equivalent combination of
education and experience.
(Bill No. 94-80; Res. No. 39-88)
Sec. 519. Powers and duties of the Personnel Officer.
   The Personnel Officer shall have general management and control of the
Personnel Office. In addition, the Personnel Officer shall have the following
powers and duties:
   (a)   To conduct or direct such investigations into the character and
fitness of applicants for appointment to the classified service as the
Personnel Officer may deem proper.
   (b)   To prepare and conduct examinations for original appointment and
promotion for positions in the classified service.
   (c)   To organize recruitment plans to attract qualified personnel to the
classified service.
   (d)   To maintain eligibility lists setting forth the names and comparative
qualifications of persons eligible to be appointed to positions in the
classified service.
   (e)   To certify to the appointing authority names on the eligibility list
prepared as provided in Section
805 of this Charter.
   (f)   To enter into agreements with other public personnel offices or
agencies for the joint administration of examinations and the joint use of
eligibility lists at the Personnel Officer's discretion.
   (g)   To authorize, at the Personnel Officer’s discretion, in writing,
temporary, provisional or emergency appointments to vacancies in the classified
service for classes for which there is no eligible list, provided that no such
provisional or emergency temporary appointment shall be for a period longer
than four months, and that no such appointment shall be renewed.
   (h)   To allocate and reallocate positions in the County service to classes
of the classification plan, subject to review by the Personnel Board upon
appeal by the appointing authority.
   (i)   To authorize the payment of all payrolls for employees in the
classified service and to withhold authorization for payment for personal
services to any person or position in the classified service unless the persons
named therein have been appointed and employed in accordance with the
provisions of this Charter, the laws of the State and applicable personnel
rules and regulations, and unless there has been a budgetary provision or
supplemental appropriation therefor.
   (j)   To direct and enforce the maintenance by all departments, boards,
commissions, offices and agencies of the County of the personnel provisions of
this Charter and the rules, regulations and ordinances adopted thereunder.
   (k)   To submit all proposed personnel rules and regulations to the
Personnel Board for their review and comment prior to adoption as provided in
Section
521 of this Charter.
   (l)   To perform such other duties as may be assigned to the Personnel
Officer by law or the Chief Administrative Officer.
   (m)   Upon the request of the appointing authority, extend, at their
discretion, the six-month probationary period for classified employees by an
additional six months.
(Res. No. 62-86; Res. No. 40-88; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 520. Appointment of the Personnel Board.
   There shall be a Personnel Board consisting of five qualified voters
appointed by the County Executive for terms coterminous with the County
Executive and confirmed by resolution of the Council. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term in the manner of original appointment. Each member shall
serve until their successor is appointed and qualified. One member shall always
be a member of the classified service as defined in Section
803 of this Charter, and they shall be selected from a list of three names
nominated by secret ballot by the members of the classified service. A member
of the Board may be removed for cause by the County Executive with the
affirmative vote of four members of the County Council. Members of the Board
shall receive no compensation for their services except reasonable and
necessary expenses as may be provided in the budget. The County Executive shall
designate a member as Chair.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 521. Powers and duties of the Personnel Board.
   (a)   The Personnel Board shall have the power:
      (1)   To adopt rules of practice and procedure governing its proceedings
which shall have the force of law to the extent consistent with the terms of
this Charter.
      (2)   To hear and to decide finally for the County in open meeting
appeals from and actions pertaining to the allocation or reallocation of
positions, appeals from any disciplinary action suspending, reducing in rank or
pay, or removing any officer or employee in the classified service, and any
other action designated by law or collective bargaining agreement to be subject
to grievance procedures.
      (3)   To hear and to decide finally for the County appeals from any
action pertaining to the methods of examination, certification, or preparation
of eligibility lists for appointment or promotion.
      (4)   To advise and consult, as appropriate, with County officials on
matters concerning the administration of the County classified service and to
report to the County Executive and County Council upon the operation of the
merit system.
      (5)   To review and comment on any proposed personnel rule or regulation
pertaining to methods of holding competitive examinations, the general
character of examinations for original appointment and promotion, transfers of
employees within the classified service, and the procedures for determining the
eligibility of applicants to participate in examinations prior to adoption.
      (6)   To retain private legal counsel, consistent with the budget, to
advise the Board with respect to any of its duties, responsibilities, or
functions, including any matter pending before it.
   (b)   Within 30 days after any final decision by the Personnel Board is
rendered, any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board and a party to the
proceedings before it may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court for Anne
Arundel County, which shall have power to affirm the decision of the Board, or
if such decision is not in accordance with law, to modify or reverse such
decision, with or without remanding the case for rehearing, as justice may
require. Within 30 days after the decision of the Circuit Court is rendered any
party to the proceeding who is aggrieved thereby may appeal such decision to
the Appellate Court of Maryland. The review proceedings provided by this
section shall be exclusive.
   (c)   The parties to any appeal which the Personnel Board may hear under
subsection (a)(2) of this section may submit the matter to binding arbitration.
The County Council shall by ordinance provide for the implementation of this
section.
(Res. No. 79-84; Res. No. 40-88; Res. No. 35-92; Res. No. 36-92)
Editor’s note - A legislatively referred constitutional amendment appeared on
the ballot as Maryland Question 1 at the General Election held on November 8,
2022. Question 1 asked the voters in Maryland to change the Maryland Court of
Appeals to the Supreme Court of Maryland and the Maryland Court of Special
Appeals to the Appellate Court of Maryland. The majority of votes cast in the
November 8 General Election were in favor of the constitutional amendment. The
Court of Appeals of Maryland is now the Supreme Court of Maryland, and the
Court of Special Appeals is now the Appellate Court of Maryland.
THE OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Sec. 522. Emergency Management Director.
   (a)   The Emergency Management Director has direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, and operation of the Office of Emergency
Management.
   (b)   The Director shall be appointed by the Governor of this State on the
recommendation of the County Executive.
   (c)   Under the general supervision of the Chief Administrative Officer, the
Emergency Management Director is subject to the direction and control of the
County Executive, under the general power of the Governor.
(Bill No. 96-80; Bill No. 72-82)
Sec. 522A. Office of Emergency Management.
   (a)   The Office of Emergency Management shall have the duties, positions
and functions that are recommended by the State Emergency Management and Civil
Defense Agency to comply with Federal and State standards.
   (b)   (1)   To the extent that amendments of Federal and State law allow,
the County Council by ordinance may reorganize the office, transfer its duties,
or abolish it.
      (2)   An ordinance adopted under this subsection shall be effective
without the necessity for amendment to this Charter.
(Bill No. 72-82)
THE OFFICE OF CENTRAL SERVICES
Sec. 523. Central Services Officer.
   The Office of Central Services shall be administered by a Central Services
Officer. The Central Services Officer shall be appointed solely with regard to
their qualifications for the duties of the office by the Chief Administrative
Officer and shall be responsible directly to the Chief Administrative Officer.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 524. Duties and functions of the Office of Central Services.
   The Office of Central Services shall be responsible for the administration
of the purchasing policies of the County set forth in
Article IX of this Charter. Unless otherwise provided by public general law,
the Office of Central Services shall also be responsible for the making,
renewal and cancellation of all contracts of insurance in which the County, or
any office, department, institution, board, commission or other agency of the
County government is named as insured; for the maintenance, operation and
management of all land and buildings owned by or operated by the County; and
for making available to other offices, departments, boards, institutions and
agencies of the County such duplicating, stenographic, mail, messenger, stores,
transportation, central garage, automotive maintenance, data processing or
other central services as may be assigned thereto from time to time by
directive of the Chief Administrative Officer, County Executive or by ordinance
of the County Council.
(Bill No. 93-80)
THE OFFICE OF LAW
Sec. 525. The County Attorney.
   The Office of Law shall be administered by the County Attorney, who shall be
appointed by the County Executive and confirmed by resolution of the County
Council. The County Attorney shall be a resident of the County and a member in
good standing of the Bar of the Supreme Court of Maryland and of the Circuit
Court for Anne Arundel County, and shall have been actively engaged in the
general practice of their profession in the State of Maryland for at least five
years prior to appointment. The County Attorney shall serve on a full-time
basis and shall not engage in the private practice of law while County
Attorney. The County Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the County
Executive and may be removed by the County Executive, unless the County
Council, by resolution on the affirmative vote of not less than five members,
votes to prevent removal of a County Attorney appointed by the County
Executive.
(Res. No. 39-88; Res. No. 37-92; Res. No. 37-19; Res. No. 30-22)
Editor’s note - A legislatively referred constitutional amendment appeared on
the ballot as Maryland Question 1 at the General Election held on November 8,
2022. Question 1 asked the voters in Maryland to change the Maryland Court of
Appeals to the Supreme Court of Maryland and the Maryland Court of Special
Appeals to the Appellate Court of Maryland. The majority of votes cast in the
November 8 General Election were in favor of the constitutional amendment. The
Court of Appeals of Maryland is now the Supreme Court of Maryland, and the
Court of Special Appeals is now the Appellate Court of Maryland.
Sec. 526. Powers and duties of the County Attorney.
   (a)   The County Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the County and of
its several offices, departments, boards, commissions and other agencies.
Except as provided in Sections
314 and
528 of this Charter, no office, department, board, commission, agency or branch
of the County government which receives County funds shall have any authority
or power to employ or retain any legal counsel other than the County Attorney.
The County Attorney shall also be the legal advisor and, if requested,
legislative draftsman for the County Council. The County Attorney shall
supervise the election of the nominees of the classified employees as provided
in Section
520 of this Charter. The County Attorney shall issue upon request, give advice
and opinions upon any legal questions affecting the interests of the County
when the same are submitted: (1) by written request of a County Council member,
(2) by written request of the County Executive, or (3) with the approval of the
County Executive, by written request of the head of any office or department in
the executive branch or any board, commission or agency. All deeds, bonds,
contracts, releases, agreements, advertisements, bids and other legal papers,
documents and instructions involving the interests of the County to be executed
and approved by any officer of the County shall be submitted to the County
Attorney and shall be approved by the County Attorney in writing as to their
form and legal sufficiency in compliance with the laws and conditions under
which executed. The County Attorney shall have the right of access at all times
to the official records of any office, department, board, commission or agency
of the County. Before the County Executive signs any ordinance passed by the
County Council, the County Attorney shall review the ordinance and advise the
County Executive as to its legality. The County Attorney shall have such
additional legal duties as may from time to time be provided by ordinance not
inconsistent herewith.
   (b)   Subject to any limitation or exception that the County Council
specifies by ordinance, the County Attorney shall defend any officer or
employee of the County in any civil action brought against the officer or
employee by reason of any act done or omitted to be done in the scope of the
officer's or employee's employment. In any case defended by the County Attorney
under this section, the County shall pay all court related expenses charged to
the officer or employee.
(Bill No. 78-72; Bill No. 77-82; Res. No. 39-88; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 527. Assistants to the County Attorney.
   The County Attorney with the approval of the County Executive may appoint,
subject to the provisions of
Article VIII of this Charter, such assistants to serve as members of the legal
staff as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the business of the Office
of Law, subject, however, to such limitations as to number, term and
compensation as may be provided from time to time by this Charter, by law,
budgetary provisions and rules and regulations of the Personnel Board.
(Res. No. 39-88)
Sec. 528. Temporary additional legal assistance.
   Nothing in this Article or
Article VIII contained shall be construed as preventing the County Attorney,
with the approval of the County Executive, subject to the availability of an
appropriation therefor, from engaging the services for a temporary period of
any attorney or attorneys for legal work of an extraordinary nature when the
work to be done is of such character or magnitude as to require legal services
in addition to those provided by the regular staff of the Office of Law.
(Res. No. 39-88; Res. No. 19-06)
   Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted the reference to budgetary
allotments. Although former Sec. 714 pertaining to work programs and allotments
was eliminated from the Charter in 1988, references to allotments remained
throughout various articles and sections of the Charter.
Sec. 529. Prohibitions.
   An assistant in the Office of Law may not at any time, while holding such
office, practice as an attorney before the County Council or any office,
department, board, commission or agency of the County in any capacity other
than as representing the County's interests.
(Res. No. 39-88; Res. No. 37-92)
OFFICE OF INFORMATION SERVICES
Sec. 529A. Information Services Officer.
   The Office of Information Services shall be administered by the Information
Services Officer who shall be appointed by the Chief Administrative Officer on
the basis of knowledge and experience in data processing and administration.
The Information Services Officer shall be directly responsible to the Chief
Administrative Officer.
(Res. No. 39-88)
   Code reference – § 2-1-401
Sec. 529B. Duties of the office.
   The Office of Information Services shall be responsible for the data
processing functions of the County government.
(Res. No. 39-88)
   Code reference – § 2-1-401
THE OFFICE OF PLANNING AND ZONING
Sec. 530. Organization of office.
   The Office of Planning and Zoning shall be administered by a Planning and
Zoning Officer appointed by the County Executive, who shall be a trained
planner of wide and varied experience in the fields of planning and zoning, at
least five years of which shall have involved a position of administrative
leadership and responsibility.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 531. Duties of the office.
   The Office of Planning and Zoning shall be charged with the responsibility
and duty of planning for the physical development and growth of the County,
including the preparation and revision of a Master Plan therefor and the
preparation and revision from time to time of rules and regulations governing
subdivisions. It shall also be responsible for the preparation, administration
and enforcement of a zoning map and of zoning rules and regulations which shall
constitute a zoning code. All plans and maps and all rules and regulations
hereafter adopted, amended or repealed by the Planning and Zoning Officer
shall, prior to taking effect as law, be approved by ordinance of the County
Council.
Sec. 532. The Planning Advisory Board.
   There shall be a Planning Advisory Board consisting of seven qualified
voters appointed by the County Executive for terms coterminous with the County
Executive’s term or until their successors shall qualify. Members of the Board
shall receive no compensation for their services except reasonable and
necessary expenses as may be provided in the budget. Vacancies shall be filled
in the manner of original appointment. The County Executive shall designate a
member as Chair.
(Res. No. 34-94; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 533. Duties and functions of the Planning Advisory Board.
   (a)   Meetings and Rules of Procedure. The Planning Advisory Board shall
hold at least ten regular monthly meetings each year, but special meetings may
be held at any time, at the call of the Chair. The Planning Advisory Board
shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business. It shall hold hearings
at its discretion or upon written request of the County Executive or on
resolution of the County Council on any matter pending before the Board. It
shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, determinations
and decisions and it shall keep minutes of its proceedings all of which shall
be filed in the Office of Planning and Zoning and shall be public record.
   (b)   Advisory Recommendations and Budget Functions. The Planning Advisory
Board shall make advisory recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Officer
and the County Council relating to the Master Plan, the zoning maps and rules
and regulations relating to zoning. At such times as the Chief Administrative
Officer shall fix, the Planning Advisory Board shall consider an itemized list
of capital projects, or capital improvement program, which the various agencies
of the County government propose to undertake in the ensuing fiscal year and
the next succeeding five fiscal years thereafter. After consideration by the
Planning Advisory Board, the Planning and Zoning Officer shall transmit to the
Budget Officer with the Planning and Zoning Officer’s recommendations a list of
projects recommended by said board to be undertaken in the periods aforesaid
and its estimates of the cost thereof. The County Executive, at the County
Executive’s discretion, or the County Council, by resolution, may provide for
reference to the Board, for review and recommendations, any matter related to
the board’s functions and duties.
   (c)   Amendment of Capital Projects After Adoption of Budget. In accordance
with Section 716 of this Charter, the Planning Advisory Board shall consider
and transmit its recommendation forthwith to the County Executive concerning
amendments to the capital budget for any fiscal year. Such recommendation shall
be advisory only.
(Res. No. 30-22)
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
Sec. 534. Organization of office.
   (a)   Administrative Hearing Officer. The Office of Administrative Hearings
shall be administered by the Administrative Hearing Officer, who shall hold the
delegated power conferred on them by this Charter. The Administrative Hearing
Officer shall be appointed by the County Executive solely with regard to the
individual’s qualifications for the duties of the office and shall have such
training or experience as will qualify the individual to conduct quasi-judicial
hearings on zoning and other matters. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall
be responsible to the County Executive.
   (b)   Deputy Administrative Hearing Officer. To assist the Administrative
Hearing Officer, the County Executive may appoint a Deputy Administrative
Hearing Officer. The Deputy Administrative Hearing Officer shall have the
training and experience necessary to qualify for the duties that may be
assigned under this subsection, and the appointment of the Deputy
Administrative Hearing Officer shall be made solely on the basis of an
individual’s qualifications to perform those duties. In addition to whatever
(duties are assigned by the Administrative Hearing Officer, the Deputy
Administrative Hearing Officer may conduct hearings held before the Office of
Administrative Hearings.
(Bill No. 77-82; Res. No. 41-88; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 535. General powers and duties.
   (a)   Delegation of Power to Administrative Hearing Officer for
Reclassification of Property. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall be
charged with the responsibility and duty of conducting public hearings on a
petition filed for a change in or reclassification of the use to which a
particular piece of property is subject according to the appropriate zoning map
in effect at the time. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall grant or deny
such reclassification in accordance with appropriate zoning regulations, but no
reclassification shall be granted by the Administrative Hearing Officer except
on the basis of an affirmative finding that there was a mistake in the zoning
map or that the character of the neighborhood has changed to such an extent
that the zoning map should be changed.
   (b)   Other Authority of Administrative Hearing Officer. Subject to
appropriate principles, standards, rules, conditions and safeguards set forth
therein, the Administrative Hearing Officer may grant variances from and make
special exceptions to the zoning laws, regulations, ordinances or resolutions.
   (c)   Powers Under State Law. The Administrative Hearing Officer may
exercise the powers described under Courts and Judicial Procedure Article, § 5-
5A-02(3) of the Annotated Code of Maryland or any other law enacted by the
General Assembly of Maryland that permits a county officer to exercise similar
powers.
   (d)   Orders and Notification. All orders of the Administrative Hearing
Officer shall be in writing setting forth the reason therefor; and a copy
thereof shall be furnished to all parties or their attorneys of record.
   (e)   Orders Final Unless Appealed. In all cases, the order of the
Administrative Hearing Officer shall be final unless further appeal is taken as
provided in Section
536 of this Charter.
(Bill No. 72-82; Res. No. 41-88)
Sec. 536. Appeals from orders of the Administrative Hearing Officer.
   (a)   Appeal to the Board of Appeals. Except as provided in subsection (b)
of this section, an appeal may be taken to the County Board of Appeals from any
decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer over which the Board of Appeals
has jurisdiction under this Charter.
   (b)   Appeal to the Circuit Court. An appeal may be taken directly to the
Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County from any decision of the Administrative
Hearing Officer rendered under Section
535(c) of this Charter.
   (c)   Time to appeal; who may appeal. Any appeal to the Board of Appeals or
the Circuit Court under this section shall be taken within 30 days after a
decision by the Administrative Hearing Officer. An appeal may be taken by any
person, or any official, office, department, corporation, board, or bureau of
the County aggrieved by the decision and a party to the proceedings before the
Administrative Hearing Officer.
   (d)   Appeal to the Appellate Court of Maryland. In the case of an appeal to
the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County, within 30 days after the decision of
the Circuit Court is rendered, any party to the proceeding who is aggrieved may
appeal the decision to the Appellate Court of Maryland.
(Res. No. 41-88)
Editor’s note - A legislatively referred constitutional amendment appeared on
the ballot as Maryland Question 1 at the General Election held on November 8,
2022. Question 1 asked the voters in Maryland to change the Maryland Court of
Appeals to the Supreme Court of Maryland and the Maryland Court of Special
Appeals to the Appellate Court of Maryland. The majority of votes cast in the
November 8 General Election were in favor of the constitutional amendment. The
Court of Appeals of Maryland is now the Supreme Court of Maryland, and the
Court of Special Appeals is now the Appellate Court of Maryland.
OFFICE OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONS
Sec. 536A. Criminal Justice and Corrections Officer.
   The Office of Criminal Justice and Corrections shall be administered by the
Criminal Justice and Corrections Officer, who shall be appointed by the Chief
Administrative Officer solely on the basis of the individual's qualifications
for the duties of the office. The Criminal Justice and Corrections Officer
shall be responsible directly to the Chief Administrative Officer.
(Bill No. 81-82)
Editor’s note – The Criminal Justice and Corrections Officer position was
abolished by Bill No. 18-93 and the Superintendent of Detention Facilities
became the successor.
Sec. 536B. Office of Criminal Justice and Corrections.
   The Office of Criminal Justice and Corrections shall be responsible for:
      (1)   the administration of a criminal justice program;
      (2)   the administration of a corrections program; and
      (3)   any other related function that is not inconsistent with this
Charter, as required by the County Executive or by ordinance of the County
Council.
(Bill No. 81-82)
Editor’s note – The Office of Criminal Justice was abolished by Bill No. 18-93
and the authority, duties, responsibilities, and functions were transferred to
the Department of Detention Facilities as successor.
[OFFICE OF DETENTION FACILITIES]
Sec. 536C. Superintendent of Detention Facilities.
   The Office of Detention Facilities shall be administered by the
Superintendent of Detention Facilities, who shall be appointed by the Chief
Administrative Officer solely on the basis of the individual’s qualifications
for the duties of the office. The Superintendent of Detention Facilities shall
be responsible directly to the Chief Administrative Officer.
(Bill No. 81-82)
Editor’s note – The Superintendent of Detention Facilities became the head of
the Department of Detention Facilities under Bill No. 18-93.
Sec. 536D. Office of Detention Facilities.
   The Office of Detention Facilities shall be responsible for the operation
and maintenance of the County detention facilities.
(Bill No. 81-82)
Editor’s note – The Office of Detention Facilities was abolished by Bill No.
18-93 and the authority, duties, responsibilities, and functions were
transferred to the Department of Detention Facilities as successor.
The Operating Departments
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Sec. 537. Director of Public Works.
   The Department of Public Works shall be administered by the Director of
Public Works, who shall be an engineering graduate of a college or university
of recognized standing and a registered professional engineer of demonstrated
ability in the management of public works and utilities; or an equivalent
combination of acceptable education and experience. The Director shall have had
responsible charge of engineering works over a period of at least five years
prior to appointment. The Director shall have such other qualifications as may
be provided by law. The Director shall be appointed solely with regard to the
individual's qualifications for the duties of the office and shall be appointed
by the County Executive and responsible directly to the Chief Administrative
Officer.
(Bill No. 85-82; Res. No. 39-88; Res. No. 20-06)
   Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted provisions relating to the
Department of Utilities that became obsolete as a result of a reorganization
ordinance enacted in 1993 by the County Council pursuant to Sec. 503 of the
Charter.
Sec. 538. Functions of the Department of Public Works.
   The Department of Public Works shall perform all functions involving public
works or utilities surveys, reports, maps, drawings, specifications and
estimates; the custody of maps and plans of the County; the supervision of the
execution of and performance of all contracts for capital projects, as defined
in Section
702 of this Charter, except for school projects; the construction of capital
projects by its own employees; the maintenance and cleaning of roads, streets,
alleys, other public places, bridges, viaducts, subways and underpasses; the
acceptance of roads and dedicated ways as prescribed by law; the maintenance of
watermains, sewers, drains and culverts; the maintenance and operation of
sewage disposal and treatment plants; the collection of garbage and other
refuse and the operation and maintenance of facilities for its disposal; the
regulation, operation, maintenance and control of water supply; the control of
fire hydrants; mosquito control; the administration and enforcement of rules
and regulations relating to water and wastewater; and any other function, not
inconsistent with this Charter, that is assigned by directive of the County
Executive or by ordinance of the County Council.
(Bill No. 85-82; Res. No. 20-06)
   Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted provisions relating to the
Department of Utilities that became obsolete as a result of a reorganization
ordinance enacted in 1993 by the County Council pursuant to Sec. 503 of the
Charter.
Sec. 539. Repealed by Res. No. 20-06.
   Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted provisions relating to the
Department of Utilities that became obsolete as a result of a reorganization
ordinance enacted in 1993 by the County Council pursuant to Sec. 503 of the
Charter.
Sec. 539A. Repealed by Res. No. 20-06.
   Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted provisions relating to the
Department of Utilities that became obsolete as a result of a reorganization
ordinance enacted in 1993 by the County Council pursuant to Sec. 503 of the
Charter.
DEPARTMENT OF INSPECTIONS AND PERMITS
Sec. 540. Director of Inspections and Permits.
   The Department of Inspections and Permits shall be administered by the
Director of Inspections and Permits, who shall be appointed solely with regard
to the individual's qualifications for the duties of the office by the County
Executive. The Director shall be responsible directly to the Chief
Administrative Officer.
(Res. No. 39-88)
Sec. 541. Functions and duties of the Department.
   The Department of Inspections and Permits shall issue County licenses and
permits, as provided by ordinance of the County Council. The Department shall
be responsible for the administration and enforcement of laws and regulations
relating to licenses and permits, as provided by ordinance. Any license or
permit issued by the Department shall be approved by any other officer or
agency of the County, as provided or required by law. The Department also shall
perform any other related duty or functions assigned by directive of the County
Executive or by ordinance of the County Council, not inconsistent with this
Charter.
(Bill No. 77-82)
Sec. 542. Licensing and examining boards.
   The Plumbing Commission, the Board of Examiners and Supervisors (or the
Board of Electrical Examiners and Supervisors), the Board of Bail Bond License
Commissioners and other boards, commissions and agencies connected with the
functions of the Department of Inspections and Permits shall be administered as
units of said Department. Nothing in this Charter contained shall be held or
construed as preventing the County Council by ordinance from reorganizing,
reconstituting or abolishing any of such boards, commissions or agencies
provided that as of the operative date of this Article the appointing authority
for members of all such boards, commissions and agencies shall be the County
Executive. All employees of such boards, commissions and agencies shall become
employees of the Department of Inspections and Permits subject to the
provisions of
Article VIII of this Charter and the funds in the custody of the boards,
commissions and agencies shall be paid into the treasury of the County.
Administrative functions of any board, commission or agency existing or created
for the regulation, examination or inspection of the qualifications or work of
occupational groups or the issuing of licenses or permits shall be performed by
employees of the Department of Inspections and Permits. Rules and regulations
of such boards, commissions and agencies not inconsistent with this Charter
shall remain in force and effect unless and until changed by ordinance. Members
of such boards, commissions or agencies shall receive no compensation for their
services except reasonable and necessary expense as may be provided in the
budget.
   State Code reference – Insurance Article, §§ 10-301 et seq.
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 543. Chief of Police.
   The Police Department shall be commanded and administered by a Chief of
Police, who shall be experienced in the command of uniformed patrol and the
detection and investigation of crime. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by
the County Executive and confirmed by resolution of the County Council, solely
on the basis of the individual’s qualifications for the duties of the office.
The Chief of Police shall be responsible directly to the Chief Administrative
Officer and all orders to the Police Department from the Chief Administrative
Officer shall be directed through the Chief of Police or an officer acting in
the Chief of Police’s absence. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the
efficiency, good conduct and discipline of the Department. Disobedience to the
lawful commands or the rules and regulations of the Chief of Police shall be
ground for removal or other disciplinary action.
(Res. No. 39-88; Res. No. 37-19; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 544. Functions of the Police Department.
   The Police Department shall be responsible for preservation of the public
peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, protection of the rights
of persons and property and enforcement of the laws and the rules and
regulations made in furtherance thereof. The Department shall have and perform
such other duties and functions as may from time to time be assigned thereto by
directive of the County Executive or by ordinance of the County Council not
inconsistent with this Charter.
(Bill No. 96-80; Bill No. 81-82)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 545. Fire Chief.
   The Fire Department shall be administered by a Fire Chief, who shall be
appointed by the County Executive and confirmed by resolution of the County
Council. The appointment shall be made solely on the basis of the individual's
qualifications for the duties of the office. In making this appointment, the
County Executive may consider, but shall not be restricted to persons who are
recommended by the Fire Advisory Board. The Fire Chief shall be responsible
directly to the County Executive.
(Bill No. 74-82; Res. No. 39-88; Res. No. 34-02; Res. No. 37-19)
Sec. 546. Fire Advisory Board.
   There shall be a Fire Advisory Board consisting of five members. Three of
the members shall be selected by the Anne Arundel County Volunteer Firemen's
Association, one of the members shall be selected by the paid fire fighters and
one member shall be appointed by the County Executive. The term of each member
shall be coterminous with that of the County Executive. The Fire Advisory Board
shall have the power and duty to advise and consult with the County Executive,
the Fire Chief and other County officials and employees from time to time on
matters concerning the administration of fire suppression, fire prevention,
fire training and fire communications activities. Whenever the position of Fire
Chief is vacant, the Fire Advisory Board may prepare and submit a list of names
of at least three persons who [whom] they recommend to the County Executive as
nominees for the office. Any person recommended shall be selected solely on the
basis of that person's qualifications for the office and with regard to the
person's experience in command or uniformed fire suppression or fire
prevention.
(Bill No. 74-82; Res. No. 34-02)
Editor's note – Bill No. 71-95, adopted November 6, 1995, provided in § 1:
".... That pursuant to Section
502 of the Charter, the Fire Advisory Board established under Section
546 of the Charter is hereby abolished."
See §§
12-1-401 et seq. for current provisions pertaining to the Fire Advisory Board.
Sec. 547. Functions and duties of the Fire Department.
   The Fire Department shall be responsible for the administration of the
affairs of the County in fire suppression, fire prevention, fire training, fire
communications, emergency medical services, and any other duty as may be
assigned by the County Executive or by law from time to time. Nothing herein
shall permit the Fire Chief to participate in the corporate affairs of any
volunteer fire company.
(Bill No. 72-82; Res. No. 34-02)
DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION AND PARKS
Sec. 548. Director of Recreation and Parks.
   The Department of Recreation and Parks shall be administered by the Director
of Recreation and Parks. The Director shall be thoroughly trained and
experienced in theory and practice relating to public recreation and the
operation and maintenance of recreation facilities and shall possess such other
qualifications for the duties of the office as may be provided by law. The
Director shall be appointed by the County Executive, and be responsible
directly to the Chief Administrative Officer.
(Res. No. 39-88)
Sec. 549. Functions of the Department.
   The Department shall be responsible for the organization and conduct of
recreation programs, operating and maintaining parks, playgrounds and other
recreation facilities and shall have such other duties consistent herewith as
may be assigned to it from time to time by ordinance. It shall encourage the
development of cooperative programs and joint use of facilities with the
Department of Education.
Sec. 550. Recreation Advisory Board.
   There shall be a Recreation Advisory Board consisting of seven members
appointed by the County Executive for terms coterminous with the County
Executive. Members of the Board shall receive no compensation for these
services except reasonable and necessary expenses as may be provided in the
budget. The County Executive shall select its Chair. The Recreation Advisory
Board shall make advisory recommendations to the Director of Recreation and
Parks relating to recreation programs and services and facilities for any age
group, cooperative programs with private organizations and schools and rules
for the preservation of order and decency in connection therewith.
(Bill No. 93-80; Res. No. 30-22)
DEPARTMENT OF AGING
Sec. 550A. Director of Aging.
   The Department of Aging shall be administered by a Director of Aging who
shall be appointed solely with regard to the individual's qualifications for
the duties of the office by the County Executive. The Director shall be
responsible directly to the Chief Administrative Officer.
(Bill No. 12-82; Res. No. 39-88)
Sec. 550B. Functions of the Department.
   The Department of Aging shall develop, administer and direct countywide
services and programs dealing with the problems and needs of the aging; review
plans of primary concern to the aging that are developed by other offices,
departments, agencies and commissions of the county government; and coordinate
with other government agencies and private agencies, organizations and
individuals the provision of government and nongovernmental services to the
aging. The Department shall also have such other duties and functions not
inconsistent with this Charter as may be assigned to it by directive of the
County Executive or by ordinance of the County Council.
(Bill No. 12-82)
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Sec. 551. Composition; administration under State law.
   The Department of Education shall consist of the County Board of Education,
the Superintendent of Schools, and all other officers, agents and employees in
the County public school system. The Board of Education shall be constituted
and shall do and perform such duties and functions as may from time to time be
provided by State law. All references in this Charter to the head of an office
or department shall be construed as including the Superintendent of Schools as
head of the Department of Education, but nothing in this Charter contained
shall be held or construed as affecting or in anywise changing the
organization, operation and administration of the County school system by the
Board of Education as provided by public general law.
DEPARTMENT OF LIBRARIES
Sec. 552. Composition; administration under State law.
   The Department of Libraries shall consist of the County Board of Library
Trustees, the County Librarian and all other officers, agents and employees in
the public library system of the County. The Board of Library Trustees shall be
constituted and shall do and perform such duties and functions as may from time
to time be provided by law. All references of this Charter to the head of an
office or department shall be construed as including the County Librarian as
head of the Department of Libraries, but nothing in this Charter contained
shall be held or construed as affecting or any anywise changing the
organization, operation and administration of the County library system by the
Board of Library Trustees as provided by public general law.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
Sec. 553. Composition; functions; administration under State and County law.
   The Department of Health shall consist of the County Health Officer and all
officers, agents and employees under the County Health Officer’s authority and
supervision or under the authority and supervision of the County Board of
Health. The County Council shall constitute the County Board of Health. With
the advice and consent of the State Secretary of Health and Mental Hygiene the
County Executive shall submit to the County Council the County Executive’s
recommendation for the appointment of a County Health Officer, and when
approved by the Council, the same shall constitute the appointment required by
State law. All references in this Charter to the head of an office or
department shall be construed as including the County Health Officer as head of
the Department of Health, but nothing in this Charter contained shall be held
or construed as affecting or in anywise changing the administration of the
County Health programs in accordance with the requirements of State law.
(Bill No. 97-80; Res. No. 30-22)
DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Sec. 554. Composition; functions; administration under State and County law.
   The Department of Social Services shall consist of the Board of Social
Services, the Director of Social Services and all officers, agents and
employees under their authority and supervision. The members of the Board of
Social Services shall be appointed and shall do and perform such duties and
functions as may from time to time be provided by State law. The County
Executive shall serve as a member of the Board ex officio. In addition to all
the duties and functions heretofore performed by the Board of Social Services,
it shall be responsible for such social services activities as may be assigned
to the Board by directive of the County Executive or ordinance of the County
Council not inconsistent with public general law. All references in this
Charter to the head of an office or department shall be construed as including
the Director of Social Services as head of the Department of Social Services,
but nothing in this Charter contained shall be held or construed as affecting
or in anywise changing the administration of the County Social Services program
in accordance with the requirements of public general law.
(Bill No. 97-80)
REORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENTS UNDER STATE LAW
Sec. 555. Furthering legislation.
   If the General Assembly shall at any time transfer to the voters of the
County or to the County Council jurisdiction or control over the affairs or any
of the departments of the County government in excess of the jurisdiction or
control vested in the County government by law or by this Charter, then to the
extent of such transfer, the County Council may by ordinance provide for the
reorganization of such departments and the administration of their affairs
within the executive branch under County law.
Article VI. Special Boards, Commissions, and Committees
COUNTY BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 601. County Board of Appeals; appointment; term; compensation.
   (a)   There shall be a County Board of Appeals consisting of seven qualified
voters of the County appointed by the County Council by a resolution adopted
within thirty days after the Council takes office. Appointments shall be for a
term conterminous with that of the Council or until their successors shall
qualify. A member who has served two consecutive terms as of or after the term
beginning January 4, 2011 is not eligible for appointment to a third
consecutive term. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
manner specified for the original appointment. All members of the Board shall
be residents of Anne Arundel County and appointments shall be made so that not
more than a majority of the members of the Board shall be members of the same
political party, and none of the remaining members shall have been a member of
that political party for twelve months prior to their appointment. Four members
of the Board shall constitute a quorum, except that when the Board is
authorized to sit in a panel of less than six members, three members shall
constitute a quorum. The members of the Board shall be paid at the rate of
Twenty-one Hundred Dollars ($2,100) per year, unless this amount is changed as
provided in Section
605 of this Article.
   (b)   The County Council may provide by ordinance for the designation of one
or more persons to sit as temporary members of the Board of Appeals. If the
Council provides for the designation of temporary members, it shall establish
by ordinance from time to time the qualifications, compensation, and method of
designation, and shall also define the circumstances under which such temporary
members may be designated.
(Bill No. 107-80; Bill No. 113-80; Bill No. 76-82; Res. No. 36-12)
   Editor's note – The 2012 amendment added the limitation that a person is not
eligible for appointment to the Board of Appeals for a third consecutive term
if the member has served two consecutive terms as of or after the term
commencing on January 4, 2011.
Sec. 602. Powers and functions of County Board of Appeals.
   The County Board of Appeals shall have and may exercise the following
functions and powers:
   (a)   In General. The County Board of Appeals shall perform its functions as
a board that is independent of both the legislative and executive branches of
the County government. However, the budget of the Board shall be submitted and
processed as part of the budget request of the Legislative Branch. The board
shall have the powers and duties set forth in this section unless modified in
accordance with Section
605 of this Article.
   (b)   Appeals From Orders Relating to Zoning. The County Board of Appeals
shall have and exercise all the functions and powers of the Board of Appeals of
Anne Arundel County and of the County Board of Appeals described in Local
Government Article, §§ 1-702 through 1-706, 9-102, 9-201 through 9-207, 10-102,
10-202 through 10-206, 10-302 through 10-330 and 18-301 of the Annotated Code
of Maryland as supplemented by other public general laws. All references in law
to the Board of Appeals or the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be construed to
refer to the County Board of Appeals created by this Article where such
construction is reasonable. In all cases heard by the County Board of Appeals,
its decision shall be final unless further appeal be taken therefrom in the
manner provided in Section
604 of this Article.
   (c)   Appeals From Orders Relating to Licenses and Permits. The County Board
of Appeals shall have the function and power to hear appeals from decisions
involving licenses or permits to install plumbing or electrical facilities,
operate a licensable amusement device, operate a taxi service, or such other
licensed or permitted activity of the County as may be provided from time to
time by law except those licensed or permitted by agencies of the State of
Maryland.
   (d)   Appeals From Orders Relating to Building. The County Board of Appeals
shall hear and decide all appeals from orders relating to building.
   (e)   Appeals From Executive, Administrative and Adjudicatory Orders. The
County Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from all other
administrative and adjudicatory orders other than those affecting the internal
operation of the executive branch as may from time to time be provided by § 10-
305 of the Local Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland or by
ordinance of the County Council not inconsistent therewith.
   (f)   Appeals From Decisions on Utility Extensions. The County Board of
Appeals shall hear appeals from decisions involving the extension of sewer and
water services as provided in Section
539A of this Charter.
   (g)   Retaining of Legal Counsel. The County Board of Appeals may retain
private legal counsel, consistent with the budget, to advise the Board with
respect to any of its duties, responsibilities or functions, including any
matter pending before it.
(Bill No. 93-80; Bill No. 76-82; Bill No. 85-82; Res. No. 39-92; Res. No. 56-
96)
Editor’s note – Sec. 602(f) is obsolete as a result of Sec. 539A being repealed
by Res. No. 20-06.
Sec. 603. Rules of practice and procedure.
   The County Board of Appeals shall have authority to adopt and amend rules of
practice and procedure governing its proceedings which shall have the force and
effect of law when approved by ordinance. The rules may relate to filing fees,
meetings and hearings of the Board, the manner in which its Chair shall be
selected and the term which they shall serve as Chair and other pertinent
matters deemed appropriate and necessary for the Board. All decisions by the
County Board of Appeals shall be made after notice and hearing de novo upon the
issues before said Board. All hearings held by the Board shall be open to the
public, and the Board shall cause to be maintained complete public records of
its proceedings, with a suitable index. All parties to the proceedings or their
attorneys of record shall receive a copy of the decision of the Board.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 604. Appeals from decisions of the Board.
   Within thirty days after any decision by the County Board of Appeals is
rendered, any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board and a party to the
proceedings before it may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court of Anne
Arundel County, which shall have power to affirm the decision of the Board, or
if such decision is not in accordance with law, to modify or reverse such
decision, with or without remanding the case for rehearing, as justice may
require. Within thirty days after the decision of the Circuit Court is rendered
any party to the proceeding who is aggrieved thereby may appeal such decision
to the Appellate Court of Maryland. The review proceedings provided by this
section shall be exclusive.
(Bill No. 80-72; Res. No. 18-06)
Editor's note – The 2006 amendment removed provisions that were inconsistent
with the Maryland Rules relating to appeals to the Circuit Court from decisions
of the Board of Appeals, including provisions regarding notifications to the
parties, the time for filing papers, and the content of those papers. The
amendment also corrected an obsolete provision relating to the appellate court
that has jurisdiction over appeals from decisions of the Circuit Court. It
changed the reference from the Court of Appeals to the Court of Special Appeals
to be consistent with the Maryland Constitution and State law.
A legislatively referred constitutional amendment appeared on the ballot as
Maryland Question 1 at the General Election held on November 8, 2022. Question
1 asked the voters in Maryland to change the Maryland Court of Appeals to the
Supreme Court of Maryland and the Maryland Court of Special Appeals to the
Appellate Court of Maryland. The majority of votes cast in the November 8
General Election were in favor of the constitutional amendment. The Court of
Appeals of Maryland is now the Supreme Court of Maryland, and the Court of
Special Appeals is now the Appellate Court of Maryland.
Sec. 605. Furthering legislation.
   The County Council shall have the power to enact by ordinance furthering
legislation not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article to implement
and define the powers and functions of the County Board of Appeals as herein
specified. The County Council may by Ordinance increase the compensation of the
members of the County Board of Appeals provided in Section
601 of this Article and thereafter decrease such compensation, provided,
however, that no such reduction shall affect the compensation of a member of
the County Board of Appeals during their current term, and in no event shall
the Council have the power to decrease the compensation of members of the Board
below the figure provided in this Charter. The County Council may also by
ordinance provide for the designation of panels of the Board of Appeals
consisting of not less than three of its members to hear such categories of
appeals as the Council may from time to time determine, provided that any
decision rendered by such a designated panel of less than the full Board shall
nevertheless constitute a decision of the Board of Appeals within the meaning
of this Article. To the extent permitted by public general laws of this State,
the County Council shall also have the power, by ordinance, to extend, limit,
or modify the subject matter jurisdiction of the County Board of Appeals.
(Bill No. 113-80; Res. No. 56-96; Res. No. 30-22)
PENSION OVERSIGHT COMMISSION
Sec. 606. Composition of Commission; terms; removal and compensation of
members.
   (a)   There shall be a Pension Oversight Commission which shall perform the
functions set forth in this Article as a commission that is independent of both
the legislative and executive branches of the County government.
   (b)   (1)   The Pension Oversight Commission shall consist of nine members
appointed by the County Executive and confirmed by resolution of the County
Council.
      (2)   Five of the members of the Pension Oversight Commission shall be
residents of the County who:
         (i)   are knowledgeable about pension administration and funding;
         (ii)   do not hold an elective or appointed office with the County or
the State; and
         (iii)   are not participants in any retirement plan that the
Commission oversees.
      (3)   Four of the members shall be members of the classified service as
defined in Section
803 of this Charter and shall be selected from a list of names nominated by
secret ballot by the members of the classified service in the manner required
by ordinance of the County Council. Of the four members:
         (i)   one shall be a uniformed police officer;
         (ii)   one shall be a professional fire fighter;
         (iii)   one shall be a member of a class represented by the employee
organization that represents the majority of classified employees other than
uniformed police officers and professional fire fighters; and
         (iv)   one shall be a member of the classified service other than the
police department and fire department, who is in a class excluded from
representation by the employee organization referred to in item (iii).
   (c)   (1)   The term of a member shall be four years and the terms of the
members shall be staggered as provided by the terms of the initial members of
the commission.
      (2)   At the end of a term, a member shall continue to serve until a
successor is appointed and qualifies.
      (3)   A member who is appointed after a term has begun shall serve only
for the rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualified.
      (4)   A person may not serve for more than two terms as a member of the
Pension Oversight Commission.
   (d)   On the recommendation of the County Executive, the County Council, on
the affirmative vote of at least five of its members, may remove a member of
the Pension Oversight Commission for cause.
   (e)   From among its members, the Pension Oversight Commission annually
shall elect a chair.
   (f)   (1)   Unless otherwise authorized by ordinance, a member of the
Pension Oversight Commission may not receive compensation.
      (2)   A member of the Commission is entitled to reimbursement of
expenses, as provided in the budget.
(Bill No. 83-82; Res. No. 64-86; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 607. Duties of the Commission.
      (1)   The Pension Oversight Commission shall have the duties set forth in
this section.
      (2)   The Commission shall submit an annual report of the status of each
County pension plan created under Section
814 of this Charter to the County Executive and the County Council. The report
shall include for each pension plan:
         (i)   the Commission's assessment of the appropriateness of the
actuarial assumptions used;
         (ii)   a statement of revenues, including contributions, investment
earnings, and forfeitures;
         (iii)   the cost of the plan, including an analysis of fees,
commissions and expenses;
         (iv)   an evaluation of the administration of the plan; and
         (v)   any amendment or proposal that the Commission may wish to
recommend.
      (3)   The County Council shall provide the Pension Oversight Commission
with a copy of any proposed ordinance or resolution pertaining to a County
retirement plan. The Commission shall review any proposal that is submitted
and, on or before the thirtieth day after receipt of the proposal, report its
findings and recommendations to the County Executive and County Council. The
County Council may not vote on any ordinance or resolution that is subject to
this paragraph until it has either received the Commission's report or the time
period for submission of the report has expired.
      (4)   On request of the County Executive, any member of the County
Council, Board of Appeals, the Personnel Officer, or any participant in a
County pension plan, the Pension Oversight Commission shall provide a written
interpretation of any provisions of a County pension plan.
      (5)   Before the County makes any change in the mediums used for funding
a County pension plan, the County shall submit a written statement of its
proposed action to the Pension Oversight Commission. The Commission shall
review any proposal that is submitted and, on or before the thirtieth day after
receipt of the proposal, report its findings and recommendations to the County
official responsible for the proposal. Unless the County Executive declares
that an emergency exists that demands immediate action, the County may not take
any action that commits the County to the proposed action until it has either
received the Commission's report or the time period for submission of the
report has expired.
      (6)   The Commission shall perform any additional duty assigned to it by
ordinance.
      (7)   The Commission may engage the services of actuaries or other
experts to assist it in carrying out its functions under this section.
(Bill No. 83-82)
Sec. 608. Budgeting requirements.
   The Commission shall have the funds as provided for in the budget.
(Bill No. 83-82)
Sec. 609. Terms of the initial members of the Commission; creation of staggered
terms.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article regarding the terms of
the members of the Commission, for the initial Commission two of the public
members of the Pension Oversight Commission shall be appointed for a term of
two years, one of the public members shall be appointed for a term of three
years, and one of the public members shall be appointed for a term of four
years. At the completion of each of those initial terms, the vacancy shall be
filled by an appointment for a term as provided in Section
606 of this Article.
(Bill No. 83-82)
SPENDING AFFORDABILITY COMMITTEE
Sec. 610. Composition of Committee; terms; compensation.
   (a)   (1)   There is a Spending Affordability Committee appointed by the
County Executive and confirmed by resolution of the County Council.
      (2)   The Committee shall make advisory recommendations to the Office of
the Budget, the County Executive, and the County Council relating to spending
affordability including County spending levels to reflect the ability of the
taxpayer to finance County services and long-term debt.
      (3)   The recommendations shall be presented in a report not less than
150 days before the end of each fiscal year, and copies of the report shall be
made available for public inspection.
      (4)   The County Executive, at their discretion, or the County Council,
by resolution, may refer to the Committee any matter related to the Committee's
functions and duties for its review and recommendations.
   (b)   The Committee shall examine:
      (1)   current capital projects;
      (2)   the 5-year capital improvement program;
      (3)   per capita wealth;
      (4)   debt service;
      (5)   pay-as-you-go funding; and
      (6)   alternative sources of funding.
   (c)   The Committee shall consist of one resident from each councilmanic
district who is knowledgeable in the field of economics, finance, fiscal
planning, or a related field. It shall elect its own chair.
   (d)   (1)   For the initial term, two of the members shall be appointed for
a term of two years, two for a term of three years, and three for a term of
four years.
      (2)   After the initial term, each member shall be appointed for a term
of four years.
      (3)   At the end of a term, a member shall continue to serve until a
successor has been appointed and qualified.
      (4)   A member appointed after a term has begun shall serve only for the
rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualified.
      (5)   A person may not serve for more than two successive terms.
   (e)   The committee shall have the funds as provided for in the budget.
(Res. No. 31-90; Res. No. 30-22)
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
Sec. 611. Human Relations Commission.
   There shall be a Human Relations Commission for Anne Arundel County that is
independent of the legislative and executive branches of County government. The
Commission shall perform the duties and functions set forth in the County Code.
(Res. No. 22-20)
VETERANS AFFAIRS COMMISSION
Sec. 612. Veterans Affairs Commission.
   There shall be an Anne Arundel County Veterans Affairs Commission that is
independent of the legislative and executive branches of County government. The
Commission shall perform the duties and functions set forth in the County Code.
(Res. No. 64-21)
Article VII. Budgetary and Fiscal Procedures
Sec. 701. Fiscal year and tax years.
   Unless and until changed in accordance with the provision of State law, the
fiscal or budget year of the County shall begin on the first day of July and
shall end on the thirtieth day of June of the succeeding year. The taxable year
shall begin on the first day of July and end on the thirtieth day of June
following unless another period shall be fixed by State law.
Sec. 702. Definition of terms used in this Article.
   (a)   The term "County government" shall include all offices, courts,
departments, institutions, corporations, boards, commissions, agencies and
their offices, agents and employees who receive or disburse County funds.
   (b)   The term "capital project" shall mean: (1) any physical public'
betterment or improvement and any preliminary studies and surveys relative
thereto; (2) the acquisition of property of a permanent nature for public use;
and (3) the purchase of equipment for any public betterment or improvement when
first constructed.
   (c)   The term "capital budget" shall mean the plan of the County to receive
and expend funds for capital projects during the first fiscal year included in
the capital program.
   (d)   The term "capital program" shall mean the plan of the County to
receive and expend funds for capital projects during the fiscal year covered by
the capital budget and the next succeeding five fiscal years thereafter.
   (e)   The term "copy or copies" shall mean paper, digital, or electronic
copies of any document or other material.
   (f)   The term "current expense budget" shall mean the plan of the County to
receive and expend funds for charges incurred for operation, maintenance,
interest and other charges for the ensuing fiscal year.
(Res. No. 55-12)
Editor's note – The 2012 amendment changed the definition of the term "copy or
copies" to include paper, electronic or digital copies.
Sec. 703. Comprehensive scope of budget.
   The County budget shall consist of the current expense budget, the capital
budget and capital program and the budget message. It shall represent a
complete financial plan for the County reflecting all receipts and
disbursements from all sources, including all revenues, all expenditures, and
the fund balance or deficit in the general and all special funds of the County
government.
(Res. No. 69-86)
Sec. 704. Formulation of current expense budget.
   Not less than one hundred twenty days prior to the end of each fiscal year,
the head of each office, department, institution, board, commission and other
agency of the County government shall furnish to the Budget Officer an annual
budget setting forth nature, volume, cost and other factors concerning the work
to be performed and the estimates of the revenues and expenditures of their
several operations for the ensuing fiscal year. Estimated revenues shall be
detailed as to source, and estimated expenditures as to program or project. All
such estimates shall be submitted in such form and with such other supporting
data as the Chief Administrative Officer may request. The data so submitted
shall thereupon be reviewed by the Chief Administrative Officer with the
assistance of the Budget Officer and the Chief Administrative Officer may hold
such hearings as the Chief Administrative Officer shall deem appropriate. The
current expense budget shall be compiled therefrom for transmission to the
County Executive. The County Executive may amend the budget proposals, except
for the budget request of the legislative branch and shall cause to be prepared
the County budget as set forth in Section 706 of this Article along with the
County Executive’s budget message.
(Res. No. 19-06; Res. No. 30-22)
Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted the reference to work programs.
Although former Sec. 714 pertaining to work programs and allotments was
eliminated from the Charter in 1988, references to allotments remained
throughout various articles and sections of the Charter.
Sec. 705. Formulation of capital budget and capital program.
   At such time or times as the Chief Administrative Officer may direct, each
office, court, department, institution, board, commission, corporation or other
agency of the County government shall submit to the Budget Officer for
transmission to the Office of Planning and Zoning an itemized list of the
capital projects which each agency proposes to undertake in the ensuing fiscal
year and the next succeeding five fiscal years thereafter. The list may include
capital projects that are proposed to be completely funded for two fiscal years
as provided in Sections
706 and
709 of this Charter. After consideration by the Planning Advisory Board, the
Planning and Zoning Officer shall transmit to the Budget Officer the list of
projects recommended by said Board together with the Planning and Zoning
Officer's recommendations on the projects to be undertaken, in the periods
aforesaid and its estimates of the cost thereof. The Chief Administrative
Officer with the assistance of the Budget Officer shall consider such
recommendations with the other budget proposals and shall recommend to the
County Executive, together with the current expense budget, a complete capital
budget and capital program, including those projects that are proposed to be
completely funded for two fiscal years. The County Executive may amend the
capital budget and capital program proposals and shall cause to be prepared the
County budget as set forth in Section
706 along with the County Executive’s budget message.
(Res. No. 50-88; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 706. Pre-submission meetings; submission and contents of the County
budget.
   (a)   Pre-submission meetings. The County Executive shall hold at least two
public meetings to receive comment on and proposals for inclusion in the County
budget prior to submission of the budget to the County Council. The meetings
shall be held no later than 30 days before the first day of the annual
legislative session of the County Council. Notice of the time and place of the
County Executive's budget meetings shall be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the County at least one week prior to the meeting and
posted on the County website for at least two weeks prior to the meeting.
   (b)   Submission to the County Council. Not later than 60 days prior to the
end of the fiscal year, the County Executive shall submit to the County Council
the proposed County budget for the ensuing fiscal year.
   (c)   Contents of the Current Expense Budget. The proposed current expense
budget shall contain not less than the following information: (1) a statement
of all revenue estimated to be received by the County during the ensuing fiscal
year, classified so as to show the receipts by funds and sources of income; (2)
a statement of debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year; (3) a
statement of the estimated fund balance or retained earnings, if any, available
for expenditure during the ensuing fiscal year, and any estimated deficit in
any fund required to be made up in the ensuing fiscal year; (4) an estimate of
the several amounts which the County Executive deems necessary for conducting
the business of the County to be financed from and not to exceed estimated
revenues for the ensuing fiscal year; (5) a statement of the bonded and other
indebtedness of the County government and its agencies, including self-
liquidating and special taxing district debt; (6) a statement of the proposed
contingency reserves which shall not exceed three per centum of the general
fund and of any other fund; (7) a comparative statement of the receipts and
expenditures for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated receipts and
expenditures of the currently ending fiscal year, and the expenditures
recommended by the County Executive for the ensuing fiscal year for each
program or project which shall be classified by agency, character and object;
and (8) any other material which the County Executive may deem advisable or the
County Council by ordinance may require.
    (d)   Contents of the Capital Budget and Capital Program. The proposed
capital budget and capital program shall be so arranged as to set forth clearly
the plan of proposed capital projects to be undertaken in the ensuing fiscal
year and in each of the next five fiscal years, and also the proposed means of
financing the same. In any year except a year during which the members of the
County Council will be elected, the capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year
may include capital projects that are to be completely funded for two fiscal
years. The capital budget shall include a statement of the receipts anticipated
during the ensuring fiscal year from all borrowing and from other sources for
capital projects and any other materials which the County Executive may deem
advisable or the County Council by ordinance may require.
   (e)   Contents of the Budget Message. The Budget Message shall contain
supporting summary tables and shall explain the proposed current expense budget
and capital program both in fiscal terms and in terms of work to be done. It
shall outline the proposed financial policies of the County for the ensuing
fiscal year and describe the important features of the current expense budget.
It shall indicate any major changes in financial policies and in expenditures,
appropriations and revenues as compared with the fiscal year currently ending,
and shall set forth the reasons for such changes. As to the capital program,
the message shall include an explanation of changes made by the County
Executive in the program presented by the Office of Planning and Zoning. The
message shall also include such other material as the County Executive may deem
desirable.
(Bill No. 51-76; Bill No. 72-82; Res. No. 50-88; Res. No. 31-10; Res. No. 54-
12; Res. No. 30-16)
   Editor's notes –
   The 2010 amendment changed the date which the County Executive must submit
the proposed County budget to the County Council to 75 days prior to the end of
the ensuing fiscal year.
   The 2012 amendment changed the date that the County Executive must submit
the proposed County budget to the County Council to 60 days prior to the end of
the current fiscal year.
Sec. 707. Filing of proposed budget; copies.
   The proposed County budget shall be filed with the Administrative Officer to
the County Council and a copy shall be delivered to each member of the Council.
At least three complete copies shall be open to inspection by the public during
regular business hours. One copy shall be supplied to each newspaper of general
circulation in the County and to each County library. The Council may determine
by resolution in advance of budget formulation the number of additional copies
it believes necessary for public use. The budget message and supporting summary
tables shall be reproduced in multiple copies, and a copy shall be made
available to any interested person on request.
(Res. No. 69-86)
Sec. 708. Public hearing.
   Upon receipt of the proposed County budget, the Administrative Officer to
the County Council shall cause to be published in at least two newspapers of
general circulation published in the County a notice of the place and time of a
public hearing on the budget plan as a whole by the County Council. Such
hearing shall be held not less than 7 nor more than 30 days after the date of
the filing of the proposed budget by the County Executive. The Council may hold
such other preliminary public hearings on the budget for the purpose of
obtaining information as it may determine but no action shall be taken by the
Council on the budget except in public meeting and after the public hearing
specified above.
(Bill No. 94-80; Res. No. 69-86; Res. No. 46-88; Res. No. 31-10)
Editor's note – The 2010 amendment changed to 30 the number of days after the
County Council receives the County budget from the County Executive within
which the County Council must hold a public hearing on the budget.
Sec. 709. Action on the budget by the County Council.
   After the public hearing specified in the preceding section, the County
Council may decrease or delete any items in the budget except those required by
the public general laws of this State and except any provision for debt service
on obligations then outstanding or for estimated cash deficits. The County
Council shall have no power to change the form of the budget as submitted by
the County Executive, to alter the revenue estimates except to correct
mathematical errors, or to increase any expenditure recommended by the County
Executive for current or capital purposes. In any year except a year during
which members of the County Council will be elected, the County Council may
completely fund for the next two ensuing fiscal years those capital projects
designated in the capital budget proposed by the County Executive which are
designated to be completely funded for two fiscal years pursuant to Section
705 of this Charter. If the County Executive proposes amendments to the budget
so as to increase items in the budget or add items to the budget, the Chair of
the County Council shall give reasonable public notice of the proposed
amendments and hold a public hearing on the amendments, provided that the
County Council may waive the public hearing by a vote of five members. The
adoption of the budget shall be by the affirmative vote of not less than four
members of the County Council on an ordinance to be known as the Annual Budget
and Appropriation Ordinance of Anne Arundel County. The County Council may, at
the same time or thereafter from time to time during the ensuing fiscal year,
adopt bond issue authorization ordinances providing the means of financing such
capital projects as are to be financed from borrowing in the ensuing fiscal
year. All of said ordinances shall be exempt from the executive veto. The
Annual Budget and Appropriation Ordinance shall be adopted by the County
Council on or before the fifteenth day of the last month of the fiscal year
currently ending; and if the County Council fails to do so, the proposed budget
submitted by the County Executive shall stand adopted, and funds for the
expenditures proposed in the current expense budget shall stand appropriated as
fully and to the same extent as if favorable action thereon had been taken by
the County Council.
(Res. No. 50-88; Res. No. 42-92; Res. No. 54-12; Res. No. 30-22)
Editor's note – The 2012 amendment changed the date by which the County Council
must adopt the Annual Budget and Appropriation Ordinance to the 15th day of the
last month of the current fiscal year.
Sec. 710. Reproduction of budget; effective date; tax levy; appropriations.
   (a)   Reproduction of Budget. The budget as adopted shall be reproduced in
sufficient copies for distribution, free of charge, to the press and the head
of each office, department or agency of the County government. Copies of the
budget shall likewise be given to any interested person on request, provided,
however, that in order to discourage waste the County Council may prescribe a
charge for each copy of the adopted budget not to exceed the actual cost of its
reproduction.
   (b)   Effective Date. The adopted budget shall take effect on the first day
of the fiscal year to which it applies.
   (c)   Tax Levy and Balanced Budget.
      (1)   When the County budget shall have been finally adopted in the
Annual Budget and Appropriation Ordinance, the County Council shall thereupon
levy and cause to be raised the amount of taxes required by the budget in the
manner provided by law so that the budget shall be balanced as to proposed
income and expenditures.
      (2)   Any ordinance adopted under this subsection to levy taxes to
balance the budget is exempt from the executive veto.
      (3)   The effective date of a tax levy bill shall be the first day of the
fiscal year to which it applies.
   (d)   Property Tax. From and after July 1, 1993, revenues derived from taxes
on properties existing on the County property tax rolls at the commencement of
the County fiscal year shall not increase, compared with the previous year,
more than the Consumer Price Index percentage of change, or by 4.5 percent,
whichever is the lesser.
   The Consumer Price Index shall be determined by the preceding January
computation by the U.S. Department of Labor.
(Bill No. 72-82; Res. No. 56-92)
Sec. 711. Transfer of appropriations.
   (a)   Transfers of appropriations between general classifications of
expenditures in the current expense budget within the same office or department
and within the same fund may be authorized by the County Executive. Transfers
between offices, departments, institutions, boards, commissions or other
agencies of the County government and within the same fund of the current
expense budget may be made only on the recommendation of the County Executive
and with the approval of the County Council by ordinance.
   (b)   Interproject transfers of appropriations between capital projects in
the capital budget may be authorized by the County Council by ordinance upon
request of the County Executive but no new project shall be created nor any
abandoned except in accordance with Section
716 of this Charter.
   (c)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the County
Council upon request of the County Executive from providing by ordinance for
inter-fund cash borrowing to meet temporary cash requirements nor to prevent
reimbursements among funds for services rendered.
(Bill No. 73-82)
Sec. 712. Supplementary and emergency appropriations.
   During any fiscal year, the County Council, upon the recommendation of the
County Executive, may by ordinance make additional, supplementary, or emergency
appropriations from contingent funds, from revenues received from anticipated
sources but in excess of budget estimates therefor, or from revenues received
from sources not anticipated in the budget for the current fiscal year;
provided that the Controller shall first certify in writing that such funds are
available for such appropriation. No supplemental appropriation shall exceed
the amount of the funds so certified.
   To the extent that there may be no available unappropriated revenues to meet
such emergency appropriations, the County Council may, by ordinance, authorize
the issuance of emergency notes which may be renewed from time to time,
provided, however, that such notes and renewals shall be paid not later than
the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which the emergency
appropriation was made. The total of emergency appropriations in any fiscal
year shall not exceed five per centum of all appropriations (including those
for debt service) made in the budget for such year.
(Bill No. 106-72)
Sec. 713. Lapsed appropriations.
   Unless otherwise provided by public general law, all unexpended and
unencumbered appropriations in the current expense budget remaining at the end
of the fiscal year shall lapse into the County treasury. No appropriation for a
capital project in the capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which
the appropriation was made has been accomplished or abandoned. Unless an
exception is authorized for the project by ordinance of the County Council, a
capital project shall be deemed to be abandoned if three fiscal years elapsed
without a construction contract being awarded for the construction phase of the
capital project. The balances remaining to the credit of the completed or
abandoned capital projects shall be available for appropriation in subsequent
capital budgets.
(Bill No. 73-82)
Sec. 714. Budget reduction amendment.
   (a)   If the County Executive concludes that revenues will be substantially
less than the amount required to fund the annual budget and appropriation
ordinance for the current fiscal year, the County Executive may:
      (1)   recommend the reduction of one or more appropriations in the annual
budget and appropriation ordinance for the current fiscal year, except those
required by State law and except any provision for debt service on obligations
then outstanding or for estimated cash deficits; or
      (2)   take any other action authorized by State law, this Charter, or any
ordinance authorized by this Charter.
   (b)   (1)   When the County Executive recommends the reduction of any
appropriation in the annual budget and appropriation ordinance, the County
Executive shall cause a proposed budget reduction amendment to be prepared and
submitted to the County Council.
      (2)   A proposed budget reduction amendment shall be submitted in the
form of a bill containing the entire annual budget and appropriation ordinance
for the current fiscal year, shall show the reductions proposed by the County
Executive as amendments to the ordinance, shall be supported by a schedule of
revised revenue estimates, and may not provide for any new item of
appropriation or any increase in a current appropriation.
      (3)   A proposed budget reduction amendment shall be filed with the
Administrative Officer to the County Council, and a copy shall be delivered to
each member of the Council. At least three complete copies shall be open to
inspection by the public during regular business hours. One copy shall be
supplied to each newspaper of general circulation in the County and to each
County library. A copy shall be made available to any interested person on
request.
      (4)   Upon receipt of a proposed budget reduction amendment, the
Administrative Officer to the County Council shall cause to be published in at
least two newspapers of general circulation published in the County a notice of
the place and time of a public hearing by the County Council on the proposed
budget reduction. The Council may hold other preliminary public hearings on the
budget reduction amendment for the purpose of obtaining information, but no
action shall be taken by the Council on the budget reduction amendment, except
in public meeting and after the public hearing specified above.
      (5)   After the public hearing specified in the preceding section, the
County Council may decrease or delete any appropriation in the current annual
budget and appropriation ordinance, except those required by State law and
except any provision for debt service on obligations then outstanding or for
estimated cash deficits. The County Council shall have no power to change the
form of the annual budget and appropriation ordinance or to alter the amended
revenue estimates except to correct mathematical errors. Neither may the County
Council increase any expenditure above the amount in the current annual budget
and appropriation ordinance. An amended annual budget and appropriation
ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage by the Council, and is not
subject to executive veto.
      (6)   The adoption of a budget reduction amendment shall be by the
affirmative vote of not less than four members of the County Council on an
ordinance to be known as the Amended Annual Budget and Appropriation Ordinance
of Anne Arundel County.
      (7)   The budget, as amended by an annual budget and appropriation
ordinance, shall be reproduced in sufficient copies for distribution, free of
charge, to the press and the head of each office, department or agency of the
County government. Copies of the amended budget shall likewise be given to any
interested person on request; provided, however, that in order to discourage
waste the County Council may prescribe a charge for each copy of the amended
budget not to exceed the actual cost of its reproduction.
(Res. No. 43-88; Res. No. 43-92)
Sec. 715. Appropriation control and certification of funds.
   (a)   During any fiscal year, an office, department, board, commission, or
other agency of the County government may not spend, or contract to spend, any
money or incur any liability, or enter into any contract, which by its terms
involves the expenditure of money, for any purpose in excess of the amounts
appropriated for the same general classification of expenditure in the budget
for that fiscal year, or in any supplemental appropriation as provided in this
Article.
   (b)   (1)   Except as otherwise authorized under paragraph (2) of this
subsection and under Section
718(g) of this Charter, an office, department, board, commission, or other
agency of the County government may not make any payment over One Hundred
Dollars ($100) or incur any obligation or liability over One Hundred Dollars
($100) unless the Controller certifies that the funds for the designated
purpose are available.
      (2)   The County Council may increase the limit set in paragraph (1) of
this subsection for uncertified expenditures and then decrease the limit by
ordinance to any amount not lower than that set in paragraph (1).
   (c)   Nothing in this or any other section of this Charter prevents the
making of contracts of lease or for services providing for the payment of funds
at a time beyond the fiscal year in which the contracts are made, if the nature
of the transactions reasonably requires the making of the contracts. However,
any contract, lease or other obligation requiring the payment of funds from the
appropriations of a later fiscal year shall be made or approved by ordinance.
   (d)   An office, department, board, commission, or other agency of County
government may not contract for the purchase of real or leasehold property
unless the funds for the contract are included in the capital budget.
   (e)   (1)   Any contract, verbal or written, made in violation of this
section is null and void.
      (2)   Any officer, agent, or employee of the County who knowingly spends
County funds in violation of this section is personally liable for the amount
spent.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of
Article VIII of this Charter, after a public hearing, the County Executive or,
on a majority vote, the County Council may remove from office any officer,
agent, or employee of the County who knowingly violates this section.
(Bill No. 73-82; Res. No. 24-98; Res. No. 19-06)
   Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted the reference to budgetary
allotments. Although former Sec. 714 pertaining to work programs and allotments
was eliminated from the Charter in 1988, references to allotments remained
throughout various articles and sections of the Charter.
Sec. 716. Restrictions on capital projects; amendment to capital budget after
adoption of budget.
   No obligations of the County shall be authorized in any fiscal year for or
on account of any capital project not included in the County budget as finally
adopted for such year; provided, however, that upon receipt of a written
request from the County Executive, the Council may, by the affirmative vote of
five members, amend the County budget. The total amount of appropriations to
the capital budget may only be increased from revenues received from
anticipated sources but in excess of budget estimates therefor, or from
revenues received from sources not anticipated in the budget for the current
fiscal year. Any proposed amendment to the capital budget shall be subject to
review by and recommendation of the Planning Advisory Board in the same manner
as a capital project initially included in the budget under Sections
705 and
706 of this Charter, including an explanation by the County Executive of any
changes made after review by and recommendation of the Planning Advisory Board.
(Res. No. 65-86)
Sec. 717. Enterprise accounting.
   (a)   Separate budgets for each utility shall be included in the current
expense and capital budgets prescribed in this Article which shall include
statements of revenue and expense for the required fiscal years.
   (b)   The accounting system of each utility shall conform to generally
accepted principles of utility accounting and shall be kept on an accrual
basis. The expense of operating each utility shall include taxes, if any,
lawfully accruing during the fiscal year.
   (c)   If for any fiscal year a utility fund operates at a net loss and the
balance sheet of the utility that has operated at a loss shows a deficit at the
end of a fiscal year, it shall be the duty of the County Executive to recommend
for that utility a schedule of rates that in the County Executive's judgment
will produce revenue at least equal to the amount of the deficit plus the
estimated operating expenses of the utility for the current fiscal year.
(Bill No. 84-82; Bill No. 86-82)
Sec. 718. Composition and limitation upon County funds and levies; special
taxes; bond obligation.
   (a)   Special Funds; Revenue and Receipts; Appropriations. All revenues and
receipts from utility assessments; from special services or benefits charges;
from special taxes or assessments imposed upon special taxing areas for special
or particular services, purposes or benefits; from funds held by the County as
trustee or agent; or from bond proceeds, shall be paid into and appropriated
from special funds created therefor.
   (b)   General Revenue and Receipts; Appropriations. All other revenues and
receipts of the County from taxes, grants, State revenues and other receipts
shall be paid into and appropriated from the general fund which shall be the
primary fund for the financing of current expenses for the conduct of County
business. A tax imposed upon all assessable property or class of property in
the County which exempts assessable property in an incorporated municipality
subject to the provisions of Article XI-E of the State Constitution shall not
be deemed or construed to be a "special tax" for the purposes of this section
and all receipts from such tax shall be paid into and appropriated from the
general fund.
   (c)   Prohibitions. No general fund revenues or receipts as defined in
subsection (b) of this section shall be dedicated to, expended for, or used to
supplement, appropriations from the special funds referred to in subsection (a)
of this section, except as a loan to such special fund as authorized by Section
711(c) of this Article which authorizes inter-fund borrowing.
   (d)   Levy for Roads.
      (1)   No tax for the purpose of raising revenue for the construction and
maintenance of public roads shall be levied upon any assessable property in the
county except on a Countywide basis, exclusive of incorporated municipalities
subject to the provisions of Article XI-E of the State Constitution which
operate and maintain their own road or street system.
      (2)   This subsection does not prohibit the County from collecting land
development fees, in lieu of any road improvements that may be required under
County law, for future roadway construction or spot road improvements. On the
recommendation of the County Executive, the County Council may provide by
ordinance for collection of fees for these purposes, their placement in escrow
accounts, and the use of funds accumulated in those accounts for road
construction or spot improvements.
   (e)   Special Taxing Districts; Existing Law. Nothing in this section shall
be construed as affecting the provisions of Chapter 28 titled "Special Taxing
Districts Generally" of the Anne Arundel County Code (1957 Edition as amended
or supplemented) or the provisions of section 9-72 of said Code, which shall
remain in effect until changed, modified or repealed by ordinance not
inconsistent with the provisions of this section.
   (f)   Bond Interest and Redemption Obligations. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to prevent the County from fulfilling any obligation to
levy, if necessary, a tax upon all or a portion of the assessable property
within the County to provide for the payment of the interest on and principal
of any bonds issued upon the full faith and credit of the County.
   (g)   Working Capital Funds. Upon request of the County Executive, the
Council may, by the annual budget and appropriation ordinance, or by other
ordinance, provide for the establishment of working capital or revolving funds
for the financing of central stores, equipment pools or other services common
to the agencies of the County, and provide that expenditures from these funds
for the purchase of inventory items need not be charged against appropriations
until the inventory items are issued to the using agencies.
   (h)   Reserve Fund for Permanent Public Improvements. Notwithstanding the
provisions of
718(c), above, the Council may establish a Reserve Fund for Permanent Public
Improvements, into which there may be paid by the annual budget and
appropriation ordinance unexpended fund balances not otherwise appropriated or
toward the financing of which taxes or other sources of revenue may be
dedicated.
   (i)   Reserve Fund for Retiree Health Benefits. The County budget shall
including a continuing, nonlapsing fund known as the Reserve Fund for Retiree
Health Benefits into which County revenues and receipts may be appropriated and
from which appropriations shall be made for the sole purpose of paying the
health care benefits of retired County employees and their spouses, dependents,
and survivors to the extent that such benefits have been approved by ordinance
of the County Council, with the interest earnings of the Fund retained to the
credit of the Fund. The County Council may increase the appropriation to this
Fund in an amount exceeding the recommendation of the County Executive. The
existence of this Fund does not mandate the payment of any benefits or prohibit
the use of General Fund revenues and receipts to pay for such benefits
notwithstanding the provisions of Section
709 and
718(c) of this Article. The Fund shall be subject to the limit on contingency
reserves set forth in Section
706(c) of this Article only to the extent that the balance in the Fund exceeds
the unfunded accrued liability for such benefits.
(Bill No. 93-80; Bill No. 94-80; Bill No. 73-82; Res. No. 24-98; Res. No. 34-
12)
   Editor's note – The 2012 amendment added Sec.
718(i).
Sec. 719. Borrowing limitations.
   Unless and until otherwise provided by ordinance of the County Council
within the limitations provided by public general law, the aggregate amounts of
bonds and other evidences of indebtedness outstanding at any one time shall not
exceed ten per centum upon the assessable basis of the County; provided,
however, that (a) tax anticipation notes or other evidences of indebtedness
having a maturity not in excess of twelve months, (b) bonds or other evidences
of indebtedness issued or guaranteed by the County payable primarily or
exclusively from taxes levied in or on, or other revenues of, special taxing
areas or districts heretofore or hereafter established by law and (c) bonds or
other evidences of indebtedness issued for self-liquidating and other projects
payable primarily or exclusively from the proceeds of assessments or charges
for special benefits or services shall not be subject to, or be included as
bonds or evidences of indebtedness in computing or applying the per centum
limitation above provided. All bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued
under the authority of The Sanitary Commission Act shall be construed as
exempt, under clauses (b) and (c) above, from the per centum limitation in this
section provided, but shall continue as heretofore to be subject to the per
centum limitation as from time to time provided in said Act.
Sec. 720. Term of bonds; disbursement of premiums.
   (a)   All bonds shall be payable under an annual installment plan which
shall commence payments not more than two years from the date of issue. The
annual installment plan may be implemented by the issuance of serial maturity
bonds or term bonds having mandatory sinking fund requirements. All bonds shall
be made payable within the probable useful life of the improvement or
undertaking with respect to which they are to be issued, or, if the bonds are
to be issued for several improvements or undertakings, then within the average
probable useful life of all such improvements or undertakings. In the case of a
bond issue for several improvements or undertakings having different probable
useful lives, the County Council shall determine the average of said lives,
taking into consideration the amount of bonds to be issued on account of each
such improvement or undertaking, and the period so determined shall be the
average period of useful life. The determination of the County Council as to
the probable useful life of any such improvement or undertaking shall be
conclusive. No bonds shall mature and be payable more than thirty years after
their date of issuance except bonds issued under the authority of the Sanitary
Commission Act.
   (b)   Bond premiums generated from the issuance of County bonds shall be
used for the funding of capital improvements financed by the bonds.
(Res. No. 38-96; Res. No. 50-12)
   Editor's note – The 2012 amendment added Sec. 720(b).
Sec. 721. Contents of Bond Issue Authorization Ordinances; interim notes.
   (a)   Contents of Bond Issue Authorization Ordinances. Each Bond Issue
Authorization Ordinance as referred to in Section
709 of this Article shall include a statement of the aggregate amount of bonds
authorized thereby, the purpose or purposes of the borrowing, and if the
purpose is to finance one or more capital projects, it shall describe each of
them sufficiently for purposes of identification, but no capital project shall
be included unless the amount included therein shall be deemed sufficient to
complete at least a usable portion of such project. The Ordinance shall
estimate the cost of the project or projects to be financed and the portion
thereof to be defrayed from sources, specifically named, other than the
proposed bond issue. The Ordinance shall also include the amount of the
proposed issue or issues; a statement showing that the proposed issue is within
the legal limitation on the indebtedness of the County or a Sanitary District
as the case may be; the probable useful life of the project or average probable
useful life of the projects to be financed; and declarations that the principal
of and interest on the proposed issue are to be paid by ad valorem taxes on
real estate and tangible personal property and intangible property subject to
taxation by the County without limitation of rate or amount, and in addition,
upon such other intangible property as may be subject to taxation by the County
within limitation prescribed by law, except for self-liquidating bonds,
including those issued under the authority of the Sanitary Commission Act and
that the full faith and credit of the County are pledged to such payments
provided that such declarations shall appropriately reflect any limitations
imposed by Section
710(d) of this Article. The Ordinance may authorize the issuance of bonds to
provide for the financing of one or more projects included within a specified
class of projects, and prescribe a procedure for the addition or deletion of
projects from such class before or after the issuance of bonds, subject to
compliance with the requirements set forth in this Article regarding the
financing of projects with bonds. The ordinance shall also recite the procedure
for the public sale or sales, if more than one sale is contemplated of the
proposed issue; the sale price of the bonds which may be at, above, or below
par, or the procedure for determining the same; the manner of execution and
authentication of the bonds, which may be by manual or facsimile signature or
seal; the form of the bonds (and any coupons appertaining thereto) which may be
registerable or nonregistrable as to principal or interest, with or without
coupons, or book entry in format; and shall contain such other matters relating
to the authorization, issuance or sale of the issue as the County Council shall
deem desirable.
   (b)   Interim notes. The County Council may, by ordinance, authorize the
issuance of interim notes, at one time, or from time to time, to provide the
temporary means of financing the funding of appropriations for capital projects
approved in a capital budget to the extent the same are to be financed from
borrowing and the borrowing is not, at the time of issuance of the notes,
authorized pursuant to a Bond Issue Authorization Ordinance that has taken
effect. The issuance of interim notes shall be subject to the limitations set
forth in Section
719 of this Article, and such notes and any renewals shall be paid not later
than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding the fiscal year in which
the notes are issued.
(Bill No. 84-72; Res. No. 38-96; Res. No. 43-16)
Sec. 722. Supplemental legislation by County Council.
   The County Council may adopt budget and fiscal laws not inconsistent
herewith or with the applicable provisions of the Constitution and public
general laws of this State to implement the objects and purposes of this
Article. Any such laws may include, but shall not be limited to, the definition
of the various funds included in the County budget, their reorganization and
consolidation to the extent permitted by law, a requirement of downpayments on
capital projects from current funds, the establishment of a reserve for
permanent public improvements as authorized in this Charter, the procedure for
the sale of bonds, notes and other evidences of indebtedness of the County, and
all such other matters as may in the judgment of the County Council promote the
orderly administration of the fiscal affairs of the County and protect its
credit.
Article VIII. Merit System
Sec. 801. Classification and pay plan and rules affecting costs.
   There shall be a classification and pay plan, enacted by ordinance, for all
positions in the classified service. The classification plan shall include
minimum qualifications for each class of position and the pay plan shall
allocate each class of position to a salary range. The County Executive shall
promulgate personnel rules governing payroll costs, including but not limited
to the hours of work, vacations, sick leave and other absences, salary steps of
promoted employees, and salaries of incumbents whose positions are reallocated
to a lower pay grade, provided that before taking effect, the rules shall be
approved by the County Council by ordinance. The plans and rules may be amended
from time to time, but the Council shall not increase or decrease the salary of
any member of the classified service except through amendment of the pay plan,
or the rules affecting payroll costs. In the maintenance and review of the pay
plan and amendment by ordinance the County Executive and the County Council
shall take into consideration prevailing salaries and wages of competing public
and private employers for similar classes of positions.
(Bill No. 97-80)
Sec. 802. Exempt positions.
   (a)   The exempt service shall consist of:
      (1)   All elected officials.
      (2)   The Chief Administrative Officer.
      (3)   All department and office heads.
      (4)   The Deputy Administrative Hearing Officer.
      (5)   All employees of the Department of Education and all employees
covered by the State Merit System.
      (6)   Members of boards and commissions.
      (7)   Two assistants to the County Executive and one assistant to the
Chief Administrative Officer.
      (8)   One administrative officer to the County Council and one assistant
administrative officer to the County Council.
      (9)   The County Auditor.
      (10)   One administrative assistant to the County Auditor.
      (11)   One executive secretary to the County Executive.
      (12)   The Director of Programming, the Legislative Liaison Officer, and
the Public Information Officer.
      (13)   Legislative assistants and a legislative counsel to the County
Council.
      (14)   Any person in an hourly rate contractual position.
      (15)   Any person appointed by and with the approval of the judges of the
Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County and the State's Attorney of Anne Arundel
County.
      (16)   Any person appointed by the Governor by and with the consent of
the Senate of Maryland.
      (17)   Any person who is paid in whole or in part with State or Federal
grant funds, regardless of the number of hours worked.
      (18)   Every person appointed by the Ethics Commission to a full- or
part-time position on the Commission's staff.
   (b)   Upon recommendation of the County Executive, the County Council may,
by ordinance, establish additional positions in the exempt service.
(Bill No. 77-82; Res. No. 66-86; Res. No. 39-88; Res. No. 40-88; Res. No. 48-
92; Res. No. 6-96; Res. No. 42-96; Res. No. 17-20)
Sec. 803. Classified positions.
   All persons appointed to positions in the County service except those
enumerated in Section
802 of this Article shall be in the classified service.
(Res. No. 40-88)
Sec. 804. Appointing authority.
   The head of each department or office shall be the appointing authority for
all employees in their department or office. Appointments to positions in the
classified service shall be from among the names certified as eligible by the
Personnel Officer for the position(s) to be filled.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 805. Eligibility lists.
   The Personnel Officer shall prepare eligibility lists for vacancies in the
classified service.
(Res. No. 62-86; Res. No. 40-88)
Sec. 806. Probationary period.
   (a)   Except as set forth herein, each employee in the classified service is
a probationary employee until the employee satisfactorily completes a
probationary period of six months. At the request of the appointing authority,
the Personnel Officer may extend this probationary period for one additional
six-month period.
   (b)   Entry-level full-time classified sworn employees of the Police
Department, Fire Department, Sheriff's Office, and Department of Detention
Facilities must satisfactorily complete a probationary period equal to the time
required to successfully complete the Department's entry-level training program
plus twelve months.
   (c)   An employee dismissed during the probationary period is considered
permanently dismissed without the privilege of appeal.
   (d)   A probationary period shall not run while an employee is on paid or
unpaid leave that exceeds 80 consecutive hours.
(Res. No. 40-88; Res. No. 19-20)
Sec. 807. Permanent status.
   A permanent status employee shall have tenure and may not be dismissed from
the County’s service except as authorized in this Charter. An employee may be
permanently separated from the classified service through resignation,
rejection or probation, or removal for cause, and may be temporarily separated
through suspension, leave of absence granted at the request of the employee, or
because their position has been abolished.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 808. Grounds for removal of permanent employee.
   No County employee shall be removed or discharged from the employee's
position because of religious or political opinions or affiliations. A
permanent classified employee may be suspended, reduced in classification, or
removed by the appointing authority for any of the following causes:
   (a)   That the employee is not physically capable of performing the work
normal to the employee's classification, provided that a physically handicapped
permanent employee may be placed upon an eligibility list for a position for
which the employee is qualified.
   (b)   That the employee has committed an act on or off duty which amounts to
conduct unbecoming to the employee's classification or position.
   (c)   That an employee is incompetent or inefficient in the performance of
the employee's duty.
   (d)   That the employee has violated any lawful and official regulation or
order, or failed to obey any lawful and reasonable direction made or given by
the employee's superior officer.
   (e)   That the employee has violated an ordinance passed by the County
Council establishing grounds for disciplinary action of permanent employees.
(Bill No. 96-80; Bill No. 72-82; Res. No. 40-88)
Sec. 809. Repealed by Res. No. 40-88.
Sec. 810. Abolition of position in budget.
   No employee in the County service shall be compensated unless there is
sufficient money appropriated or allocated to cover the cost of their position.
A permanent employee in a classified position for which there are insufficient
funds or whose position has been abolished shall be suspended but placed upon
an eligibility list for a position for which they are qualified under such
procedures and conditions as the Personnel Board shall specify.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 811. Right to organize and collective bargaining.
   Employees in the classified service shall have the right to organize and
bargain collectively through representative employee organizations of their own
choosing as provided by ordinance of the County Council.
(Res. No. 40-88)
Sec. 812. Binding arbitration for law enforcement employees and for uniformed
firefighters of the Fire Department.
   (a)   In addition to the right granted to County employees in Section
811 of this Article to organize and bargain collectively, the County Council
shall provide by ordinance for binding arbitration with authorized
representatives of the appropriate employee bargaining unit in order to resolve
labor disputes with the County's law enforcement employees. The ordinance shall
provide for the appointment of a neutral arbitrator by the parties to the
arbitration who shall issue a binding decision to be implemented as part of the
following year's budget process and which shall take into account the financial
condition of the County and the reasonable interests of the law enforcement
employees and the county relating to the terms and conditions of employment.
Law enforcement employees shall be uniformed officers of the Police Department,
Sheriff's Department, and Office of Detention Facilities. Any ordinance that is
enacted shall prohibit strikes or work stoppages by the law enforcement
employees.
   (b)   In addition to the right granted to County employees in Section
811 of this Article to organize and bargain collectively, the County Council
shall provide by ordinance for binding arbitration with authorized
representatives of the appropriate employee bargaining unit in order to resolve
labor disputes with uniformed firefighters of the Fire Department. The
ordinance shall provide for the appointment of a neutral arbitrator by the
parties to the arbitration who shall issue a binding decision to be implemented
as part of the following year's budget process and which shall take into
account the financial condition of the County and the reasonable interests of
the uniformed firefighters of the Fire Department and the County relating to
the terms and conditions of employment. Any ordinance that is enacted shall
prohibit strikes or work stoppages by uniformed firefighters.
(Res. No. 44-02; Res. No. 45-02)
Sec. 813. Prohibited practices.
   No person shall willfully or corruptly make any false statement,
certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test held or certification
or appointment made under the personnel provisions of this Charter or in any
manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution
of such personnel provisions or the rules made thereunder. No person seeking
appointment to or promotion in the classified service shall either directly or
indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to
any person or seek or attempt to use any political endorsement of any elected
official for or on account of or in connection with a test, appointment,
proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion. No person shall, for the
purpose of influencing the vote or political action of any County employee, or
for any consideration, use or promise to use, directly or indirectly, any
official authority or influence, whether possessed or anticipated, to secure or
attempt to secure for any person an appointment or advantage in appointment to
a position in the civil service, or an increase in pay or other advantage in
employment in any such position. Any person who violates any of the provisions
of this subsection, upon conviction of such violation, shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more
than six months and such person shall for a period of five years be ineligible
for appointment for a position in the County service.
(Bill No. 105-72; Bill No. 96-80; Res. No. 40-88)
Sec. 814. Pensions of persons not a part of the Maryland State Retirement and
Pension Systems.
   The County Council shall establish pension benefits for County employees who
are not covered by the Maryland State Retirement and Pension Systems and are in
the classified service. The County Council may establish pension benefits for
any or all employees who are not covered by the Maryland State Retirement and
Pension Systems and are not in the classified service. Pension plans shall be
funded and benefits shall be based upon an actuarial reserve pension plan which
assures the payment of benefits for all present and future pension eligibles by
the prepayment of calculated insurance risks. Alternately, or in conjunction
with such an actuarially sound plan, the Council is authorized to place such
employees under the Maryland State Retirement and Pension Systems or Title II
of the Federal Social Security Act or both.
(Bill No. 93-80; Res. No. 45-92)
Sec. 815. Retiree Health Benefits Trust.
   The County Council may by ordinance establish the Reserve Fund for retiree
health benefits described in Section
718(i) of this Charter as an "other post-employment benefits" (OPEB) trust
known as the Retiree Health Benefits Trust, and provide for the number and
manner of appointment of the trustees and the exercise of the powers and duties
of the trustees as an independent agency of the County without regard to the
limitations otherwise imposed under
Articles IV and
IX of this Charter.
(Res. No. 34-12)
   Editor's note – Sec. 815 was added by amendment in 2012.
Article IX. Centralized Purchasing
Sec. 901. Responsibility for purchasing.
   The Central Services Officer shall be responsible to the Chief
Administrative Officer for the execution of the County purchasing policies
established in this Article.
Sec. 902. County purchasing policies and practices.
   The Central Services Officer shall appoint a County Purchasing Agent in
accordance with the provisions of
Article VIII who shall have the following purchasing functions which the
Purchasing Agent may delegate to Deputy Purchasing Agents in the Purchasing
Agent’s office and under the Purchasing Agent’s supervision:
   (a)   The making of all purchases, leases and contracts for all public works
and for all supplies, material, equipment and services for all offices,
departments, institutions, boards, commissions and other agencies of the County
government for which payment is to be made out of County funds.
   (b)   If recommended by the County Executive and approved by ordinance of
the County Council, the establishment and operation of a County warehouse for
the County supplies, material and equipment and the maintenance of a sufficient
stock of stable commodities to meet the requirements of the County government.
   (c)   The operation of a uniform and modern system of property accounting
and stores control as established by, and under the direction of, the Office of
Finance.
   (d)   The establishment, after consultation with the appropriate County
officials, of suitable specifications and standards for all supplies, materials
and equipment to be purchased, and the inspection of all deliveries to
determine compliance with such specifications and standards.
   (e)   The establishment and maintenance of a system of requisitions and
receipts covering the furnishing of supplies, materials and equipment to the
various offices, departments, institutions, boards, commissions and other
agencies of the County.
   (f)   The establishment, with the approval of the Purchasing Agent’s
superiors and by ordinance of the County Council, of reasonable rules and
regulations governing emergency purchases and contracts and those involving
material, equipment or services of an unusual or noncompetitive nature which
shall not be subject to competitive bidding
   (g)   The sale of real property and of surplus, old and waste supplies,
materials, and equipment of the County, or the transfer of the same between
offices, departments or other agencies of the County government.
   (h)   The making of purchases for a stores revolving fund, which the Council
is hereby authorized to establish, and of making sales from the stores to using
agencies of the County.
(Bill No. 86-72; Bill No. 73-82; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 903. Application of this Article to departments and agencies under State
law.
   The provisions of this Article shall apply to the Department of Education
and other departments and agencies created by or operating under public general
laws of this State to the extent requested by them or as permitted by law. In
the interests, however, of promoting uniformity and of effecting maximum
savings for all purchases out of County funds, the purchasing facilities of the
Office of Central Services shall also be available to such departments and
agencies, and their use shall be encouraged.
Sec. 904. Competitive bidding.
   (a)   Any single purchase or contract under the jurisdiction of the County
Purchasing Agent and involving an expenditure of more than Three Thousand
Dollars ($3,000), except for purchases for which the County Council has set a
higher minimum requirement under Section
911 of this Article, emergency purchases, and those involving material and
equipment of a non-competitive nature, as may be defined and governed by the
regulations adopted under Section
902(f) of this Article, shall be made from or let by sealed bids or proposals.
The sealed bids and proposals shall be publicly opened after public notice for
the period and in the manner that the Purchasing Agent or the Purchasing
Agent’s authorized deputy determines, however, a purchase or contract may not
be made under this section for at least one week after the public opening of
bids. The purchases and contracts shall be made from or awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder who shall give security or bond for the performance of their
contract as determined by the Purchasing Agent or the Purchasing Agent’s
deputy. In all cases, the County shall reserve the right to reject any and all
bids.
   (b)   All construction, maintenance and repair work shall be subject to the
requirements of competitive bidding provided in this section, unless the work
is to be done directly by the County through the use of its own laboring force.
All materials and supplies used by the County laboring force shall be purchased
in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
   (c)   The County may not sell real property that it owns unless the property
is first declared surplus by the County Executive. The County Council shall
enact furthering legislation to implement the procedure for the disposition of
said surplus property.
   (d)   No sale, contract, or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the
requirements of this section.
(Bill No. 73-82; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 905. Conformity with budget limitations.
   No deliveries of supplies, materials or equipment shall be made to any
office, department, board, institution, commission or agency of the County
government in excess of the available appropriation therefor, and except for
small purchases in an amount less than the amount specified in or authorized
under Section
715 of this Charter for uncertified purchases, no payment shall be made out of
County funds for the purchase of supplies, materials or equipment, unless the
Controller shall first certify that the funds for the designated purpose are
available. Any purchase or contract not so certified-by the Controller shall be
invalid and the County shall not be bound thereby.
(Bill No. 73-82; Res. No. 19-06)
   Editor's note – The 2006 amendment deleted the reference to budgetary
allotments. Although former Sec. 714 pertaining to work programs and allotments
was eliminated from the Charter in 1988, references to allotments remained
throughout various articles and sections of the Charter.
Sec. 906. Service contracts.
   Contracts for professional services and for services for which the rate or
price is fixed by a public authority authorized by law to fix rates or prices,
shall be let without resort to competitive bidding.
Sec. 907. Uniform bidding.
   It shall be the duty of the Purchasing Agent to discourage uniform bidding
by every possible means and to endeavor to obtain as full and open competition
as possible on all purchases and sales. For competitive sealed bids and
proposals, the Purchasing Agent shall require each bidder to accompany their
bid with a statement made under oath that they have not been a party with other
bidders to an agreement to bid a fixed or uniform price or to share price bid
information. Violation of such statement shall render void the bid of such
bidders. Any disclosure to or acquisition by a competitive bidder, in advance
of the opening of the bids, of the terms or conditions of the bid submitted by
a competitor shall render the entire proceedings void and shall require
readvertising for bids.
(Res. No. 38-02; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 908. Contract execution.
   All contract bid forms and all contracts shall be approved by the County
Attorney as to form and legal sufficiency. Following such approval, all
contracts shall be signed in behalf of the County by the County Executive or
the County Executive’s designee. A copy of each signed contract shall be
forwarded promptly to the Controller.
(Bill No. 94-80; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 909. Cooperative purchasing.
   As appropriate, the Purchasing Agent may undertake programs involving joint,
or cooperative purchases with other public jurisdictions.
(Res. No. 37-02)
Sec. 910. Negotiations with vendors.
   No officer or employee of the County shall negotiate directly or indirectly
with any vendor except with the approval of the Purchasing Agent pursuant to
the furthering legislation prescribed in Section
911 of this Charter.
Sec. 911. Furthering Legislation.
   The County Council shall enact furthering legislation, not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Charter or with the public general laws of this State,
to implement the purchasing policies herein established. Such legislation may
regulate the practices of the County Purchasing Agent and other officers,
agents and employees of the County in regard to the issuance of inquiries, the
receipt of bids, the placement of orders and other matters relating to the
making of purchases and the award of contracts. Such legislation may prescribe
special procedures governing the letting of bids and the award of contracts for
the construction of roads, bridges, streets, buildings and those relating to
water, sewer and storm water facilities, and may increase the minimum dollar
requirement for full competitive bidding with respect to such contracts from
Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) as provided in Section
904 to a figure not less than Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000) and up to
One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000). The award of contracts greater than
Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000) and less than the minimum dollar requirement for
full competitive bidding shall be awarded through a simplified competitive
process except as otherwise provided by law. The County Purchasing Agent shall
cause to be published on the Anne Arundel County website all awards of
contracts through the full and simplified bidding processes for capital
improvements, contractual services, professional services, or supplies of
greater than $10,000 awarded by the County in accordance with the Anne Arundel
County Code. All such legislation shall be subject to amendment from time to
time by the County Council.
(Bill No. 93-80; Bill No. 73-82; Res. No. 19-04; Res. No. 15-18; Res. No. 18-
20; Res. 15-24)
Sec. 912. Repealed by Bill No. 93-80.
Article X. Miscellaneous
Sec. 1001. County Ethics Commission.
   (a)   (1)   There is an Anne Arundel County Ethics Commission.
      (2)   The Commission is an independent agency.
      (3)   Neither the Commission nor any authority, duty or function assigned
by this section of the Charter may be abolished, reassigned, transferred or
reorganized, except by amendment of this section of the Charter.
   (b)   (1)   The Commission consists of seven members, appointed by the
County Executive with the approval of the County Council. The County Council
shall hold at least one public hearing prior to approving an appointment to the
Commission.
      (2)   Three of the seven members of the Commission appointed by the
County Executive shall be nominated by the County Council.
      (3)   The County Executive may reject a nominee of the County Council
only for cause. If a nominee is rejected, the Council shall submit another
individual for appointment to the Commission within 30 days.
      (4)   No more than four members of the Commission shall be members of the
same political party.
      (5)   The County Council shall hold at least one public hearing prior to
approving an appointment to the Commission.
   (c)   A person is eligible to serve on the Commission if the person:
      (1)   is a resident of Anne Arundel County;
      (2)   does not hold and is not a candidate for an elected or appointed
office of the federal, state or local governments or a political party;
      (3)   is not an employee of the federal, state, or local governments or a
political party; and
      (4)   is not required to register as a lobbyist pursuant to any federal,
state or local public ethics law.
   (d)   Other than by voting or making a monetary contribution, no member of
the Commission, may:
      (1)   participate in the campaign of a candidate for elective public
office; or
      (2)   support or oppose a ballot question at any general or special
election, except a question directly affecting the Commission.
   (e)   (1)   The term of each Commission member, except the initial
appointees, is four years. No member may serve more than two consecutive terms.
      (2)   Of the seven initial appointees, two shall serve an initial term of
one year, two shall serve an initial term of two years, two shall serve an
initial term of three years, and one shall serve an initial term of four years.
      (3)   A member whose term has expired shall hold over until a successor
is appointed and approved.
      (4)   The Commission shall elect annually a chair from among its members.
The chair may serve consecutive terms as chair.
   (f)   Upon the recommendation of the County Executive, the County Council
may remove a member of the Commission for:
      (1)   neglect of duty;
      (2)   misconduct in office;
      (3)   any other conduct which, in the opinion of the County Council,
renders the person unfit for office; or
      (4)   any change in status that renders the person ineligible under this
section.
   (g)   Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their
service, but shall be reimbursed, in accordance with the budget, for reasonable
and necessary expenses in the discharge of their official duties.
   (h)   The Commission shall meet at the call of its chair or a majority of
its members. A quorum consists of four or more members. An affirmative vote of
at least four members is necessary for any action of the Commission.
   (i)   (1)   The Commission shall have an executive director and a secretary.
The Commission may appoint other staff as provided in the budget. All staff
serve at the pleasure of the Commission and are not in the merit system. The
Commission shall determine whether staff are part-time or full-time.
      (2)   The Commission may retain legal counsel to advise or represent the
Commission.
      (3)   The County Attorney and the Controller shall assist the Commission
at the request of the Commission.
(Res. No. 48-92; Res. No. 31-08; Res. No. 49-12; Res. No. 30-22)
Editor's notes –
The 2008 amendment added the requirement that three of the seven members of the
Ethics Commission shall be nominated by the County Council, that the County
Executive may reject a nominee only for cause, and that, if a nominee is
rejected, the County Council shall submit the name of another nominee within 30
days.
   The 2012 amendment limited members of the County Ethics Commission to two
consecutive terms of office.
   State Code references – General Provisions Article
      Establishment (1001(a)) – § 5-201
      Members (1001(b))– § 5-202
      Qualifications (1001(c), (d)) – § 5-202(b)
      Terms (1001(e)) – § 5-202(d)
      Removal (1001(f)) – § 5-202(e)
      Quorum (1001(h)) – § 5-204(a)
      Meetings (1001(h)) – § 5-204(b)
      Compensation (1001(g)) – § 5-204(c)
      Staff (1001(i)) – § 5-204(d), (e)
Sec. 1001A. County Public Ethics Law.
   (a)   There shall be a comprehensive Anne Arundel County Public Ethics Law
enacted by ordinance.
   (b)   The Anne Arundel County Public Ethics Law:
      (1)   shall contain the provisions required by the Maryland Public Ethics
Law;
      (2)   shall contain prohibited activities, conflict of interest, improper
influence and public disclosure provisions substantially the same as the
provisions of Sections
1001,
1002 and
1002A of the Charter which were repealed at the general election in 1992;
      (3)   may contain other provisions; and
      (4)   must receive the approval of the State Ethics Commission as meeting
the local government requirements of the Maryland Public Ethics Law.
   (c)   The Commission shall review periodically the County Public Ethics Law
and propose such amendments as it finds necessary or desirable.
   (d)   The County Council shall provide the Ethics Commission with a copy of
any proposed ordinance or resolution pertaining to County public ethics. The
Commission shall review any proposal submitted by the Council and, on or before
the thirtieth day after receipt of the proposal, report its findings and
recommendations to the County Executive and the County Council. The County
Council may not vote on any ordinance or resolution that is subject to this
paragraph until it has either received the Commission's report or the time
period for submission has expired.
(Res. No. 48-92)
Sec. 1001B. Authority, duties and functions of Commission.
   (a)   The Anne Arundel County Ethics Commission and its staff shall
administer the Anne Arundel County Public Ethics Law.
   (b)   The Commission shall prescribe and provide forms for the reports,
statements, notices and other documents required by the County Public Ethics
Law.
   (c)   The Commission's staff shall review the statements filed in accordance
with the County Public Ethics Law and notify persons filing those statements of
omissions or deficiencies.
   (d)   The Commission shall publish and make available explanatory
information concerning the provisions of the public ethics law, the duties
imposed by it, and the means for enforcing it.
   (e)   (1)   The Commission's staff shall investigate a complaint of a
violation of the County Public Ethics Law or, in the absence of a complaint,
may inquire into a potential violation and file a complaint if appropriate.
      (2)   The Commission may hear and decide complaints alleging violations
of the County Public Ethics Law.
      (3)   The Commission or staff, as appropriate, may administer oaths,
compel the attendance of witnesses, and require the production of records and
other materials in connection with an inquiry, investigation, or hearing
conducted by the Commission or its staff.
   (f)   At the request of any County Official or employee subject to the
provisions of the County Public Ethics Law, the Commission shall issue an
advisory opinion concerning the application of the law to that person. At the
request of any other person, the Commission may issue an advisory opinion
concerning the application of the County Public Ethics Law. The Commission
shall respond, at least preliminarily, to a request for advisory opinion within
two weeks after receipt of the request.
   (g)   The Commission's staff shall make each advisory opinion available to
the public after receipt by the person requesting the opinion. Before an
advisory opinion is made public, facts not material to the opinion that may
identify the person who is the subject of the opinion shall be deleted to the
fullest extent possible.
   (h)   The County Public Ethics Law may provide for the Commission to have
additional authority, duties and functions.
(Res. No. 48-92)
   State Code reference – Duties, General Provisions Article, § 5-204 (see also
§
7-2-104 of the County Code).
Sec. 1001C. Repealed by Res. No. 48-92.
Editor’s note – Sec. 1001C was repealed by operation of law on July 1, 1993.
Sec. 1002. Repealed by Res. No. 48-92.
Sec. 1002A. Repealed by Res. No. 48-92.
Sec. 1003. Additional compensation prohibited.
   No County officer or employee who is compensated for their services by
salary shall receive any additional remuneration for serving as an ex officio
member of a County board, commission or agency.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 1004. Copies of books and papers on demand.
   The County Executive shall, with reasonable promptness furnish to any
resident of the County, on demand, a certified copy of any book, account or
paper kept by any board, commission, office or department of the County
government, or such part thereof as may be demanded, except criminal
investigation reports, and individual personnel records, upon payment in
advance by the person demanding the same of a reasonable fee to be prescribed
by resolution of the County Council. This section shall not apply to any papers
prepared by or for use of counsel in any action or proceeding to which the
County is a party or for use in any investigation authorized by or under this
Charter.
Sec. 1005. Inspection of books, accounts and papers.
   All books, accounts, papers and records of any board, commission, office or
department, except criminal investigation reports and individual personnel
records, shall at all times be open to the inspection of any resident of the
County or representative of the press, subject to such reasonable rules and
regulations in regard to the time and manner of such inspection as the County
Executive, with the approval of the County Council, may make. Public inspection
of police records may be permitted to the extent authorized by the County
Council or otherwise in accordance with law. This section shall not apply to
any papers prepared by or for use of counsel in actions or proceedings to which
the County is a party or for use in any investigation authorized by or under
this Charter.
Sec. 1006. Surety bonds.
   The penalty of the bond required by public general law to be furnished by
the Controller as Collector of County taxes, shall be prescribed by the County
Council by ordinance, but shall not be less than Three Hundred Thousand Dollars
($300,000). The County Executive shall be bonded for the faithful performance
of their duties for Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000). All officers and
employees subordinate to the County Council and all other officers and
employees of the executive branch shall be bonded for the faithful performance
of their duties in such penalties as may be fixed by ordinance but in no case
shall such bond or bonds be less than Three Hundred Thousand Dollars
($300,000). Such ordinance shall provide for a blanket form of bonds or other
similar forms of bonds with corporate surety. Surety bond premiums shall be
paid by the County.
(Bill No. 73-82; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 1007. Compilation of laws.
   (a)   Code of Laws. At its first annual legislative session and at intervals
thereafter, the County Council shall provide for a compilation and codification
of all public local laws of the County, all ordinances of the County Council
and all resolutions heretofore adopted by the County Commissioners having the
force and effect of law in effect at such times, other than those of a
temporary or special character. Each such codification shall be submitted to
the County Council, and if adopted by ordinance, shall be known as "The Anne
Arundel County Code". It shall be published in book form, together with this
Charter, Local Government Article, §§ 1-702 through 1-706, 9-102, 9-201 through
9-207, 10-102, 10-202 through 10-206, 10-302 through 10-330 and 18-301 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland (1957 Edition) as amended, an index, and such
appropriate notes, citations, annotations and appendices as may be determined
by the Office of Law.
   (b)   Cumulative Supplement. As soon as practicable after August 15th of
each year, the County Attorney shall cause to be prepared and published a
cumulative supplement to the Anne Arundel County Code, with an index and such
appropriate notes, citations, annotations and appendices as the County Attorney
may deem desirable or as may be required by the County Council.
(Bill No. 93-80; Res. No. 6-16; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 1008. County Seal.
   In accordance with the powers granted to chartered counties of this State by
public general law, the County Council shall, by ordinance, adopt a County
Seal, and thereafter it may use and alter the same at pleasure. The Seal shall
contain the corporate name of the County and such other information or insignia
as the County Council may determine. The County Executive, the secretary to the
County Executive, the Administrative Officer to the County Council and such
other officers as may be specified by ordinance of the County Council shall
have power to attest to the County Seal.
(Bill No. 93-80; Res. No. 69-86)
Sec. 1009. Subpoena power.
   The County Council, the County Executive, the Chief Administrative Officer,
the Personnel Board, the County Board of Appeals, the County Auditor and such
other officers or agencies of the County as may be so empowered by ordinance of
the County Council or otherwise by law shall have the power to administer
oaths, to compel the attendance of witnesses and to require the production of
records and other materials in connection with any investigation, inquiry or
hearing authorized by this Charter or by law.
Sec. 1010. Definitions and rules of construction.
   As used in this Charter:
   (a)   The word "law" shall be construed as including all acts, ordinances,
public local laws and other legislative acts of the County Council, all
ordinances and resolutions of the County Commissioners not hereby or hereafter
amended or repealed, and all public general laws and public local laws of the
General Assembly in effect from time to time after the adoption of this
Charter, whenever such construction would be reasonable.
   (b)   The term "The Sanitary Commission Act" whenever used in this Charter
shall mean Chapter 22, titled "Waters and Sewers" of the Anne Arundel County
Code (1957 Edition as amended and supplemented).
   (c)   The words "shall" and "must" shall be construed as mandatory and the
word may" shall be construed as permissive.
   (d)   Whenever in this Charter the masculine gender is used, such words
shall be construed to include any and all gender identities, except where such
construction would be absurd or unreasonable.
   (e)   The word “person” shall include the words “corporation”, “partnership”
and “association”, unless such a construction would be unreasonable.
   (f)   The word “officer” shall include the word “Council member”.
   (g)   The words “hereafter” and “heretofore” shall refer to the effective
date of this Charter, unless such a construction would be unreasonable.
   (h)   The word “State” shall mean the State of Maryland.
   (i)   The term “operative date” when used in this Charter shall mean that
date on which the majority of the members of the first elected County Council
and the first elected County Executive qualify and assume the duties of their
respective offices.
   (j)   The term “legislative session-day” shall refer to one of forty-five
days specified in Section 3 of Article XI [XI-A] of the Constitution on which
the County Council may convene for the purpose of enacting legislation.
(Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 1011. Custody of papers and records.
   Except for papers and instruments entrusted to the Controller under Section
512 or
513 of this Charter, the County Council shall provide by ordinance for the
custody and safekeeping of all deeds, bonds, contracts, releases and other
papers and instruments involving the interests of the County.
(Bill No. 93-80; Bill No. 72-82)
Sec. 1011A. Publication and distribution of Charter.
   (a)   (1)   The Office of Law shall provide for the publication and keep
copies of:
         (i)   This Charter as most recently amended; and
         (ii)   The Charter, with its annotations, as it was last published
prior to the adoption of amendments on the ballot of November, 1982.
      (2)   On request, the Office of Law shall provide to any person a copy of
any document that is required to be published under this subsection. A
reasonable charge, not exceeding the actual cost to the County, may be made for
each document.
   (b)   Each library in the County library system shall keep current copies of
this Charter for public use. In addition, each library shall keep at least two
copies of the Charter, with its annotations, as it was last published prior to
the adoption of amendments on the ballot of November, 1982.
(Bill No. 72-82)
Sec. 1012. [Existing laws.]
   The public local laws of Anne Arundel County and all rules, regulations,
resolutions and ordinances of the County Commissioners in force at the time of
the effective date of this Charter are hereby repealed to the extent that they
are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, but no further; and to
the extent that they are not hereby repealed because of such inconsistency, all
such public local laws, rules, regulations, resolutions and ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended.
(Bill No. 95-80)
Sec. 1013. [Reference in State Constitution and laws to County Commissioners.]
   In accordance with the provisions of Article XI-A of the Maryland
Constitution, all references in the Constitution and the laws of this State to
the County Commissioners shall, at such time as the elected members of the
first County Council and first County Executive take office, be construed to
refer to the County Council and to the County Executive whenever such
construction would be reasonable. The County Council shall succeed to all
legislative powers vested heretofore in the County Commissioners and the County
Executive shall succeed to all executive and administrative powers heretofore
vested in the County Commissioners by the Constitution and laws of this State
except as provided in this Charter.
(Bill No. 95-80)
Sec. 1014. Construction of "local governing body."
   Whenever State or Federal law confers a power or duty on the County by
language that refers to "the local governing body" or by similar language, any
action required of the County shall be taken by the County Executive and then
referred to the County Council for confirmation.
(Bill No. 72-82)
Sec. 1015. Separability.
   If any Article, section or provision of this Charter shall be held
unconstitutional, invalid or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, then
it is intended and declared by the people of the County that all other
Articles, sections or provisions of this Charter and their application to all
other persons and circumstances shall be separable and shall not be affected by
any such decision.
(Bill No. 95-80)
Sec. 1016. Citation.
   This charter shall be known and may be cited as "The Anne Arundel County
Charter".
(Bill No. 95-80)
Sec. 1017. [Effective date of this Charter.]
   The effective date of this charter is December 3, 1964.
(Bill No. 95-80)
Article XI. [Transition Schedule]
Sec. 1101. Repealed by Bill No. 93-80.
Sec. 1102. Repealed by Bill No. 95-80.
Sec. 1103. Repealed by Bill No. 93-80.
Sec. 1104. Repealed by Bill No. 93-80.
Sec. 1105. Repealed by Bill No. 93-80.
Sec. 1106. Repealed by Bill No. 93-80.
Sec. 1107. Repealed by Bill No. 95-80.
Sec. 1108. Repealed by Bill No. 95-80.
Sec. 1109. Repealed by Bill No. 93-80.
Sec. 1110. Repealed by Bill No. 95-80.
Sec. 1111. Existing County Seal.
   Until a new County Seal shall have been adopted by the County Council
pursuant to the requirements of
Article X, Section
1008 of this Charter, the Seal of the Board of County Commissioners shall be
and remain the official Seal of the County.
Article XII. Termination of Charter; Amendments to Charter
Sec. 1201. Termination.
   The County Council may, by ordinance, approved by the affirmative vote of at
least six members, propose the termination of this Charter and return of the
County to the County Commission form of government in effect prior to the
adoption of this Charter. The same proposal may be made by petition signed by
twenty per centum or more of the registered voters of the County, or 10,000 or
more of such registered voters in case twenty per centum is greater than
10,000. Such petition shall conform with the requirements of Article XI-A of
the Constitution of the State of Maryland and shall be filed with the County
Executive. The question so proposed by act of the County Council or by petition
shall be published by the County Executive in at least one newspaper of general
circulation published in the County once each month for five successive months
prior to the next general election or Congressional election occurring after
the passage of such act or the filing of such petition. At such election, such
question shall be submitted to the voters of the County, and if the majority of
votes cast on the question shall be in favor of repealing this Charter, then,
at the next quadrennial election, County Commissioners shall be elected under
the public general laws of the State of Maryland. When the County Commissioners
so elected have qualified for office, this Charter shall terminate. All laws,
regulations and ordinances in effect at the termination of this Charter shall
remain in force until changed by action of the General Assembly of Maryland, or
the Board of County Commissioners, as provided by the Constitution and public
general laws of this State.
Sec. 1202. Amendment.
   (a)   Amendments to this Charter may be proposed by a resolution of the
County Council approved by not less than five of its members, and such action
shall be exempt from executive veto. Amendments may also be proposed by
petition filed with the Chair of the County Council and signed by not less than
twenty per centum of the registered voters of the County, or 10,000 or more of
such registered voters in case twenty per centum of the number of registered
voters is greater than 10,000. When so proposed, whether by resolution of the
County Council or by petition, the County Council shall make available to the
press and public a reasonable number of copies of the question which shall be
submitted to the voters of the County at the next general or Congressional
election occurring after the passage of said act or the filing of said
petition; and if at said election the majority of votes cast on the question
shall be in favor of the proposed amendment, such amendment shall stand adopted
from and after the thirtieth day following said election. Any amendments to
this Charter, proposed in the manner aforesaid, shall be published by the Chair
of the County Council in at least one newspaper of general circulation
published in the County for five successive weeks prior to the election at
which the question shall be considered by the voters of the County.
   (b)   If, at the election held on November 3, 1992, or at any election
thereafter, the voters approve Charter amendments containing provisions so
inconsistent that only one can be given effect, only the amendment that
receives the higher number of favorable votes shall take effect and amend the
Charter.
(Res. No. 44-88; Res. No. 32-90; Res. No. 51-92; Res. No. 30-22)
Sec. 1203. Decennial Redistricting and Charter Revision Commission.
   On the first day of the annual legislative session of the County Council in
the year of each decennial census of the population of the United States, the
County Council shall appoint by resolution a Redistricting and Charter Revision
Commission for the purpose of making a comprehensive study of the County
government and the updating of its Charter where necessary, including the
matter of the revision of the councilmanic districts of the County. The
Commission shall be composed of a number of representative citizens of the
County equal to the number of councilmanic districts in the County, with each
member of the County Council making one appointment, who shall report to the
Council their findings and recommendations, together with drafts of any
recommended revisions of the Charter, within twelve months after their
appointment. The Redistricting and Charter Revision Commission shall receive
from the County an appropriation sufficient to carry out its duties and
responsibilities.
(Bill No. 93-80; Res. No. 35-12; Res. No. 24-22)
   Editor's note – The 2012 amendment changed the number of the members of the
Decennial Charter Revision Commission to equal the number of councilmanic
districts in the County, and provided that each member of the County Council
shall make one appointment to the Commission.
REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location of State Law references, Bills, and Resolutions
contained in the Charter.
 
State Law Cite        Location
Const. Art. XI-A      1013,
                      1201
Const. Art. XI-A, § 3401,
                      1010
Const. Art. XI-E      718
 
 
Court and Judicial Procedure Article
§ 5-5A-02(3)535
 
General Provisions Article
General Provisions Article
§ 5-201        1001
§ 5-202(a)     1001
§ 5-202(b)     1001
§ 5-202(d)     1001
§ 5-202(e)     1001
§ 5-204(a)     1001
§ 5-204(b)     1001
§ 5-204(c)     1001
§ 5-204(d), (e)1001
§ 5-205        1001B
 
 
Insurance Article
§§ 10-301 et seq542
 
Local Government Article
Local Government Article
                         306,
§§ 1-702 through 1-706 602,
                         1007
                         306,
§ 9-102                 602,
                         1007
                         306,
§§ 9-201 through 9-207 602,
                         1007
                         306,
§ 10-102                602,
                         1007
                         306,
§§ 10-202 through 10-20602,
                         1007
                         306,
§§ 10-302 through 10-33602,
                         1007
§ 10-305                602
                         306,
§ 18-301                602,
                         1007
 
Bill Number Disposition
Bill Number Disposition
115-69      1002
49-70       1002
56-70       208,
            307
69-72       205
73-72       307
76-72       404
78-72       526
80-72       604
84-72       721
86-72       902
105-72      813
106-72      712
118-73      401
14-75       208
51-76       706
56-80       201,
            202
            201,
            310,
            401,
            524,
            550,
            602,
            718,
            814,
            911,
93-80       912,
            1007,
            1008,
            1011,
            1101,
            1103,
            1104,
            1105,
            1106,
            1109,
            1203
            405,
            518,
94-80       708,
            718,
            908
            1012,
            1013,
            1015,
            1016,
95-80       1017,
            1102,
            1107,
            1108,
            1110
            405,
            504,
            507,
96-80       512,
            522,
            544,
            808,
            813
            553,
97-80       554,
            801
107-80      601
113-80      601,
            605
120-80      201
            405,
12-82       507,
            550A,
            550B
            307,
            405,
            522,
            522A,
            535,
72-82       547,
            706,
            710,
            808,
            1011,
            1011A,
            1014
            312,
            313,
            711,
            713,
            715,
73-82       718,
            902,
            904,
            905,
            911,
            1006
74-82       545,
            546
76-82       601,
            602
            401,
            505,
77-82       526,
            534,
            541,
            802
            504,
            536A,
81-82       536B,
            536C,
            536D,
            544
            606,
83-82       607,
            608,
            609
84-82       717
            507,
85-82       537,
            538,
            602
86-82       717
 
Resolution Number Disposition
Resolution Number Disposition
77-84             201
79-84             521
62-86             519,
                  805
64-86             606
65-86             716
66-86             802
67-86             205
68-86             208
                  203,
                  302,
                  307,
69-86             405,
                  703,
                  707,
                  708,
                  1008
                  405,
                  504,
                  505,
                  506,
                  507,
                  507A,
                  518,
                  525,
                  526,
                  527,
39-88             528,
                  529,
                  529A,
                  529B,
                  537,
                  540,
                  543,
                  545,
                  548,
                  550A,
                  802
                  519,
                  521,
                  802,
                  803,
40-88             805,
                  806,
                  808,
                  809,
                  811,
                  813
                  534,
41-88             535,
                  536
43-88             714
44-88             1202
46-88             708
                  705,
50-88             706,
                  709
31-90             610
32-90             1202
33-90             401
34-92             503,
                  504
35-92             521
36-92             521
37-92             525,
                  529
39-92             602
42-92             709
43-92             714
45-92             814
                  802,
                  1001,
                  1001A,
48-92             1001B,
                  1001C,
                  1002,
                  1002A
51-92             1202
55-92             203
56-92             710
34-94             532
6-96              802
38-96             720,
                  721
42-96             802
55-96             507A
56-96             602,
                  605
24-98             715,
                  718
26-98             311
27-98             311
33-02             307
                  545,
34-02             546,
                  547
37-02             909
38-02             907
40-02             402
44-02             812
45-02             812
19-04             911
18-06             604
                  510,
                  513,
                  514,
19-06             516,
                  528,
                  704,
                  715,
                  905
                  405,
20-06             507,
                  537,
                  538
31-08             1001
28-10             202,
                  205
31-10             706,
                  708
32-12             404
33-12             209
34-12             718,
                  815
35-12             1203
36-12             601
38-12             312
39-12             307
40-12             208
45-12             205
47-12             307
48-12             203
49-12             1001
50-12             720
54-12             706,
                  709
55-12             702
6-16              1007
7-16              307,
                  308
30-16             706
31-16             405
43-16             721
48-17             307
15-18             911
24-18             311
36-19             311
                  405,
37-19             525,
                  543,
                  545
17-20             802
18-20             911
19-20             806
20-20             509
22-20             611
18-22             203
19-22             204
21-22             307
22-22             307
23-22             311
24-22             1203
                  201 to
                  204,
                  208,
                  209,
                  302,
                  307 to
                  311,
                  401 to
                  406,
                  501,
                  509,
                  511 to
                  517,
                  519,
                  520,
                  523,
                  525,
                  526,
                  530,
                  532 to
                  534,
30-22             543,
                  550,
                  553,
                  603,
                  605,
                  606,
                  610,
                  704,
                  705,
                  709.
                  804,
                  807,
                  810,
                  902,
                  904,
                  907,
                  908,
                  1001,
                  1003,
                  1006,
                  1007,
                  1010,
                  1202
15-24             911
20-24             307
27-24             311
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Title
      
1.   DEFINITIONS; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; CITATION
      
2.   SUBPOENAS AND OATHS
      
3.   MINUTES AND RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
      
4.   RECORDS MANAGEMENT
      
5.   REIMBURSEMENT FOR CERTAIN EXPENSES
      
6.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
      
7.   COUNTY SEAL, FLAG, AND OTHER SYMBOLS
      
8.   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
      
9.   EQUITY AND HUMAN RIGHTS
      
10.   LANGUAGE ACCESS
      
11.   OPEN DATA
      
12.   PUBLIC CAMPAIGN FINANCING
TITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; CITATION
Section
   
1-1-101.   Definitions.
   
1-1-102.   Rules of construction.
   
1-1-103.   Computation of time.
   
1-1-104.   Captions.
   
1-1-105.   Citation.
   
1-1-106.   Severability.
§ 1-1-101. Definitions.
   In this Code, the following words have the meanings indicated unless the
context clearly requires otherwise or the meanings are inconsistent with the
Acts of the State General Assembly, the decisions of the courts of the State,
or the manifest intent of the County Council.
      (1)   "Charter" means the Anne Arundel County Charter.
      (2)   "County" means Anne Arundel County, Maryland.
      (3)   "County Council" means the County Council of Anne Arundel County.
      (4)   "Fair market value" means the price at which property changes hands
in a transaction between a willing buyer not compelled to buy and a willing
seller not compelled to sell.
      (5)   "Includes" or "including" means includes or including by way of
illustration and not by way of limitation.
      (6)   "Owner", when applied to a structure or land, includes any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant by the entireties, tenant in
partnership, or joint tenant of all or part of the structure or land.
      (7)   "Person" means an individual, receiver, trustee, guardian, personal
representative, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other entity.
      (8)   "Personal property" means any type of property other than real
property.
      (9)   "Property" includes real and personal property.
      (10)   "Real property" includes lands, tenancies, hereditaments, and all
chattels real.
      (11)   "State" means the State of Maryland.
      (12)   "State Code" means the Annotated Code of Maryland.
(1985 Code, Art. 1, § 1-101)
§ 1-1-102. Rules of construction.
   (a)   Generally. In this Code, the rules of construction set forth in this
section apply unless the context clearly requires otherwise or the rules of
construction are inconsistent with the State Code, the decisions of the courts
of the State, or the manifest intent of the County Council.
   (b)   Joint authority. Words purporting to give joint authority to three or
more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving the
authority to a majority of the officers or persons.
   (c)   Establishment of a prohibition. The words "may not" and words of like
import have a mandatory negative effect and establish a prohibition.
   (d)   Oaths. The word "oath" shall be deemed to include an affirmation, and
the word "sworn" shall be deemed to include the word "affirmed."
   (e)   Variations of "write." The words "written" and "in writing" include
printing and any other mode of physically or digitally representing words and
letters. However, if the law requires the written signature of a person or an
official or public writing or bond, the signature must be in the proper
handwriting of the person or, if the person is unable to write, by the person's
proper mark. For purposes of this section, an "electronic signature" means
electronic sounds, symbols, or data attached to or logically associated with a
record and executed or adopted by a person as verification of the person's
intent to sign the record.
   (f)   Singular and plural. Words used in the singular may extend and be
applied to several persons or things and words used in the plural may extend
and be applied to a single person or thing.
   (g)   Tense. Words in the present tense include the future tense.
   (h)   Continuation of Code. The provisions in this Code, so far as they are
substantially the same as those of the local laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be
construed as a continuation of them and not as new enactments.
   (i)   Amendments. A provision of this Code that refers to any portion of
this Code, the State Code, or any other law applies to any subsequent amendment
to that portion of this Code, the State Code, or other law unless the referring
provision expressly provides otherwise.
(1985 Code, Art. 1, § 1-102) (Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 71-16)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 1-209.
§ 1-1-103. Computation of time.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Code, in computing any period
of time prescribed by this Code, the following rules apply.
      (1)   The day of the act, event, or default after which the designated
period of time begins to run is not included. If the period of time allowed is
more than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays are
counted. If the period of time allowed is seven days or less, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays are not counted. The last day of the
period so computed is included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day that is
not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. If the act to be done is the filing
of some paper with a County office and that office is not open for all or part
of the last day of the period, the period runs until the end of the next day
that is not a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or a day on which the office is
not open.
      (2)   In determining the latest day for performance of an act required by
this Code to be performed a prescribed number of days before a certain day,
act, or event, all days before the day, act, or event, including intervening
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, are counted in the number of days so
prescribed. The latest day is included in the determination unless it is a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event the latest day is the first
preceding day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
      (3)   Whenever a person has the right or is required to do some act or
take some proceeding within a prescribed period after service on the person of
a notice or other paper and service is made by mail, three days shall be added
to the prescribed period.
(1985 Code, Art. 1, § 1-102) (Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 71-16)
§ 1-1-104. Captions.
   The captions and taglines printed in bold in this Code are mere catchwords
to indicate the contents of the sections or subsections. They may not be deemed
or taken as part of the sections or subsections when the sections or
subsections are adopted, amended, reenacted, cited, or interpreted.
(1985 Code, Art. 1, § 1-103) (Bill No. 71-16)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 1-208.
§ 1-1-105. Citation.
   The provisions in this article and the following articles constitute and may
be cited as the "Anne Arundel County Code". The articles of this Code may be
cited by name or by number.
(1985 Code, Art. 1, §§ 1-106, 1-107) (Bill No. 70-99)
Charter reference – §
1007.
§ 1-1-106. Severability.
   If any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code is
declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words,
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, or sections of this Code because the
remaining language would have been enacted without the incorporation in this
Code of the invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph, or section.
(1985 Code, Art. 1, § 1-108) (Bill No. 23-04)
TITLE 2. SUBPOENAS AND OATHS
Section
Subtitle 1. Civil Matters
   
1-2-101.   Subpoena powers.
   
1-2-102.   Administration of oath.
Subtitle 2. Criminal Matters
   
1-2-201.   Investigative subpoena.
   
1-2-202.   Administration of oath.
   
1-2-203.   State's Attorney Investigator.
SUBTITLE 1. CIVIL MATTERS
§ 1-2-101. Subpoena powers.
   (a)   Authority to issue. A subpoena to compel the attendance of witnesses
and to require the production of records and other materials in connection with
civil investigations, inquiries, or hearings may be authorized by the:
      (1)   County Council;
      (2)   County Executive;
      (3)   Chief Administrative Officer;
      (4)   Chief of Staff;
      (5)   Director of Inspections and Permits;
      (6)   Planning and Zoning Officer;
      (7)   Administrative Hearing Officer;
      (8)   Board of Appeals;
      (9)   Personnel Board;
      (10)   Director of Public Works;
      (11)   County Auditor;
      (12)   County Attorney;
      (13)   Human Relations Commission; or
      (14)   Ethics Commission or Executive Director of the Ethics Commission.
   (b)   Contents. A subpoena shall be directed to the Sheriff and issued by
the:
      (1)   Chair of the Board of Appeals or the Chair's designee;
      (2)   Administrative Officer to the County Council, as directed by the
County Auditor or the County Council;
      (3)   Chief of Staff to the County Executive, as directed by any other
officer or the Personnel Board;
      (4)   Human Relations Officer; or
      (5)   Chair or Executive Director of the Ethics Commission.
   (c)   Service. A subpoena may be served by the Sheriff or by any person not
less than 18 years of age who is not a party to the proceedings for which the
subpoena is issued. The person effecting service shall prepare and sign an
affidavit attesting to personal delivery. The County Council, the Human
Relations Commission, or the Board of Appeals may supplement the provisions of
this subsection by rule.
   (d)   Failure to obey.
      (1)   In case of failure to comply with a subpoena, the Commission may
apply to the Circuit Court in any County for an order requiring the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records, and
documents.
      (2)   The Court may issue an order requiring the attendance and testimony
of the witness and the production of the books, papers, records, electronically
stored information, documents, and tangible property:
         (i)   after notice to the person subpoenaed as a witness or directed
to produce books, papers, records, electronically stored information,
documents, and tangible property; and
         (ii)   on a finding that the attendance and testimony of the witness
or the production of the books, papers, records, electronically stored
information, documents, and tangible property is relevant or necessary for the
proceedings of the Commission.
      (3)   An order issued by the Court under this subsection shall be served
on the person to whom it is directed by the Sheriff or Deputy Sheriff of the
County where the residence or main office of the person is located.
      (4)   A failure to obey an order issued by the Court under this
subsection may be punished by the Court as a contempt of court.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 1-101) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 17-93; Bill No. 95-94;
Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 71-16; Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 21-24)
Charter reference – §
1009.
§ 1-2-102. Administration of oath.
   (a)   Authority to administer. The County Council, County Executive, Chief
Administrative Officer, Chief of Staff, Director of Inspections and Permits,
Planning and Zoning Officer, Administrative Hearing Officer, Board of Appeals,
Personnel Board, Director of Public Works, County Auditor, County Attorney,
Deputy County Attorneys, Supervising County Attorneys, Assistant County
Attorneys, Human Relations Officer, Ethics Commission, and Executive Director
of the Ethics Commission may administer oaths to and take the testimony of any
witness before them in a civil matter.
   (b)   Content. The form and effect of an oath administered under this
section shall be the same as an oath administered in a court of law.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 1-102) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 71-16; Bill No. 57-19)
SUBTITLE 2. CRIMINAL MATTERS
§ 1-2-201. Investigative subpoena.
   (a)   Generally. With the approval of the Court, the State's Attorney may
order the Clerk of the Circuit Court to issue a subpoena to a witness to
testify before the State's Attorney as to a crime committed in the County. The
subpoena shall be directed to the Sheriff, who shall serve the subpoena as if
the subpoena were issued directly from the Court.
   (b)   Fee. A witness subpoenaed and testifying before the State's Attorney
is entitled to a fee.
   (c)   Failure to obey. If a person is subpoenaed to testify before the
State's Attorney and the person does not obey the subpoena, the State's
Attorney may request the Court to issue a body attachment directed to the
Sheriff against the person named, compelling the person to appear and testify
before the State's Attorney, returnable on the day stated in the attachment.
(1985 Code, Art. 4, § 2-101)
§ 1-2-202. Administration of oath.
   The State's Attorney may administer an oath to and take the testimony of any
witness who appears before the State's Attorney pursuant to a subpoena issued
under §
1-2-101. The form and effect of an oath administered under this section shall
be the same as an oath administered in a court of law.
(1985 Code, Art. 4, § 2-102) (Bill No. 71-16)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 2-201.
§ 1-2-203. State's Attorney Investigator.
   (a)   Defined. In this section, "State's Attorney Investigator" means an
individual specially approved and appointed by the State's Attorney from time
to time as the State's Attorney considers necessary.
   (b)   Generally. A State's Attorney Investigator is under the direct
supervision of the State's Attorney, shall perform such duties as the State's
Attorney may designate, and is entitled to compensation and benefits comparable
to those of County sworn police personnel. A State's Attorney Investigator is
at all times subject to the rules and regulations of the appointing authority
and the supervision and control of the persons the appointing authority
designates.
   (c)   Oath. Each State's Attorney Investigator shall take an oath of office
subscribed before the Clerk of the Circuit Court for the County.
   (d)   Confidentiality. Each State's Attorney Investigator shall hold as
confidential all information obtained as a result of any investigation and may
not divulge the information except on order of a court of record of the State
or for the proper administration of justice.
(1985 Code, Art. 4, § 2-103) (Bill No. 90-87; Bill No. 23-04)
TITLE 3. MINUTES AND RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Section
   
1-3-101.   Definitions.
   
1-3-102.   Minutes and record of proceedings.
   
1-3-103.   Supplies, equipment, and clerical assistance.
§ 1-3-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Meeting" means the convening of a quorum of a special body for the
transaction or consideration of the business of the special body.
      (2)   "Record" means to perpetuate by audio reproduction or stenographic
transcription.
      (3)   "Recording" means an audio reproduction or stenographic
transcription.
      (4)   "Special body" means a"public body" as defined by the Maryland Open
Meetings Act.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 4-101) (Bill No. 71-16)
§ 1-3-102. Minutes and record of proceedings.
   (a)   Generally. A special body shall keep and approve minutes and record
the proceedings of each meeting at which it performs advisory, investigative,
legislative, or quasi-legislative functions, as defined by the Maryland Open
Meetings Act, in the manner and form required by the Maryland Open Meetings
Act.
   (b)   Who retains. The Central Services Officer shall keep approved minutes
and recordings of meetings of special bodies appointed by the County Executive
or jointly by the County Executive and the County Council. The Administrative
Officer to the County Council shall keep approved minutes and recordings of
meetings of special bodies appointed by the County Council or the Chair of the
County Council.
   (c)   Length of time retained. Approved minutes shall be maintained for 10
years from the date of the meeting at which the minutes were taken or for such
greater time required by law, regulation, or State Archives. Recordings of
meetings shall be maintained for five years from the date of the meeting at
which the recording was made, or for such longer period as may be directed by
executive order or by resolution or ordinance of the County Council.
   (d)   Public review. Approved minutes and recordings shall be available for
public review during normal business hours under the supervision of the Central
Services Officer or the Administrative Officer to the County Council, or their
respective designees.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 4-102) (Bill No. 71-16)
Charter reference – §§
1005,
1011.
State Code reference – State Government Article, § 10-611.
§ 1-3-103. Supplies, equipment, and clerical assistance.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, each special body shall be provided
with the necessary supplies, equipment, and clerical assistance by:
      (1)   the County Executive for those special bodies appointed by the
County Executive and those appointed jointly by the County Executive and the
County Council; or
      (2)   the Administrative Officer to the County Council for those special
bodies appointed by the County Council or the Chair of the County Council.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 4-103) (Bill No. 71-16)
TITLE 4. RECORDS MANAGEMENT
Section
   
1-4-101.   Definitions.
   
1-4-102.   Records Management Officer.
   
1-4-103.   Duties of unit heads.
   
1-4-104.   Approval of record retention schedules required.
   
1-4-105.   Loan of records.
   
1-4-106.   Disposal of records.
State Code reference – State Government Article, §§ 10-614 - 10-619.
§ 1-4-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Photograph" includes a photograph, a photocopy, and a
microphotograph.
      (2)   "Record" means any documentary material in any form created or
received by any unit in connection with the transaction of public business.
      (3)   "Unit" means any department, office, bureau, committee, board,
commission, or other organizational unit of County government.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 7-101) (Bill No. 71-16)
§ 1-4-102. Records Management Officer.
   (a)   Designation. The Central Services Officer is the County Records
Management Officer.
   (b)   Responsibilities. The Records Management Officer has primary
responsibility for the development and administration of a continuing records
management program for the records of each unit. The Records Management Officer
shall:
      (1)   establish standards, procedures, and techniques for the effective
management of County records;
      (2)   ensure and oversee the preparation of record retention schedules
providing for the retention of County records of continuing value and for the
prompt and orderly disposal of County records no longer possessing sufficient
administrative, legal, or fiscal value to warrant their further preservation;
      (3)   consult with and advise units in an effort to achieve uniformity of
new forms;
      (4)   inspect records and records management practices of all units;
      (5)   assist heads of units in training personnel in handling records;
and
      (6)   ensure compliance with laws and regulations related to local
government records and the State Archives.
   (c)   Reports. The Records Management Officer may require reports from heads
of units, as necessary.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 7-102) (Bill No. 71-16)
§ 1-4-103. Duties of unit heads.
   The head of each unit shall:
      (1)   cooperate with the Records Management Officer in the preparation of
records retention schedules;
      (2)   comply with the rules, regulations, standards, and procedures
issued by the Records Management Officer with respect to the handling of
records; and
      (3)   designate an employee as a liaison to the Records Management
Officer to assist in carrying out the records management program.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 7-103) (Bill No. 71-16)
§ 1-4-104. Approval of record retention schedules required.
   Record retention schedules are not effective until approved in writing by
the Records Management Officer and as required by State law and regulations.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 7-104) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 71-16)
§ 1-4-105. Loan of records.
   The Records Management Officer, in his or her sole discretion, may loan
records of the County that are considered to have historical significance to
any responsible person. The person to whom records are loaned shall provide for
the proper preservation, display, and indexing of the records and shall make
the records available for reference purposes.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 7-105) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 71-16)
§ 1-4-106. Disposal of records.
   Records are the property of the County and may not be destroyed, sold,
transferred, or otherwise disposed of except in accordance with State law and
as prescribed by record retention schedules approved as provided in this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 7-106)
TITLE 5. REIMBURSEMENT FOR CERTAIN EXPENSES
Section
   
1-5-101.   Definitions.
   
1-5-102.   Criminal Reimbursement Expense Fund.
   
1-5-103.   Reimbursement for criminal prosecutions.
   
1-5-104.   Right to retain counsel in criminal prosecutions.
   
1-5-105.   Reimbursement for internal investigations.
   
1-5-106.   Payment of claims.
§ 1-5-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Criminal prosecution" means a proceeding that is prosecuted by the
State or the United States against a public safety employee or inspector
charged with a public offense for an act or omission committed in the course
and scope of the employment or the performance of duties as an employee of the
County.
      (2)   "Defense expenses" means court costs, reasonable attorney's fees,
and other legal expenses related to defending an internal investigation of a
public safety employee or criminal prosecution of a public safety employee or
inspector.
      (3)   "Favorable final determination" means a criminal prosecution
resulting in a finding of not guilty on all charges; a final reversal, through
appellate proceedings, of a finding of guilt; a mistrial, without further
prosecution; or the entry of nolle prosequi on all charges based on the
prosecutor's determination that the evidence was insufficient to support a
conviction, but the term does not include a plea of nolo contendere.
      (4)   "Favorable final finding" means an administrative determination
exonerating a public safety employee of the charges brought in accordance with
an internal investigation or resulting in no disciplinary action against a
public safety employee after an internal investigation.
      (5)   "Fund" means the Criminal Reimbursement Expense Fund for the County
created by this title.
      (6)   "Inspector" means an individual who, while acting within the scope
of and during the course of employment with the County or performance of that
individual's duties on behalf of the County, inspects properties for compliance
with County law.
      (7)   "Internal investigation" means an investigation into or
administrative proceeding concerning alleged or suspected misconduct or a
violation of rules and regulations or duties and responsibilities against a
public safety employee for an act or omission committed while acting within the
scope of and during the course of employment with or performance of duties as
an employee of the County that is conducted by the County Police or Fire
Department or a federal or State agency, division, or organization when that
investigation results from a complaint or accusation by a person other than a
member of the same department as the employee.
      (8)   "Public safety employee" means the following individuals while they
are acting within the scope of and during the course of employment with or
performance of their duties on behalf of the County: sworn, paid members of the
County Police and Fire Departments; County Detention Center officers; and
members of the County Volunteer Fire Departments and Rescue Squads.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 6-101) (Bill No. 4-90; Bill No. 95-91; Bill No. 23-04)
§ 1-5-102. Criminal Reimbursement Expense Fund.
   There is a Criminal Reimbursement Expense Fund for the County. The Fund
shall be used to pay reasonable defense expenses incurred by public safety
employees and inspectors in defending criminal prosecutions and internal
investigations, as provided in this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 6-102) (Bill No. 71-16)
§ 1-5-103. Reimbursement for criminal prosecutions.
   Public safety employees and inspectors are entitled to reimbursement from
the Fund for reasonable defense expenses incurred in defending a criminal
prosecution brought against the employee in which there has been a favorable
final determination.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 6-103) (Bill No. 95-91)
§ 1-5-104. Right to retain counsel in criminal prosecutions.
   (a)   Generally. Public safety employees and inspectors may retain defense
counsel in a criminal prosecution in which the employee is named as a
defendant. The County may not provide legal representation for the employee.
   (b)   Funds for retainer. On written request of an employee, the County
shall advance funds in an amount not to exceed $1,000 required by the employee
as a retainer for legal representation. The retainer funds advanced shall
become a debt of the employee in favor of the County if there is not a
favorable final determination. Funds advanced by the County under this
subsection shall be secured by the collateral the County considers appropriate,
including the assignment of the employee's accrued retirement contributions and
evidenced by a confessed judgment promissory note executed by the employee and
the employee's spouse.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 6-104) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 4-90; Bill No. 95-91)
§ 1-5-105. Reimbursement for internal investigations.
   (a)   Generally. A public safety employee is entitled to reimbursement from
the Fund for defense expenses incurred in representing the employee in an
internal investigation brought against the employee in which there has been a
favorable final finding.
   (b)   Amount. The amount to be reimbursed for an internal investigation is
limited to the defense expenses incurred after the time that written charges
are issued by the Department to the public safety employee, except that defense
expenses incurred before that time may be reimbursed to a maximum of $100 if
the employee is given written notice that the employee is the subject of an
internal investigation and the employee is requested by the investigating
authorities to give a statement concerning the events being investigated.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 6-105)
§ 1-5-106. Payment of claims.
   (a)   Submission of bill. A public safety employee or inspector who was a
defendant in a criminal prosecution or internal investigation shall submit an
itemized bill of defense expenses to the County Attorney.
   (b)   County Attorney review and recommendation. After a review of the bill
by the County Attorney as to the reasonableness of the charges, the County
Attorney shall recommend to the Chief Administrative Officer that the County
pay all or part of the bill that the County Attorney determines to be
reasonable. The County Attorney shall submit a written explanation of the
recommendations to the Chief Administrative Officer and send a copy to the
employee.
   (c)   Employee objection. If the employee disagrees with the recommendation
of the County Attorney, the employee or the employee's designee may file a
written objection setting forth the grounds for the disagreement within 20 days
after the date of the County Attorney's recommendation.
   (d)   Action by Chief Administrative Officer. After considering the County
Attorney's recommendation and any written objection filed by the employee, the
Chief Administrative Officer shall approve the payment of all defense expenses
or reduce any portion of the defense expenses.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 6-106)
TITLE 6. CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
1-6-101.   Definitions.
   
1-6-102.   Proclamation.
   
1-6-103.   Curfew and executive orders.
   
1-6-104.   Duration.
   
1-6-105.   Penalties.
State Code reference – Public Safety Article, Title 14.
§ 1-6-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Civil emergency" means a riot or unlawful assembly characterized
by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force without the
authority of law; or a natural disaster or human-made calamity, earthquake,
snowfall, or explosion, within the limits of the County; resulting in the death
or injury of persons or the destruction of property so that extraordinary
measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
      (2)   "Curfew" means a prohibition against persons walking, running,
loitering, standing, bicycling, or driving on any road, public property, or
vacant premises in the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 8-101) (Bill No. 71-16)
§ 1-6-102. Proclamation.
   Whenever the County Executive finds that a civil emergency exists, the
Executive shall proclaim in writing its existence, including the basis
therefor.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 8-102) (Bill No. 71-16)
§ 1-6-103. Curfew and executive orders.
   (a)   Powers of the County Executive. After proclamation of a civil
emergency, in the interest of public safety and welfare, the County Executive
may order:
      (1)   a general curfew applicable to limited defined geographical areas
of the County or to the County as a whole, and applicable during the hours of
the day or night that the Executive finds necessary;
      (2)   the closing of any or all retail and wholesale taverns, liquor
establishments, or other public or private business establishments or clubs
selling or permitting the consumption of alcoholic beverages;
      (3)   the discontinuance of the selling, distributing, or giving away of
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
      (4)   the temporary closing of any or all gasoline stations or other
establishments whose chief activity is the sale, distribution, or dispensing of
liquid flammable or combustible products;
      (5)   the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing, or giving
away of any firearms or ammunition;
      (6)   the temporary closing of any or all establishments whose principal
business or activity is the sale, distribution, dispensing, or giving away of
firearms or ammunition;
      (7)   the closing of any road or vehicle parking area to motor vehicle
and pedestrian traffic; and
      (8)   any other measures imminently necessary for the protection of life
and property in the County.
   (b)   When effective. A curfew or other executive order issued under this
section shall be effective immediately on issuance and dissemination to the
public by the appropriate news media.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 8-103)
§ 1-6-104. Duration.
   A proclamation of a civil emergency or an executive order may not be
effective for more than seven days unless authorized by ordinance enacted by
the County Council.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 8-104)
§ 1-6-105. Penalties.
   A person who violates an executive order issued under this title is guilty
of a misdemeanor as provided in §
9-1-101 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 8-105)
   State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-202.
TITLE 7. COUNTY SEAL, FLAG, AND OTHER SYMBOLS
Section
   
1-7-101.   County seal.
   
1-7-102.   County flag and colors.
   
1-7-103.   County Tartan.
   
1-7-104.   County tree.
§ 1-7-101. County seal.
   (a)   Appearance. The County seal shall be rendered as follows.
      (1)   Overall form. The overall form of the Anne Arundel County seal
shall be an oval in an aspect ratio of height to width of 1.1 to 1.0.
      (2)   Field. The field of the seal shall be white.
      (3)   Border. The seal shall have a border. The width of the border shall
be 1.1 times the width of a parallelogram in the Calvert Coat of Arms embedded
in the shield.
      (4)   Border pearls. Inside the border shall be 128 border pearls in
gold. The width of each border pearl shall be .53 times the width of the
border. The uppermost and bottom-most border pearls shall align with the
centerline of the shield.
      (5)   County name. Along the inner edge of the border shall be affixed
the words "ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY MARYLAND" in all capital letters in Times New
Roman font. The letter "A" in "ANNE" shall align with the lower left curve of
the shield. The foot of the "L" in "ARUNDEL" shall align with the leftmost
large pearl in the coronet. The letter "C" in "COUNTY" shall align with the
rightmost large pearl in the coronet. The letter "D" in "MARYLAND" shall align
with the lower right curve of the shield. The height of each letter in "ANNE
ARUNDEL" shall be 1.2 times the width of a parallelogram in the Calvert Coat of
Arms embedded in the shield. The height of each letter in "COUNTY MARYLAND"
shall be 1.1 times the width of a parallelogram in the Calvert Coat of Arms
embedded in the shield.
      (6)   Shield.
         (i)   Inside the seal shall be a shield. The height of the shield
shall be .52 times the height of the seal. The width of the shield shall be .54
times the width of the seal. The shape of the shield shall include 90 degree
angles in the upper left and upper right corners of the shield, shall include
curvilinear lines in the lower left and lower right corners of the shield, and
shall come to a point at the bottom of the shield that aligns with the
centerline of the shield.
         (ii)   The outermost edge of the shield shall be a narrow black
border. Inside the narrow black border shall be a narrow white border. Inside
the narrow white border shall be a second black border, the width of which
shall be 1.1 times the combined widths of the narrow black and narrow white
borders. The combined widths of the three borders shall be .49 times the width
of a parallelogram in the Calvert Coat of Arms embedded in the shield.
         (iii)   The interior of the shield shall be evenly quartered by two
perpendicular black lines. The upper left and lower right quadrants shall take
the form of the black and gold stripes of the Calvert Coat of Arms: a paly of
six pieces, gold and black, and a bend dexter counterchanged, so that they
consist of six alternating gold and black vertical bars with a diagonal band of
parallelograms, the colors of which are reversed. The lower right corner of the
upper left quadrant shall be gold, and the upper left corner of the lower right
quadrant shall be black.
         (iv)   The lower left quadrant and the upper right quadrant shall take
the form of the Crossland Coat of Arms, but containing crosses fleury in place
of crosses bottany. The lower left and the upper right quadrants shall be
quartered. Centrally placed in each quadrant shall be a cross fleury, with each
cross fleury extending the full breadth of the quadrant. The colors of each
quadrant shall be white and red, and the cross fleury shall be counterchanged.
The upper left and lower right quarters of the lower left quadrant shall be in
white, and the lower left and upper right quarters of the upper right quadrant
shall be in red.
      (7)   Roses. Centered below the shield shall be two branches with one
rose and one thorn each. The roses shall be red, and the branches shall be
gold. The ends of the rose branches shall curl under toward the bottom of the
seal to form brackets. The roses shall align with the vertical lines that
bisect the crosses fleury.
      (8)   Coronet.
         (i)   Floating atop the shield shall be a baron's coronet. The coronet
shall be pitched back at an angle of approximately 20 degrees, revealing the
inner portion of the coronet.
         (ii)   There shall be a gold tassel centered on the top of the
coronet. The tassel shall be the same height as a large pearl described in
paragraph (iii).
         (iii)   The crown of the coronet shall be red and shall undulate in
the form of velvet. Affixed to the crown shall be four large pearls. The
diameter of each large pearl shall be 1.9 times the width of a parallelogram in
the Calvert Coat of Arms embedded in the shield.
         (iv)   Below the crown and large pearls shall be a gold band divided
into three sections: upper, middle, and lower bands. The three sections of the
band shall be configured such that the height of the middle band shall be 1.3
times the combined height of the upper and lower bands. Within the middle band
shall be five black diamonds elongated so as to be 2.2 times as wide as they
are long. The width of each diamond shall be 1.2 times the width of a
parallelogram in the Calvert Coat of Arms embedded in the shield. The middle
diamond shall be centered on the vertical centerline of the shield. Between
each diamond shall be two black dots one on top of the other.
         (v)   Below the band shall be a white band with the appearance of
ermine. The height of the white band shall be .88 times the width of a
parallelogram in the Calvert Coat of Arms embedded in the shield. Within the
white band shall be five black dots, each centered under a diamond in the
middle gold band. The diameter of each black dot shall be .68 times the height
of each diamond. Below the white band shall be the inside of the coronet in
black.
      (9)   Colors. The colors of the seal shall be: black – pantone process
black c; gold – pantone 124 c; red – pantone 201 c; and white.
      (10)   Official rendering. The official rendering of the seal of Anne
Arundel County, Maryland shall be archived with the Maryland State Archives.
   (b)   Attestation. In addition to the County Executive, the Secretary to the
County Executive, and the Administrative Officer to the County Council, the
Chief of Staff may attest to the County seal. In their absence, the County
Attorney or the Budget Officer may attest to the County seal.
(1985 Code, Art. 1, § 1-104; Art. 2, § 1-103) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 16-06;
Bill No. 61-16)
Charter reference – §§
1008,
1111.
§ 1-7-102. County flag and colors.
   The official flag of the County shall contain the seal of the County on a
white background trimmed with gold fringe and the official colors of the County
shall be the gold of the Calvert Arms and the red of the Crossland Arms.
(1985 Code, Art. 1, § 1-105)
Editor's note – For the act authorizing County colors, see "An Act of Gov.
Francis Nicholson" dated October 9, 1964 (Maryland Archives, Vol. XX, p. 154).
§ 1-7-103. County Tartan.
   The Anne Arundel County Tartan is a tartan designed by the Anne Arundel
County Scottish Festival, Inc., including colors from the County Seal and the
United States Navy, accredited by and registered with the Council of Scottish
Tartans Society as the Anne Arundel County Tartan.
(1985 Code, Art. 1, § 1-105.1) (Bill No. 70-99)
§ 1-7-104. County tree.
   The County tree is the tulip tree or yellow poplar (Liriodendron
tulipifera).
(1985 Code, Art. 1, § 1-105.2) (Bill No. 18-89)
TITLE 8. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section
   
1-8-101.   Manner of collection of amounts owed to the County.
   
1-8-102.   Surety bonds.
   
1-8-103.   Reward for theft of or damage to County property.
   
1-8-104.   County boundary line with Calvert County.
   
1-8-105.   Public-private partnerships.
§ 1-8-101. Manner of collection of amounts owed to the County.
   When an owner of real property is responsible to the County for the payment
of a tax, fee, or other charge related to or arising out of the ownership or
use of the real property, the amount shall be levied, collected, and enforced
in the same manner as County real property taxes and have the same priority
rights, bear the same interest and penalties, constitute a lien on the real
property so assessed, and be treated the same as County real property taxes.
(Bill No. 71-16)
§ 1-8-102. Surety bonds.
   (a)   The Controller and the County Executive shall each be covered by a
surety bond in an amount of at least $300,000 to ensure the faithful
performance of their duties.
   (b)   All officers and employees of the County other than the Controller and
the County Executive shall be covered collectively by surety bonds in an amount
of at least $300,000 to ensure the faithful performance of their duties.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 1-104) (Bill No. 71-16)
Charter reference – §
1006.
§ 1-8-103. Reward for theft of or damage to County property.
   (a)   Generally. On request of the Chief of Police, the County Executive may
offer a reward in the name of the County for information leading to the arrest
and conviction of any person responsible for property damage to any public
building or theft of or damage to any public property in the County.
   (b)   Amount. The reward shall be at least $25 and may not exceed 10% of the
amount of the property damage incurred or 10% of the value of the property
stolen or damaged.
   (c)   Payment. A determination by the County Executive of the person to whom
a reward is to be paid is conclusive. On making a determination that a person
is entitled to a reward, the County Executive shall cause to be introduced
before the County Council a bill providing for the transfer of an appropriate
sum of money from the contingency account of the Chief Administrative Officer
to an appropriate account for payment of the reward.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 1-105) (Bill No. 71-16)
§ 1-8-104. County boundary line with Calvert County.
   Beginning for the same at a point on the shoreline of the Chesapeake Bay,
the point being positioned by Maryland State grid coordinated at north
320353.036 east 934307.069 leaving the shoreline of the Chesapeake Bay and
running for the newly established County line between Anne Arundel County and
Calvert County as surveyed November 1975 by John E. Harms, Jr. & Associates,
Inc., and referring the courses and coordinates of this description to the
Maryland State grid meridian.
   North 28 degrees 44 minutes 31 seconds west 540.00 feet to a brass plaque
engraved "Anne Arundel County - Calvert County Boundary Line 1" set in the
concrete bridge abutment on the easterly side of Maryland Route 261, continuing
along the same course 1,451.15 feet to an old County line monument found
engraved "Anne Arundel County 1824" on one side and "Calvert County 1824" on
the opposite side, continuing along the same course 1,958.60 feet to a monument
set at an angle point in the County line at coordinate point north 323816.165
east 932407.776 the monument having a brass plaque set and engraved "Anne
Arundel - County Calvert County Boundary Line No. 2", comprising a total
distance of 3,949.75 feet from the point of beginning, leaving monument 2 and
running along the County line.
   South 88 degrees 53 minutes 16 seconds west, 8,779.72 feet, to a monument
set on the easterly side of Maryland Route 613, the monument having a brass
plaque set and engraved "Anne Arundel County - Calvert County Boundary Line No.
3", continuing along the same course 8,858.87 feet to a monument set on the
easterly side of Old Maryland Route 2, the monument having a brass plaque set
and engraved "Anne Arundel County - Calvert County Boundary Line No. 4",
continuing along the same course 2,375.13 feet to a monument set on the
southerly side of Maryland Route 260, the monument having a brass plaque set
and engraved "Anne Arundel County - Calvert County Boundary Line No. 5",
continuing along the same course 3,189.11 feet to an old County line monument
found at an angle point in the County line at coordinate point north 323365.748
east 909209.315, the monument found being engraved "Anne Arundel County 1824"
on one side and "Calvert County 1824" on the opposite side, comprising a total
distance of 23,202.83 feet, from monument No. 2, leaving the old monument found
and running along the County line.
   North 37 degrees 02 minutes 18 seconds west, 2,967.06 feet, to an angle
point in the County line in the centerline of a stream at coordinate point
north 325734.154 east 907422.110, leaving the stream and running along the
County line.
   North 00 degrees 05 minutes 44 seconds west 40.00 feet to a monument set,
the monument having a brass plaque set and engraved "Anne Arundel County -
Calvert County Boundary Line No. 6", running along the same course 2,807.00
feet to monument set on the southerly side of Maryland Route 260, the monument
having a brass plaque set and engraved "Anne Arundel County - Calvert County
Boundary Line No. 7", continuing along the same course 3,238.17 feet to an
angle point on the north side of Cornwall Road at coordinate point north
331819.307 east 907411.968, then leaving the line as described by John E.
Harms, Jr. and Associates, Inc. in November 1975 and running along the
northwest right-of-way of Cornwall Road the following courses and distances.
   North 32 degrees 08 minutes 33 seconds east 332.34 feet to an angle point in
the County line at coordinate point north 332100.712 east 907588.7832.
   North 32 degrees 25 minutes 33 seconds east 207.66 feet to an angle point in
the County line at coordinate point north 332275.9916 east 907700.132.
   North 39 degrees 30 minutes 53 seconds east 133.88 feet to an angle point in
the County line at coordinate point north 332379.279 east 907785.316.
   North 36 degrees 58 minutes 13 seconds east 228.84 feet to an angle point in
the County line at coordinate point north 332562.114 east 907922.940.
   North 34 degrees 02 minutes 43 seconds east 134.31 feet to an angle point in
the County line at coordinate north 332673.399 east 907998.133, then leaving
the right-of-way line of Cornwall Road and running the following courses and
distances.
   North 32 degrees 54 minutes 57 seconds west 203.93 feet to an angle point in
the County line at coordinate point north 332884.592 east 907887.316.
   North 32 degrees 23 minutes 37 seconds west 297.35 feet to an angle point in
the County line at coordinate point north 333095.670 east 907728.015.
   North 33 degrees 10 minutes 07 seconds west 189.43 feet to an angle point in
the new County line at coordinate point north 33254.235 east 907624.377.
   North 28 degrees 55 minutes 27 seconds west 445.46 feet to intersect the
County line between monuments 7 and 8 in the survey by John E. Harms, Jr. and
Associates, Inc. in November 1975 at coordinate point north 333644.132 east
907408.927, then to the line between monuments 7 and 8.
   North 0 degrees 05 minutes 44 seconds west 701.23 feet to a monument set on
the southerly side of Jewell Road, the monument having a brass plaque set and
engraved "Anne Arundel County - Calvert County Boundary Line No. 8", continuing
along the same course 5,587.78 feet to a monument set at a point 70.00 feet
southerly from the center of Lyons Creek, the monument having a brass plaque
set and engraved "Anne Arundel County - Calvert County Boundary Line No. 9",
continuing along the same course 70.00 feet to a point in the center of Lyons
Creek at coordinate point north 340003.137 east 907398.328.
   Leaving the point and running westerly along the center of Lyons Creek as it
meanders to a brass plaque set in a concrete bridge abutment on the easterly
side of the southbound lane of Maryland Route 416 at coordinate point north
339304.750 east 897562.215 the plaque being engraved "Anne Arundel County -
Calvert County Boundary Line No. 10", the plaque being located south 86 degrees
20 minutes 41 seconds west 9,856.28 feet from monument 9.
   Leaving the point marked by plaque 10 and continuing westerly along the
center of Lyons Creek as it meanders to a point in the center of the Patuxent
River at coordinate point north 333260.000 east 889410.000, the point being
located south 53 degrees 26 minutes 37 seconds, west, 10,148.77 feet from
plaque 10.
(1985 Code, Art. 1, § 1-105.3) (Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 71-16)
State Code reference – 1982 Md. Laws, Ch. 841, § 1.
§ 1-8-105. Public-private partnerships.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “public-private partnership” means a
contract in which the skills and assets of the public sector and the private
sector are shared in delivering a service or facility for the use of the
general public and each sector shares in the potential risks and rewards.
   (b)   Requirement. The County shall maximize opportunities for public-
private partnerships when it is feasible to do so and is in the best interest
of the County.
(Bill No. 60-21)
TITLE 9. EQUITY AND HUMAN RIGHTS
Section
Subtitle 1. General Provisions
   
1-9-101.   Definitions.
   
1-9-102.   Public policy and purpose.
   
1-9-103.   Violations.
Subtitle 2. Housing
   
1-9-201.   Prohibitions.
   
1-9-202.   Discriminatory restrictive covenants.
   
1-9-203.   Exceptions.
Subtitle 3. Public Accommodation
   
1-9-301.   Discrimination in public accommodations.
Subtitle 4. Employment
   
1-9-401.   Discrimination in employment.
SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-9-101. Definitions.
   In this title and in Title 5A of
Article 3 of this Code, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Discriminate” or “Discrimination” means an act prohibited under
this title, and includes acting, failing to act, or unduly delaying action
regarding a person because of the person’s membership in a protected class or
association with someone in a protected class in such a way that the person is
adversely affected in the terms and conditions of employment, in housing, or in
public accommodations. Discrimination also includes retaliating against any
person because that person lawfully opposed any discriminatory practice under
this title, or filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any
manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this title or Subtitle
5A of
Article 3 of this Code.
      (2)   “Discriminatory restrictive covenant” means a specification
limiting the transfer or rental of a dwelling because of the person’s
membership in a protected class.
      (3)   “Gender identity or expression” means the gender with which a
person identifies, regardless of the sex assigned to that person at birth and
regardless of the person’s perceived gender identity. Perceived gender identity
means the gender with which a person is perceived to identify based on that
person’s appearance, behavior, expression, other gender related
characteristics, or sex assigned to the person at birth or identified in
documents.
      (4)   “Housing” means a dwelling unit, including a mobile home, for the
use of one or more individuals, groups, or families, and the definition
includes the site upon which the dwelling exists and land offered for sale or
lease for the construction of a dwelling.
      (5)   “Protected class” means those persons protected from discrimination
based on actual or perceived age, ancestry, citizenship, color, creed,
disability, familial status, gender identity or expression, marital status,
national origin, occupation, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, or source
of income.
      (6)   “Public accommodation” has the meaning stated in § 20-301 of the
State Government Article of the State Code.
      (7)   “Rent” means to rent, lease, sublease, or otherwise grant for
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
      (8)   (i)   “Source of income” means any lawful source of money that is
paid to or for the benefit of a buyer or renter of housing, including money
from:
            1.   a lawful profession or occupation;
            2.   a federal, state, or local government assistance, grant, or
loan program;
            3.   a gift or inheritance, otherwise legally considered a source
of income, provided that a purchase or lease agreement is executed;
            4.   a pension or annuity;
            5.   alimony or child support;
            6.   financial holdings, such as bank accounts, trusts, investment
accounts, stocks, or bonds; and
            7.   any contract right, sale, or pledge of an interest in
property.
         (ii)   “Source of income” does not include the determination of a
person’s ability to pay a purchase price or to pay rent, which is determined by
such reasonable and customary standards, such as verification of income and its
source, the creditworthiness of the renter or buyer, and the creditworthiness
of any source of income.
(Bill No. 55-19; Bill No. 21-24)
§ 1-9-102. Public policy and purpose.
   (a)   Purpose. Discrimination because of a person’s membership in a
protected class adversely affects the health, welfare, peace, and safety of the
community. This title is intended to foster equal opportunity for all without
regard to a person’s membership in a protected class and strictly in accord
with their individual merits as human beings.
   (b)   Intent. While the prohibitions in this title are substantially similar
to prohibitions in Federal and State law, the intent is that the process for a
complaint filed for a violation of this title will be more accessible and
proceed more promptly than possible under either Federal or State law. It is
not intended to be a duplicative or cumulative process, and, once a complaint
is filed under a similar or identical Federal or State law, the complaint filed
under this title may not proceed if the effect is duplicative or cumulative.
(Bill No. 21-24)
§ 1-9-103. Violations.
   A violation of this title may be presented to the Human Relations Commission
and shall be initiated, investigated, and adjudicated, sanctioned, or otherwise
resolved pursuant to the provisions of Title 5A of
Article 3 of this Code.
(Bill No. 55-19; Bill No. 21-24)
SUBTITLE 2. HOUSING
§ 1-9-201. Prohibitions.
   (a)   Sale or rental of housing. A person who sells or offers to sell, rents
or offers to rent, controls, constructs, or manages housing may not
discriminate by:
      (1)   making or causing the making, printing, or publishing of a notice,
statement, or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of housing that
indicates a preference or limitation with respect to a member of a protected
class;
      (2)   representing to a member of a protected class that housing is not
available for inspection, sale, or rental if the housing is in fact available;
      (3)   refusing to negotiate for the sale or rental of housing to a member
of a protected class;
      (4)   refusing to sell or rent housing to a member of a protected class
after the making of a bona fide offer;
      (5)   refusing to make housing available to a member of a protected
class;
      (6)   restricting the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale or
rental of housing to a member of a protected class;
      (7)   restricting the provision of services or facilities to a member of
a protected class in connection with the sale or rental of housing;
      (8)   including a discriminatory restrictive covenant in a document
relating to the sale or rental of housing; or
      (9)   honoring, enforcing, or attempting to honor or enforce a
discriminatory restrictive covenant.
   (b)   Restricting access, membership, or participation in certain business
entities. A person may not discriminate by denying a member of the protected
class access, membership, or participation in or restricting the terms and
conditions of access, membership, or participation in a business entity
relating to the sale or rental of housing, such as a multiple listing service
or real estate brokers’ organization.
   (c)   Solicitation of sales through prohibited representations; false signs
to sell or rent. A person may not discriminate:
      (1)   by knowingly inducing or attempting to induce a person to sell or
transfer an interest in housing by representing that the existing or potential
proximity of housing owned, rented, used, or occupied by a member or members of
a protected class will or may result in:
         (i)   the lowering of property values;
         (ii)   change in the character of the block, neighborhood, or area in
which the housing is located; or
         (iii)   a decline in the quality of the schools and institutions
serving the area.
      (2)   by placing a sign, display, or device designed to indicate that a
bona fide offer is being made to sell or rent housing if, in fact, the housing
is not offered for sale or rent.
   (d)   Aiding or abetting. A person may not aid, abet, incite, compel, or
coerce any person to commit a discriminatory act under this section or attempt,
directly or indirectly, alone or in concert with others, to commit a
discriminatory act.
(Bill No. 55-19; Bill No. 21-24)
§ 1-9-202. Discriminatory restrictive covenants.
   (a)   Void. Except as provided in §
1-9-203, discriminatory restrictive covenants are contrary to the public policy
of the County and are void and of no effect.
   (b)   Refusal to accept documents containing a discriminatory restrictive
covenant. A person may refuse to accept a document affecting title to real
property, whether in connection with a sale, lease, mortgage, or otherwise, if
the document includes a discriminatory restrictive covenant. The refusal to
accept a document with a discriminatory restrictive covenant may not be deemed
a breach of any contract, including a contract to sell, rent, or mortgage the
property.
(Bill No. 55-19; Bill No. 21-24)
§ 1-9-203. Exceptions.
   (a)   Age restrictions. With respect to discrimination based on age, this
title does not apply to:
      (1)   a medical, health, or educational institution established for a
specific age group;
      (2)   assisted living facilities, adult independent dwelling units,
housing for the elderly of moderate means, and nursing homes, as defined in
Article 18 of this Code;
      (3)   child care centers, as defined by Article 18 of this Code, and any
other facilities for preschool children licensed as required in the Family Law
Article of the State Code; or
      (4)   age restricted residential development, as provided in §
17-7-501 of this Code.
   (b)   Private membership clubs. This title does not prohibit a private club,
not in fact open to the public, that as incidental to its primary purpose
provides housing, which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of the housing to its members or
from giving preference to its members.
   (c)   Religious organizations. A religious organization, association, or
society, or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or
society, may limit the sale, rental, or occupancy of housing that it owns or
operates for other than commercial purposes to persons of the same religion and
may give preferences to persons of the same religion.
   (d)   Veterans. This subtitle does not prohibit a person from providing
preferences in the sale, rental, or occupancy of housing to a veteran and the
veteran’s household, to the extent authorized by federal or State law.
(Bill No. 55-19; Bill No. 21-24)
SUBTITLE 3. PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION
§ 1-9-301. Discrimination in public accommodations.
   An owner or operator of a place of public accommodation, or their agent or
employee, may not discriminate in the provision of the accommodations,
advantages, facilities, or privileges of a place of public accommodation.
(Bill No. 21-24)
SUBTITLE 4. EMPLOYMENT
§ 1-9-401. Discrimination in employment.
   (a)   Prohibitions. An employer may not:
      (1)   fail or refuse to hire, discharge, or otherwise discriminate
against an individual with respect to compensation, terms, conditions, or
privileges of employment of the individual because of the individual’s:
         (i)   membership in a protected class; or
         (ii)   refusal to submit to a genetic test or make available the
results of a genetic test;
      (2)   limit, segregate, or classify its employees or applicants for
employment in any way that would deprive or tend to deprive an individual of
employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect the status of the
individual as an employee because of the individual’s:
         (i)   membership in a protected class; or
         (ii)   refusal to submit to a genetic test or make available the
results of a genetic test;
      (3)   request or require genetic tests or genetic information as a
condition of hiring or determining benefits;
      (4)   fail or refuse to make a reasonable accommodation for the known
disability of an otherwise qualified employee or an applicant for employment;
or
      (5)   engage in harassment of an employee based on the employee’s
membership in a protected class.
   (b)   Exception. This section does not apply to an employee of Anne Arundel
County. A claim of discrimination arising out of County employment shall be
initiated, investigated, and resolved pursuant to
Article 6 of this Code and the Employee Relations Manual.
(Bill No. 21-24)
TITLE 10. LANGUAGE ACCESS
Section
   
1-10-101.   Definitions.
   
1-10-102.   Equal access to public services and public meetings.
   
1-10-103.   Equal access version of a government website or webpage.
   
1-10-104.   Coordination and technical assistance; standards.
§ 1-10-101. Definitions.
   In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “County agency” includes any County department, office, board, or
commission.
      (2)   “Equal access” means to be informed of, participate in, and benefit
from public services offered and public meetings held by a County agency at a
level equal to English proficient individuals.
      (3)   “Limited English proficiency individual” or “LEP individual” means
an individual whose primary language for communication is not English and who
has a limited ability to read, speak, write, or understand English.
      (4)   “Oral language services” include various methods to provide verbal
information and interpretation, such as staff interpreters, bilingual staff,
telephone interpreter programs, and private interpreter programs.
      (5)   “Vital documents” means documents that contain information that is
critical to being informed of, participating in, and benefiting from public
services offered and public meetings held by a County agency, including all
applications or informational materials, notices, and complaint forms offered
by County agencies.
(Bill No. 25-22)
§ 1-10-102. Equal access to public services and public meetings.
   (a)   In general. Each County agency shall take reasonable steps to provide
equal access to public services and public meetings for individuals with
limited English proficiency.
   (b)   Reasonable steps. Reasonable steps to provide equal access to public
services and public meetings include:
      (1)   the provision of oral language services for individuals with
limited English proficiency;
      (2)   face-to-face, in-house oral language services, if contact between
the County agency and individuals with limited English proficiency is on a
weekly or more frequent basis;
      (3)   the translation of vital documents ordinarily provided to the
public into any language spoken by any limited English proficient population
that constitutes at least 3% of the County population as measured by the most
recent United States Census or that a County agency regularly serves; and
      (4)   any additional methods or means necessary to achieve equal access
to public services offered by and public meetings held by County agencies.
   (c)   No charge to LEP individual. Equal access described in this section
shall be provided free of charge to LEP individuals.
   (d)   Implementation. The provisions of this section shall be fully
implemented by July 1, 2022.
(Bill No. 25-22)
§ 1-10-103. Equal access version of a government website or webpage.
   (a)   In general.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), each County agency
shall provide for each website or webpage that may reasonably be expected to be
available to and used by members of the general public equal access versions of
the website in any language that:
         (i)   is spoken by any limited English proficient population that
constitutes at least 0.5% of the overall population within the County, as
measured by the most recent United States Census; and
         (ii)   can be translated free of charge.
      (2)   If machine translation services are used to carry out the
provisions of paragraph (1), the County agency may post a disclaimer
conspicuously on the website or webpage that the County agency:
         (i)   does not guarantee the accuracy or reliability of the
translation; and
         (ii)   is not liable for any loss or damage arising out of the use of
or reliance on the translated content.
   (b)   Exceptions. A County agency is not required to provide equal access to
website or webpage content if:
      (1)   the County agency program determines that an inaccurate translation
of the content could lead to a denial of services or benefits; or
      (2)   the content cannot be translated due to the limitations of machine
translation software, including files in pdf format, images, and videos.
   (c)   County websites. Each County agency is encouraged to provide equal
access versions of websites or webpages to the same extent County agencies are
required to under subsection (a), but may not be required to do so.
(Bill No. 25-22)
§ 1-10-104. Coordination and technical assistance; standards.
   (a)   In general. The Human Relations Officer and the Department of
Information Technology, shall provide coordination and technical assistance to
County agencies to aid compliance with this subtitle.
   (b)   Standards for equal access versions of web sites. The Human Relations
Officer shall establish minimum standards to which the equal access versions of
websites or webpages required under §
1-10-103 must conform, including a standard regarding the prominent placement
of links on the English version of a website or webpage to each equal access
version of the website.
(Bill No. 25-22)
TITLE 11. OPEN DATA
Section
   
1-11-101.   Definitions.
   
1-11-102.   Open Data Implementation Plan.
   
1-11-103.   Public data set availability.
   
1-11-104.   Web portal administration.
   
1-11-105.   Open data policy.
   
1-11-106.   Internet data set policy and technical standards manual.
   
1-11-107.   Open Data Implementation Plan Report.
   
1-11-108.   Legislative Branch.
§ 1-11-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words and phrases have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Agency” means any department or office of the County government.
      (2)   (i)   “Data” means the final version of digital information
regularly created or maintained by or on behalf of and owned by the County that
records a file, measurement, transaction, or final decision related to the
mission of an agency.
         (ii)   “Data” does not include any information provided to an agency
by another government entity, information that may not be made available for
privacy or security reasons, or data otherwise protected by law.
      (3)   “Measurement” means to quantify any characteristic of an observable
event, occurrence, or object by comparison to a reference standard.
      (4)   “Open Data Implementation Plan” means a plan developed by the Chief
Administrative Officer to implement this title as further described in §
1-11-102.
      (5)   (i)   “Public data set” means data identified as eligible for
publication by the Open Data Implementation Plan.
         (ii)   “Public data set” does not include any portion of a data set
that is not subject to disclosure under any federal or State law or any data
that is subject to copyright or trademark protections.
      (6)   “Single web portal” means a specifically designed website platform
that brings information from diverse sources and serves as the single point of
access for the information.
(Bill No. 30-22)
§ 1-11-102. Open Data Implementation Plan.
   (a)   The Chief Administrative Officer shall prepare an Open Data
Implementation Plan within one year of June 13, 2022.
   (b)   The Open Data Implementation Plan shall:
      (1)   include a summary description of the public data sets under the
control of each agency;
      (2)   assign and prioritize the order in which public data sets should be
published on the single web portal based on whether the public data set:
         (i)   can be used to increase agency accountability and
responsiveness;
         (ii)   improves public knowledge of the agency and its operations;
         (iii)   furthers the mission of the agency;
         (iv)   creates economic opportunity; or
         (v)   responds to a need or demand identified through public input;
      (3)   create a timeline for the inclusion of public data sets on the
single web portal;
      (4)   address when and how an agency may change or terminate collection
of data or remove the public data set from the single web portal;
      (5)   designate an employee in each agency as a contact for public data
set management and otherwise address appropriate staffing to manage the public
data sets published on the single web portal;
      (6)   prescribe the frequency of updates for public data sets on the
single web portal; and
      (7)   address measures to maintain bandwidth availability of the single
web portal.
(Bill No. 30-22)
§ 1-11-103. Public data set availability.
   (a)   The County shall make public data sets available on the single web
portal within one year of June 13, 2022.
   (b)   A public data set shall be made available for download.
   (c)   A public data set shall be published in a format that permits
automated processing, does not require a software license or the use of
specialized software, and uses appropriate technology to notify the public of
updates.
   (d)   Once published, a public data set shall be updated as often as is
required by the open data implementation plan.
   (e)   (1)   A published public data set shall be made available without any
registration or license requirement or restriction on use. The County shall
require a third-party providing the public data set or application utilizing
that data set on behalf of the County to identify the source and version of the
public data set and describe any modification made to that data set.
      (2)   In this subsection, “registration or license requirement or
restriction” does not include any measure required to:
         (i)   protect the single web portal from unlawful abuse or an attempt
to damage or impair use of the portal; or
         (ii)   analyze the type of data being used to improve service
delivery.
   (f)   A published public data set must be accessible to external and
internal search capabilities.
   (g)   This title does not prohibit an agency from:
      (1)   disclosing information not otherwise defined as data; or
      (2)   making voluntarily disclosed information accessible through the
single web portal.
(Bill No. 30-22)
§ 1-11-104. Web portal administration.
   (a)   The County shall conspicuously publish the open data policy required
by §
1-11-105 on the single web portal.
   (b)   The County shall implement a mechanism to solicit public feedback and
encourage public discussion on open data policies and public data set
availability on the single web portal.
   (c)   An agency shall decide if inclusion of a public data set requested
through the public input mechanism of the single web portal should be included
on the single web portal.
(Bill No. 30-22)
§ 1-11-105. Open data policy.
   (a)   A public data set made available on the single web portal is provided
for informational purposes only.
   (b)   The County makes no express or implied warranty as to the
completeness, accuracy, content, merchantability, or fitness for any particular
purpose or use of any public data set made available on the single web portal.
   (c)   The County is not liable for any deficiency in the completeness,
accuracy, content, or fitness for any particular purpose or use of any public
data set, or application utilizing the data set, provided by any third party.
   (d)   This title and the Open Data Implementation Plan do not create a
private right of action for enforcement. Failure to comply with this title or
the Open Data Implementation Plan shall not result in liability of the County.
(Bill No. 30-22)
§ 1-11-106. Internet data set policy and technical standards manual.
   (a)   Within 180 days after June 13, 2022, the County shall prepare and
publish a technical standards manual for the publication of public data sets on
the single web portal to make public data available to the greatest number of
users and for the greatest number of applications.
   (b)   The manual:
      (1)   shall use open standards for web publishing and e-government,
whenever practicable;
      (2)   shall identify the reason why each technical standard was selected
and to which types of data it applies;
      (3)   may recommend or require that data be published under more than one
technical standard; and
      (4)   shall include a plan to adopt or utilize a web application
programming interface that permits application programs to request and receive
public data sets directly from the single web portal.
   (c)   The County shall update the manual as necessary.
(Bill No. 30-22)
§ 1-11-107. Open Data Implementation Plan Report.
   (a)   No later than January 1, 2023, and every January 1 thereafter, the
Chief Administrative Officer shall submit to the County Executive and County
Council, and post on the single web portal, a report on progress under the Open
Data Implementation Plan until all public data sets required to be published
have been made available through the single web portal.
   (b)   The report shall include:
      (1)   the actions taken to make public data sets available on the single
web portal since the previous report;
      (2)   any action that will be taken before the next report;
      (3)   whether the list of public data sets in the Open Data
Implementation Plan should be updated;
      (4)   whether the prioritization of public data sets in the Open Data
Implementation Plan should be changed; and
      (5)   whether the timeline outlined in the Open Data Implementation Plan
for the inclusion of a public data set on the single web portal should be
changed.
(Bill No. 30-22)
§ 1-11-108. Legislative Branch.
   (a)   The Legislative Branch may provide its public data sets to the Chief
Administrative Office to be included in the Open Data Implementation Plan.
   (b)   The Legislative Branch may post all of its public data sets included
in the Open Data Implementation Plan on the same single web portal used by the
Executive Branch.
(Bill No. 30-22)
TITLE 12. PUBLIC CAMPAIGN FINANCING
Section
   
1-12-101.   Definitions.
   
1-12-102.   Public Campaign Financing Fund established.
   
1-12-103.   Contributions.
   
1-12-104.   Requirements for certification.
   
1-12-105.   Board determination.
   
1-12-106.   Disbursements of public contribution.
   
1-12-107.   Use of public contribution.
   
1-12-108.   Withdrawal.
   
1-12-109.   Applicant, certified, and participating candidate restrictions.
   
1-12-110.   Public Campaign Financing System Commission.
   
1-12-111.   Funding for the Public Campaign Financing Fund.
   
1-12-112.   Violations.
§ 1-12-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   “Applicant candidate” means a person who is running for a covered
office and who is seeking to be a certified candidate in a primary or general
election.
      (2)   “Board” means the Maryland State Board of Elections.
      (3)   “Campaign finance entity” means a political committee established
under Title 13 of the Election Law Article of the State Code.
      (4)   “Certified candidate” means a candidate running for a covered
office who is certified as eligible for public campaign financing from the
Fund.
      (5)   “Consumer Price Index” means the Consumer Price Index for All Urban
Consumers (CPI) for Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, as published by the United
States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, or a successor index.
      (6)   “Contested election” means an election in which there are more
candidates for an office than the number who can be elected to that office.
Contested election includes a special election held to fill a vacancy under §
205 or §
402 of the Charter.
      (7)   “Contribution” means the gift or transfer, or promise of gift or
transfer, of money or other thing of value to a campaign finance entity to
promote or assist in the promotion of the success or defeat of a candidate,
political party, or question. Contribution includes proceeds from the sale of
tickets to a campaign fund-raising event as defined in § 1-101 of the Election
Law Article of the State Code.
      (8)   “Controller” means the County Controller or the County Controller’s
designee.
      (9)   “County Board” means the Anne Arundel County Board of Elections.
      (10)   “Covered office” means the Office of County Executive or County
Councilmember.
      (11)   “Disbursement period” means the period of time beginning 365 days
before the primary election for the covered office the candidate seeks and
ending 15 days after the date of the general election.
      (12)   “Election cycle” means the primary and general election for the
same term of a covered office.
      (13)   “Eligible contribution” means an aggregate donation in a four year
election cycle of no more than $250 from an individual, including an individual
who does not reside in the County.
      (14)   “Fund” means the Public Campaign Financing Fund.
      (15)   “Non-certified candidate” means a person who is running for a
covered office who either:
         (i)   chooses not to apply to be a certified candidate; or
         (ii)   applies to be a certified candidate but fails to qualify.
      (16)   “Non-participating candidate” means a person who is running for a
covered office who is either a certified candidate who declines to accept a
public contribution or a non-certified candidate.
      (17)   “Participating candidate” means a certified candidate who has
received a public contribution from the Fund for a primary or general election.
      (18)   “Public Campaign Financing System Commission” means the Commission
established in §
1-12-110.
      (19)   “Public contribution” means money disbursed from the Fund to a
certified candidate.
      (20)   “Publicly funded campaign account” means a campaign finance
account established by a candidate for the exclusive purpose of receiving
eligible contributions and spending funds in accordance with this title.
      (21)   “Qualifying contribution” means an eligible contribution of at
least $5 but no more than $250 in support of an applicant candidate or a
certified candidate that is:
         (i)   made by a County resident;
         (ii)   made after the beginning of the qualifying period, but no later
than the primary election or, if the candidate, advances, the general election;
and
         (iii)   acknowledged by a receipt that identifies the contributor’s
name and residential address and signed by the contributor directly or by a
digital signature using a method approved by the Board.
      (22)   “Qualifying period” means the period of time beginning on January
1 following the last election for the covered office the candidate seeks and
ending 45 days before the date of the primary election.
      (23)   “Slate” means a political committee of two or more candidates who
join together to conduct and pay for joint campaign activities.
(Bill No. 25-23)
§ 1-12-102. Public Campaign Financing Fund established.
   (a)   Fund created. There is a Public Campaign Financing Fund. This Fund is
continuing and non-lapsing.
   (b)   Source of funding. The Fund consists of:
      (1)   all funds appropriated to it by the County Council;
      (2)   any unspent funds remaining in a participating candidate’s publicly
funded campaign account after the candidate is no longer a candidate for a
covered office;
      (3)   any public contribution plus interest returned to the Fund by a
participating candidate who withdraws from participation;
      (4)   all interest earned on funds in the Fund; and
      (5)   voluntary donations made directly to the Fund.
(Bill No. 25-23)
§ 1-12-103. Contributions.
   (a)   Prerequisites. Before raising any contribution governed by this title,
an applicant candidate shall:
      (1)   File notice of intent with the Board on or before April 15 of the
year of the election on a form prescribed by the Board; and
      (2)   Establish a publicly funded campaign account for the purpose of
receiving eligible contributions and spending funds in accordance with this
title.
   (b)   Limitation on contributions and loans.
      (1)   Other than a contribution from the applicant candidate or the
applicant candidate’s spouse, an applicant candidate may not accept an eligible
contribution from an individual greater than $250.
      (2)   An applicant candidate may not accept a loan from anyone other than
the applicant candidate or the applicant candidate’s spouse.
      (3)   An applicant candidate and the applicant candidate’s spouse may not
contribute or lend a combined total of more than $12,000 to the applicant
candidate’s publicly funded campaign account.
   (c)   Consumer Price Index adjustment.  By March 1, 2026, and then by March
1 of each subsequent fourth year, the Chief Administrative Officer shall adjust
the contribution limit established in subsection (b), to be effective July 1,
2026, and then July 1 of each subsequent fourth year, by the average of the
annual increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for the previous four
calendar years. The Chief Administrative Officer shall calculate the adjustment
to the nearest multiple of $10, and shall publish the amount of the adjustment
no later than March 1, 2026, and then no later than March 1 of each subsequent
fourth year.
(Bill No. 25-23)
§ 1-12-104. Requirements for certification.
   (a)   Qualification. To qualify as a certified candidate:
      (1)   An applicant candidate for County Executive shall collect from
County residents at least:
         (i)   500 qualifying contributions; and
         (ii)   an aggregate total of $40,000; and
      (2)   An applicant candidate for Councilmember shall collect from County
residents at least:
         (i)   75 qualifying contributions; and
         (ii)   an aggregate total of $7,500.
   (b)   Receipt of funds. An applicant candidate shall deposit all eligible
contributions received into the applicant candidate’s publicly funded campaign
account. An applicant candidate shall deliver to the Board a copy of a receipt
for each qualifying contribution.
   (c)   Certification. An applicant candidate shall apply to the Board for
certification during the qualifying period.
(Bill No. 25-23)
§ 1-12-105. Board determination.
   (a)   Board certifications. The Board shall certify an applicant candidate
if the Board finds that the applicant candidate has received the required
number of qualifying contributions and the required aggregate total dollars for
the office no later than 10 business days after receiving:
      (1)   a declaration from the applicant candidate agreeing to follow the
regulations governing the use of a public contribution;
      (2)   a campaign finance report that includes:
         (i)   a list of each qualifying contribution received;
         (ii)   a list of each expenditure made by the applicant candidate
during the qualifying period;
         (iii)   the receipt associated with each contribution and expenditure;
and
      (3)   a certificate of candidacy for a covered office.
   (b)   Application. A candidate may submit only one application for
certification for any election. An applicant candidate may correct any mistakes
in the application for certification within the earlier of:
      (1)   10 business days after receiving notice that the Board denied the
application; or
      (2)   the end of the qualifying period.
   (c)   Decision final. After the timing for corrections has passed, the
decision by the Board to certify a candidate is final.
   (d)   Authorization for disbursement of funds. If the Board certifies a
candidate, the Board shall authorize the Controller to disburse a public
contribution to the certified candidate’s publicly funded campaign account.
(Bill No. 25-23)
§ 1-12-106. Disbursements of public contribution.
   (a)   Amount of disbursements. The Controller shall disburse a public
contribution from the Fund to each certified candidate in a contested election
only during the disbursement period as follows:
      (1)   For a certified candidate for County Executive, the matching
dollars shall equal:
         (i)   $6 for each dollar of a qualifying contribution received for the
first $50 of each qualifying contribution;
         (ii)   $4 for each dollar of a qualifying contribution received for
the second $50 of each qualifying contribution; and
         (iii)   $2 for each dollar of a qualifying contribution received for
the third $50 of each qualifying contribution.
      (2)   For a certified candidate for County Council, the matching dollars
shall equal:
         (i)   $4 for each dollar of a qualifying contribution received for the
first $50 of each qualifying contribution;
         (ii)   $3 for each dollar of a qualifying contribution received for
the second $50 of each qualifying contribution; and
         (iii)   $2 for each dollar of a qualifying contribution received for
the third $50 of each qualifying contribution.
      (3)   The total public contribution payable to a certified candidate for
an election cycle may not exceed:
         (i)   $750,000 for a candidate for County Executive; and
         (ii)   $125,000 for a candidate for County Council.
   (b)   Limitation. The Controller may not disburse matching dollars from the
Fund to a certified candidate for:
      (1)   a contribution from the candidate or the candidate’s spouse; or
      (2)   an in-kind contribution of property, goods, or services.
   (c)   Qualifying contributions. A certified candidate may continue to
collect qualifying contributions and receive a matching public contribution up
to the primary election or, if the certified candidate advances, the general
election. A qualifying contribution may not exceed $250 from any individual in
the aggregate during an election cycle.
   (d)   Annual review of Fund balance. On or before July 1 of the year
preceding a primary election, the Controller shall determine if the amount in
the Fund is sufficient to meet the maximum public contributions reasonably
expected to be required during the next election cycle. If the Controller
determines that the total amount available for disbursement in the Fund is
insufficient to meet the allocations required by this section, the Controller
shall reduce each public contribution to a certified candidate based on the
ratio of the amount in the Fund to the maximum public contributions reasonably
expected to be required.
   (e)   Continued disbursement to certified candidates. Within three business
days after the Board certifies the results of the primary election, the Board
shall authorize the Controller to continue to disburse the appropriate public
contribution for the general election to each certified candidate who is
certified to be on the ballot for a contested election in the general election.
   (f)   Nomination by petition. A certified candidate nominated by petition
may receive a public contribution for a contested election in the general
election if:
      (1)   the candidate’s nomination is certified by the Board; and
      (2)   the candidate did not participate in a primary election.
   (g)   Proof of qualifying contributions. A participating candidate shall
submit a receipt for each qualifying contribution to the Board to receive a
public contribution. The Controller shall disburse the appropriate public
contribution into a participating candidate’s publicly funded campaign account
within three business days after the Board authorizes the public contribution.
   (h)   General election contributions. A candidate may receive a public
contribution during the general election for a qualifying contribution received
during the primary election after the candidate has received the maximum public
contribution for the primary election if the candidate is otherwise eligible to
receive public contributions during the general election.
   (i)   Participating candidates not certified to be on ballot. Within 30 days
after the County Board certifies the results of the primary election, a
participating candidate who is not certified to be on the ballot for the
general election shall return any unspent funds in the candidate’s publicly
funded campaign account to the Controller for deposit into the Fund.
   (j)   Repayment of funds mistakenly disbursed. If the Controller mistakenly
disburses a public contribution to a candidate greater than the candidate was
entitled to receive, the candidate shall repay the funds mistakenly disbursed
within five business days after being notified of the mistake. Any unspent
funds returned by a candidate to the Controller after an election may be used
as a credit against any repayment required for public contributions mistakenly
disbursed to the candidate.
(Bill No. 25-23)
§ 1-12-107. Use of public contribution.
   (a)   Expenses incurred during election. A participating candidate may only
use qualifying contributions and public contributions for expenses incurred for
a primary or general election. A participating candidate may not pay in advance
for goods and or services to be used after certification with non-qualifying
contributions received before applying for certification.
   (b)   Complaints. A complaint alleging an impermissible receipt or use of
funds by a participating candidate shall be filed with the Board.
   (c)   Access to financial records. A participating candidate shall provide
the Board with reasonable access to the financial records of the candidate’s
publicly funded campaign account upon request.
   (d)   Return of public contributions. Within 30 days after the Board
certifies the results of the general election, a participating candidate shall
return any unspent funds in the candidate’s publicly funded campaign account to
the Controller for deposit into the Fund.
(Bill No. 25-23)
§ 1-12-108. Withdrawal.
   (a)   When allowed. A participating candidate may withdraw an application
for a public contribution any time before the public contribution is disbursed
to the candidate’s publicly funded campaign account.
   (b)   Process for withdrawal. A participating candidate may withdraw from
participation, if the candidate:
      (1)   files a statement with the Board; and
      (2)   repays the full amount of the public contributions received,
together with the applicable interest established by regulation, to the
Controller for deposit into the Fund.
(Bill No. 25-23)
§ 1-12-109. Applicant, certified, and participating candidate restrictions.
   An applicant, certified, or participating candidate may not:
      (1)   accept a private contribution from a group or organization,
including a political action committee, a corporation, a labor organization, or
a State or local central committee of a political party;
      (2)   accept a private contribution from an individual in an aggregate
greater than $250, or the maximum amount of an eligible contribution, as
adjusted by §
1-12-106(d), during a four year election cycle;
      (3)   after filing a notice of intent with the Board to seek public
contributions, pay for any campaign expense with any campaign finance account
other than the candidate’s publicly funded campaign account;
      (4)   be a member of a slate in any election in which the candidate
receives a public contribution;
      (5)   transfer funds:
         (i)   to the candidate’s publicly funded campaign account from any
other campaign finance entity established for the candidate; or
         (ii)   from the candidate’s publicly funded campaign account to any
other campaign finance entity.
(Bill No. 25-23)
§ 1-12-110. Public Campaign Financing System Commission.
   (a)   Created. There is a Public Campaign Financing System Commission. The
Commission consists of one member from each councilmanic district appointed by
the County Council, and two members appointed by the County Executive. A member
shall serve a four-year term. A member shall continue to serve until a
successor is appointed. A vacancy occurring before the end of a term shall be
filled in the manner of the original appointment for the remainder of a term.
   (b)   Composition. Each member shall be a resident of the County while
serving on the Commission. No more than five members shall be of the same
political party. The Commission shall designate the chair and vice-chair.
   (c)   Compensation. Each member shall serve without compensation, but may be
reimbursed for reasonable expenses subject to appropriation and availability of
funds in the annual budget.
   (d)   Reports. The Commission shall issue a report to the Council no later
than 180 days prior to the end of each fiscal year estimating the funds
necessary to implement the public campaign finance system and recommending an
appropriation to the Public Campaign Financing Fund for the following fiscal
year.
(Bill No. 25-23)
§ 1-12-111. Funding for the Public Campaign Financing Fund.
   (a)   Annual funding. Except as provided in subsection (b), in each fiscal
year, the County Executive shall include in the annual budget and appropriation
ordinance the amount calculated by the Public Campaign Financing System
Commission as necessary to fully fund the public campaign financing system for
the fiscal year.
   (b)   Exception. The County Executive is not required to include the amount
calculated by the Public Campaign Financing System Commission as necessary to
fully fund the public campaign financing system for the fiscal year in the
annual budget and appropriation ordinance if:
      (1)   in the current fiscal year, funds have been or are being
transferred from the Revenue Reserve Fund to the General Fund pursuant to §
4-11-106 of this Code; or
      (2)   not later than 120 days prior to the end of the fiscal year, the
County Executive certifies to the County Council that the County’s fiscal
condition makes it imprudent to include the full amount calculated by the
Public Campaign Financing System Commission as necessary to fully fund the
public campaign financing system for the fiscal year, and the County Council
approves the certification by a vote of not less than five members.
   (c)   Public Campaign Financing Fund. Funds to finance the public campaign
financing system included in the annual budget and appropriation ordinance
shall be included in and disbursed from the Public Campaign Financing Fund.
   (d)   Staffing. The County Executive may provide staff support for the
Commission.
(Bill No. 25-23)
§ 1-12-112. Violations.
   Any violation of this title is a Class B civil offense subject to §
9-2-101 of this Code. Each day a violation exists is a separate offense.
(Bill No. 25-23)
ARTICLE 2. BRANCHES OF COUNTY GOVERNMENT
   Title
      
1.   EXECUTIVE BRANCH
      
2.   LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
      
3.   JUDICIAL BRANCH
TITLE 1. EXECUTIVE BRANCH
Section
Subtitle 1. Composition, Supervision, and Structure
   
2-1-101.   Composition.
   
2-1-102.   General supervision.
   
2-1-103.   Offices and departments.
Subtitle 2. Executive Office
   
2-1-201.   Executive Office.
   
2-1-202.   Chief of Staff.
Subtitle 3. Office of the Chief Administrative Officer
   
2-1-301.   Chief Administrative Officer.
Subtitle 4. Other Offices and Departments – In General
   
2-1-401.   Duties of offices and departments.
   
2-1-402.   Office and department heads.
Subtitle 5. Other Offices and Departments – Special Provisions
   
2-1-501.   Administrative Hearing Officer.
   
2-1-502.   County Attorney.
   
2-1-503.   Aging and Disabilities.
   
2-1-504.   Detention Facilities.
   
2-1-505.   Public Works.
   
2-1-506.   Office of Transportation.
   
2-1-507.   Department of Animal Services.
Subtitle 6. Other Departments and Agencies
   
2-1-601.   Anne Arundel Community College.
   
2-1-602.   Education.
   
2-1-603.   Health.
   
2-1-604.   Libraries.
   
2-1-605.   Social Services.
Charter reference – §§
501 et seq.
SUBTITLE 1. COMPOSITION, SUPERVISION, AND STRUCTURE
§ 2-1-101. Composition.
   The Executive Branch of the County government consists of:
      (1)   the County Executive;
      (2)   the County offices, departments, and other units enumerated in this
title; and
      (3)   the County officers and employees assigned to those offices,
departments, and units.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 1-102) (Bill No. 18-93; Bill No. 83-17)
§ 2-1-102. General supervision.
   The Executive Branch is subject to the general supervision and control of
the County Executive. The County Executive is responsible for the efficient
operation and management of the Executive Branch and for the faithful execution
of the laws by the County agencies, officials, and employees of the Executive
Branch.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 1-103) (Bill No. 18-93; Bill No. 83-17)
§ 2-1-103. Offices and departments.
   (a)   Offices in Executive Branch. There are the following offices in the
Executive Branch:
      (1)   Executive Office;
      (2)   Office of the Chief Administrative Officer;
      (3)   Office of Administrative Hearings;
      (4)   Office of the Budget;
      (5)   Office of Central Services;
      (6)   Office of Emergency Management;
      (7)   Office of Finance;
      (8)   Office of Information Technology;
      (9)   Office of Law;
      (10)   Office of Personnel; and
      (11)   Office of Planning and Zoning; and
      (12)   Office of Transportation.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 1-104)
   (b)   Departments in Executive Branch. There are the following departments
in the Executive Branch:
      (1)   Department of Aging and Disabilities (successor to the Department
of Aging);
      (2)   Department of Animal Services;
      (3)   Department of Detention Facilities (successor to the Office of
Detention Facilities and the Office of Criminal Justice and Corrections);
      (4)   Fire Department;
      (5)   Department of Inspections and Permits;
      (6)   Police Department;
      (7)   Department of Public Works (successor to the Department of Public
Works and the Department of Utilities); and
      (8)   Department of Recreation and Parks.
   (c)   Other entities included in Executive Branch. To the extent not
prohibited by State law, the following are treated as being in the Executive
Branch for the purposes of funding and coordinating State and County services
at the local level:
      (1)   Anne Arundel Community College;
      (2)   Department of Education;
      (3)   Health Department;
      (4)   Department of Libraries; and
      (5)   Department of Social Services.
   (d)   Entities not included in Executive Branch. The following County-funded
State agencies are not assigned to the Executive Branch:
      (1)   Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County;
      (2)   Orphans' Court for Anne Arundel County;
      (3)   Office of the State's Attorney;
      (4)   Office of the Sheriff of Anne Arundel County;
      (5)   Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel County; and
      (6)   Board of Supervisors of Elections for Anne Arundel County.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 1-105) (Bill No. 18-93; Bill No. 51-96; Bill No. 17-00;
Bill No. 20-00; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 40-02; Bill No. 83-17; Bill No. 1-25;
Bill No. 25-25)
SUBTITLE 2. EXECUTIVE OFFICE
§ 2-1-201. Executive Office.
   (a)   Office. There is an Executive Office in the Executive Branch that is
responsible for administrative support to the County Executive, Constituent
Services, government relations, human relations, and public information.
   (b)   Persons assigned. The following are assigned to the Executive Office:
      (1)   assistants to the County Executive;
      (2)   Chief of Staff;
      (3)   Compliance Officer;
      (4)   Governmental Relations Officer;
      (5)   Public Information Officer; and
      (6)   staff as provided in the annual budget.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 3-101) (Bill No. 18-93; Bill No. 51-96; Bill No. 43-99;
Bill No. 83-17)
§ 2-1-202. Chief of Staff.
   (a)   Head of Executive Office. The head of the Executive Office is the
Chief of Staff who is appointed by and serves at the pleasure of the County
Executive. The Chief of Staff reports directly to the County Executive.
   (b)   Duties. The Chief of Staff shall assist the County Executive in
formulating policy, coordinate matters between the County Executive and the
County Council, manage special projects as assigned by the County Executive,
and exercise other authority and perform other duties, responsibilities, and
functions as determined by the County Executive. The County Executive may
assign to the Chief of Staff any or all of the authority, duties,
responsibilities, and functions prescribed in the Charter for the Secretary to
the County Executive and supervisory authority over Executive Branch offices,
departments, and units not assigned to the Chief Administrative Officer.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 3-102) (Bill No. 18-93; Bill No. 51-96; Bill No. 55-13;
Bill No. 55-13)
SUBTITLE 3. OFFICE OF THE CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
§ 2-1-301. Chief Administrative Officer.
   (a)   Office. The Office of the Chief Administrative Officer is responsible
for administrative support to the Chief Administrative Officer.
   (b)   Officer. The Chief Administrative Officer is appointed by and serves
at the pleasure of the County Executive. The Chief Administrative Officer shall
possess the qualifications required by the Charter and be appointed solely on
the basis of the appointee's qualifications for performing the duties of the
office. The Chief Administrative Officer has the authority, duties,
responsibilities, and functions prescribed in the Charter and this Code, except
the Chief Administrative Officer's supervisory authority over Executive Branch
offices, departments, and units is as the County Executive directs.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, §§ 2-101, 2-102) (Bill No. 18-93; Bill No. 51-96; Bill No.
43-99; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 83-17)
Charter reference – §§
504,
505.
SUBTITLE 4. OTHER OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS – IN GENERAL
§ 2-1-401. Duties of offices and departments.
   The Offices of Administrative Hearings, Budget, Central Services, Finance,
Information Technology, Law, Personnel, Planning and Zoning, and
Transportation, and the Departments of Aging and Disabilities, Animal Services,
Detention Facilities, Fire, Inspections and Permits, Police, Public Works, and
Recreation and Parks have the authority, duties, responsibilities, and
functions prescribed in the Charter and this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, §§ 4-101, 4A-101, 5-101, 6-101, 6A-101, 7-101, 7A-101, 8-
101, 9-101, 10-101, 11-101, 12-101, 13-101, 14-101, 15-101) (Bill No. 18-93;
Bill No. 51-96; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 20-00; Bill No. 40-02; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 1-25; Bill No. 25-25)
Charter reference – §§
511 et seq.
§ 2-1-402. Office and department heads.
   The Administrative Hearing Officer, Budget Officer, Central Services
Officer, Controller, Information Technology Officer, County Attorney, Personnel
Officer, Planning and Zoning Officer, Transportation Officer, Director of Aging
and Disabilities, Director of Animal Services, Superintendent of Detention
Facilities, Fire Chief, Director of Inspections and Permits, Chief of Police,
Director of Public Works, and Director of Recreation and Parks are appointed by
and serve at the pleasure of the County Executive. They shall possess the
qualifications required by the Charter and this Code and be appointed solely on
the basis of their qualifications for performing the duties of office.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, §§ 4-102, 4A-102, 5-102, 6-102, 6A-102, 7-102, 7A-102, 8-
102, 9-102, 10-102, 11-102, 12-102, 13-102, 14-102, 15-102) (Bill No. 18-93;
Bill No. 32-96; Bill No. 51-96; Bill No. 43-99; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 20-00;
Bill No. 66-00; Bill No. 51-01; Bill No. 7-02; Bill No. 40-02; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 1-25; Bill No. 25-25)
Charter reference – §§
511 et seq.
SUBTITLE 5. OTHER OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS – SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 2-1-501. Administrative Hearing Officer.
   The Administrative Hearing Officer reports directly to the County Executive
for administrative purposes only. The County Executive may not:
      (1)   supervise, participate in, influence, or attempt to influence a
quasi-judicial matter to be decided by the Administrative Hearing Officer; or
      (2)   review, reverse, modify, or overrule a quasi-judicial decision
rendered by the Administrative Hearing Officer.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 8-102) (Bill No. 18-93; Bill No. 23-04)
§ 2-1-502. County Attorney.
   The County Attorney shall serve and be named as the resident agent for Anne
Arundel County, Maryland.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 7-102) (Bill No. 18-93; Bill No. 51-01; Bill No. 23-04)
§ 2-1-503. Aging and Disabilities.
   The Director of the Department of Aging and Disabilities, after consultation
with and written agreement from the Area Agency on Aging Advisory Council, may
establish fees for use of facilities and participation in programs sponsored by
the Department, but the Director shall provide 90 days' notice of any new fee
or change in a fee by posting an appropriate notice in each location in which a
Department of Aging and Disabilities program takes place.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 14-102) (Bill No. 18-93; Bill No. 32-96; Bill No. 83-17)
§ 2-1-504. Detention Facilities.
   (a)   Qualifications. The Superintendent of the Department of Detention
Facilities shall have:
      (1)   a baccalaureate degree in an appropriate discipline;
      (2)   a minimum of five years of related experience; and
      (3)   demonstrated administrative ability and leadership.
   (b)   Duties. The authority, duties, and functions of the Superintendent
include:
      (1)   operating detention facilities;
      (2)   maintaining public safety through confinement and supervision of
offenders;
      (3)   developing and managing the Department's operating budget;
      (4)   providing employee services; and
      (5)   implementing regulatory requirements and standards.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 13-102) (Bill No. 18-93; Bill No. 43-99; Bill No. 66-00;
Bill No. 83-17)
§ 2-1-505. Public Works.
   The Director of Public Works shall:
      (1)   be an engineering graduate of a college or university of recognized
standing and a registered professional engineer of demonstrated ability in
management of public works; or
      (2)   have an equivalent combination of acceptable education and
experience; and
      (3)   have had responsible charge of engineering works over a period of
at least five years.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 9-102) (Bill No. 18-93; Bill No. 83-17)
§ 2-1-506. Office of Transportation.
   (a)   Office. There is an Office of Transportation in the Executive Branch.
   (b)   Duties. The Office of Transportation shall provide transportation
mobility and planning services to promote a multi-modal transportation network
throughout the County and shall perform other transportation related duties as
periodically assigned by the County Executive.
   (c)   Officer.
      (1)   The Office of Transportation shall be administered by the
Transportation Officer.
      (2)   The Transportation Officer shall be appointed by the County
Executive on the basis of knowledge and experience in planning and development
aspects of transit, as well as the operation of public transit systems.
      (3)   The Transportation Officer shall report directly to the Chief
Administrative Officer.
(Bill No. 1-25)
§ 2-1-507. Department of Animal Services.
   (a)   Department. There is a Department of Animal Services in the Executive
Branch.
   (b)   Duties. The Department of Animal Services shall administer the
provisions of this Code and State and federal laws and regulations related to
animal care, control, and welfare and shall perform other animal welfare
related duties as periodically assigned by the County Executive.
   (c)   Director.
      (1)   The Department of Animal Services shall be administered by the
Director of Animal Services.
      (2)   The Director of Animal Services shall be appointed by the County
Executive on the basis of knowledge and experience in the care, control, and
welfare of animals, as well as the operation of animal care and welfare
facilities.
      (3)   The Director of Animal Services shall report directly to the Chief
Administrative Officer.
(Bill No. 25-25)
SUBTITLE 6. OTHER DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES
§ 2-1-601. Anne Arundel Community College.
   There is an Anne Arundel Community College established under State law.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 20-101) (Bill No. 18-93)
§ 2-1-602. Education.
   There is a Department of Education as provided in the Charter.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 18-101) (Bill No. 18-93)
Charter reference – §
551.
§ 2-1-603. Health.
   (a)   Establishment. There is a Department of Health as provided in the
Charter.
   (b)   Vacancy.
      (1)   Within 60 days after the occurrence of a vacancy, the County
Executive shall submit by resolution to the County Council the name of an
individual meeting the qualifications of § 3-302 of the Health-General Article
of the State Code to be nominated as Health Officer.
      (2)   To identify a nominee, the Personnel Officer shall advertise the
vacancy and include the qualifications for a Health Officer listed in § 3-302
of the Health-General Article of the State Code. The Personnel Officer shall
report to the County Executive and the County Council the steps taken to
publicly advertise the vacancy and recruit qualified candidates for Health
Officer.
   (c)   Referral to State. On approval of the County Council, the name of the
nominee shall be sent to the Secretary of the State Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene for appointment as Health Officer.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 16-101; Art. 2, § 2A-101) (Bill No. 18-93; Bill No. 90-
88; Bill No. 83-17)
Charter reference – §
553.
§ 2-1-604. Libraries.
   There is a Department of Libraries as provided in the Charter.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 17-101) (Bill No. 18-93)
Charter reference – §
552.
§ 2-1-605. Social Services.
   There is a Department of Social Services as provided in the Charter. The
County Executive and the Chair of the Anne Arundel County Board of Social
Services shall evaluate annually the Anne Arundel County Director of Social
Services. The evaluation shall be in writing and reviewed in person with the
Director, the Secretary of Human Resources, and the Anne Arundel County Board
of Social Services.
(1985 Code, Art. 1A, § 19-101) (Bill No. 43-99)
Charter reference – §
554.
TITLE 2. LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
Section
   
2-2-101.   Compensation.
   
2-2-102.   Benefits.
Charter reference – §§
201 et seq.
§ 2-2-101. Compensation.
   (a)   General. Except as provided in subsection (b), the salaries of the
members of the County Council shall be as follows:
      (1)   The Chair of the County Council shall receive, while in that
office, an annual salary as follows:
         (i)   $47,153 beginning the first Monday in December, 2022;
         (ii)   $48,332 beginning the first Monday in December, 2023;
         (iii)   $49,540 beginning the first Monday in December, 2024; and
         (iv)   $50,779 beginning the first Monday in December, 2025.
      (2)   The Vice Chair of the County Council shall receive, while in that
office, an annual salary as follows:
         (i)   $43,271 beginning the first Monday in December, 2022;
         (ii)   $44,353 beginning the first Monday in December, 2023;
         (iii)   $45,461 beginning the first Monday in December, 2024; and
         (iv)   $46,598 beginning the first Monday in December, 2025.
      (3)   Each other member of the County Council shall receive, while in
that office, an annual salary as follows:
         (i)   $42,161 beginning the first Monday in December, 2022;
         (ii)   $43,215 beginning the first Monday in December, 2023;
         (iii)   $44,295 beginning the first Monday in December, 2024; and
         (iv)   $45,402 beginning the first Monday in December, 2025.
   (b)   Limitation. If the rate increases in the annual salaries for the
Councilmembers for a particular year exceed the total rate of any cost-of-
living adjustment provided to classified employees on the NR pay schedule for
that fiscal year, then the salary increases of the Councilmembers shall be
limited to the total cost-of-living adjustment for that fiscal year.
(Bill No. 20-22)
   Charter reference – §
204.
   State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-302.
   Editor's note – The changes to compensation for members of the County
Council made by Bill No. 20-22 apply only for members of the Council elected
during the General Election in November 2022 and thereafter.
§ 2-2-102. Benefits.
   (a)   Retirement plan. Members of the County Council shall participate in
the employees’ retirement plan in accordance with §
5-3-101 of this Code.
   (b)   Health insurance benefit. Members of the County Council may
participate in health programs in the same manner as County employees subject
to the following conditions:
      (1)   Any Council member who is a retired County employee as of the
beginning of their first elected, first appointed or non-consecutive term in
office shall be eligible to participate in the County health insurance program
as a retiree and pay the prevailing retiree premium cost.
      (2)   Any Council member who is not a retired County employee as of the
beginning of their first elected, first appointed, or non-consecutive term in
office on or after December 5, 2022 shall pay 50% of the premium cost of
coverage set by the Personnel Officer for health insurance during their term.
   (c)   Transportation allowance. A member of the County Council shall receive
$450 for transportation expenses per month for use of a personal vehicle to
conduct County business.
   (d)   Technology allowance. A member of the County Council shall receive a
technology allowance of $100 per month to cover the expense of using a personal
computer, tablet, or cellular phone to conduct Council business.
   (e)   Other benefits. Members of the County Council may participate in other
benefit programs available to County employees, including health programs,
insurance programs, tax-sheltered accounts, deferred compensation programs,
credit union services, deductions for charitable purposes, and payroll
deductions relating to these programs. Participation in these programs shall be
in the same manner as in the participation of County employees. Additional
benefit programs authorized for County employees during a councilmanic term of
office may not be made available to members of the County Council until the
beginning of the next term of office, at which time they shall be fully
available unless prohibited in this section. Members of the County Council may
not receive County employee paid leave, or payroll deductions other than those
associated with the items authorized in this section.
   (f)   Expenses incurred outside the County. Subject to approval in the
budget, a member may be reimbursed for actual necessary expenses incurred in
representing the County beyond the County’s geographical boundaries.
   (g)   Other allowances prohibited. Except for the allowances provided for in
this section, a member is not entitled to any other allowance of any kind.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 2-101) (Bill No. 35-86; Bill No. 39-90; Bill No. 56-94;
Bill No. 13-98; Bill No. 64-98; Bill No. 4-02; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 18-10;
Bill No. 23-10; Bill No. 73-10; Bill No. 2-18; Bill No. 20-22)
   Editor's note – The allowances for transportation and technology for members
of the County Council made by Bill No. 2-18 apply only for members of the
Council elected during the General Election in November 2018 and thereafter.
TITLE 3. JUDICIAL BRANCH
Section
Subtitle 1. Circuit Court
   
2-3-101.   Deeds in the Sixth Assessment District.
   
2-3-102.   Conveyances of part of subdivision.
   
2-3-103.   Fee for recordation of record plats.
   
2-3-104.   Additional marriage license fee.
Subtitle 2. Orphans' Court
   
2-3-201.   Hours of operation.
   
2-3-202.   Compensation.
SUBTITLE 1. CIRCUIT COURT
§ 2-3-101. Deeds in the Sixth Assessment District.
   (a)   Submittal to clerk. Before submitting a deed for the conveyance of
real property in the Sixth Assessment District to the Clerk of the Circuit
Court for recordation, a person shall submit the deed to the Finance Office of
the City of Annapolis.
   (b)   Certification by City Finance Office. If all public taxes, assessments
and charges, including water charges, due to the City of Annapolis on the
property for the current and all prior years have been paid, the City Finance
Office shall so certify on the deed.
   (c)   No recordation without certification. The Clerk of the Circuit Court
may not accept a deed for recordation unless the deed has a certification from
the City Finance Office that all water charges for the property being
transferred have been paid.
(1985 Code, Art. 4, § 1-101)
State Code reference – Real Property Article, § 3-104.
§ 2-3-102. Conveyances of part of subdivision.
   Whenever property appears on the Controller's tax roll as a single account
and the person to whom the property is assessed executes a conveyance of less
than the entire property shown on the account, the Controller may not certify
the deed for transfer unless the taxes due on the entire property are paid.
(1985 Code, Art. 4, § 1-102) (Bill No. 83-17)
§ 2-3-103. Fee for recordation of record plats.
   The fee for recording and indexing record plats and copies that are
submitted to the Clerk of the Circuit Court for recording is $20, in addition
to any fee set by State law.
(1985 Code, Art. 4, § 1-201)
§ 2-3-104. Additional marriage license fee.
   In addition to the marriage license fee of $10 required by § 2-404(a) of the
Family Law Article of the State Code, the Clerk of the Circuit Court for Anne
Arundel County shall charge a fee of $45 for each marriage license issued by
the Clerk. The proceeds of the additional fee shall be paid monthly to the
Controller.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 10-104) (Bill No. 50-93; Bill No. 83-17)
Editor's note – Sections 2-3-106 through 2-3-108 were transferred to Article 4,
Title 3A, §§ 4-3A-101 through 4-3A-103 of the Anne Arundel County Code by Bill
No. 29-12, passed May 21, 2012.
SUBTITLE 2. ORPHANS' COURT
§ 2-3-201. Hours of operation.
   The Orphans' Court for the County shall sit for the transaction of business
from 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
(1985 Code, Art. 4, § 3-102)
§ 2-3-202. Compensation.
   (a)   Judge. Except as provided in subsection (b), each Judge of the
Orphans’ Court is entitled to an annual salary as follows:
      (1)   $39,000 for fiscal year 2022;
      (2)   $49,000 for fiscal year 2023;
      (3)   $52,750 for fiscal year 2024;
      (4)   $56,500 for fiscal year 2025; and
      (5)   $60,250 for fiscal year 2026, and each fiscal year thereafter.
   (b)   Chief Judge. The Chief Judge of the Orphans’ Court is entitled to an
annual salary as follows:
      (1)   $39,500 for fiscal year 2022;
      (2)   $54,000 for fiscal year 2023;
      (3)   $57,750 for fiscal year 2024;
      (4)   $61,500 for fiscal year 2025; and
      (5)   $65,250 for fiscal year 2026, and each fiscal year thereafter.
(Bill No. 68-18; Bill No. 60-22)
ARTICLE 3. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND SIMILAR BODIES
   Title
      
1.   AGRICULTURE COMMISSION
      
2.   BOARD OF APPEALS
      
3.   BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF ELECTIONS
      
4.   CORE SERVICE AGENCY
      
5.   COMMISSION ON DISABILITY ISSUES
      
6.   COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AND REPAIR COMMISSION
      
7.    ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
      
8.   HIV/AIDS COMMISSION
      
9.   HOUSING AUTHORITY
      
10.   HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
      
11.   HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
      
12.   ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY PARTNERSHIP FOR CHILDREN, YOUTH, AND FAMILIES
      
13.   MARITIME INDUSTRY ADVISORY BOARD
      
14.   ODENTON TOWN CENTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE
      
15.   PENSION OVERSIGHT COMMISSION
      
16.   POLICE ACCOUNTABILITY BOARD
      
17.   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES REVENUE AUTHORITY
      
18.   RESILIENCE AUTHORITY OF ANNAPOLIS AND ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY
      
19.   SALARY STANDARD COMMISSION
      
20.   SCENIC AND HISTORIC ROADS COMMISSION
      
21.   SELF-INSURANCE FUND COMMITTEE
      
22.   TIPTON AIRPORT AUTHORITY
      
23.   VETERANS AFFAIRS COMMISSION
      
24.   VIDEO LOTTERY FACILITY LOCAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
      
25.   WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
      
26.   YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL
      
27.   ANIMAL WELFARE COUNCIL
   Attorney’s note – Article 3 is not an exclusive listing of all provisions
relating to boards, commissions, and similar bodies. See, for example, §
5-1-107 relating to disability retirement pension review boards and §§
12-4-201 et seq. relating to the Animal Control Commission.
TITLE 1. AGRICULTURE COMMISSION
Section
   
3-1-101.   Established.
   
3-1-102.   Purpose.
   
3-1-103.   Composition.
   
3-1-104.   Appointment and terms of voting members.
   
3-1-105.   Meetings and quorum.
   
3-1-106.   Duties.
   
3-1-107.   Bylaws.
   
3-1-108.   Compensation.
   
3-1-109.   Reports.
   
3-1-110.   Non-limiting.
§ 3-1-101. Established.
   There is an Agriculture Commission to be known as the “Anne Arundel County
Agriculture Commission.”
(Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-1-102. Purpose.
   The purpose of the Commission is to represent the interests of the County’s
agricultural industry and to offer guidance and provide assistance to County
officials, employees, agencies, boards, and commissions in matters concerning
the agricultural industry in Anne Arundel County.
(Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-1-103. Composition.
   (a)   Voting Members. The Commission shall consist of 13 voting members, as
follows:
      (1)   Nine individuals shall own, manage, or operate a working farm in
the County, at least one representing each of the following sectors: livestock,
equine, grain, hay, fruit/viticulture, vegetable, and horticulture. Of these
nine voting members:
         i.   at least three individuals shall also participate in one or more
of the following accessory use activities: agritourism, on-farm alcohol
production, or value-added agriculture (processing);
         ii.   at least three individuals shall represent farm operations
smaller than 50 acres; and
         iii.   at least three individuals shall represent farm operations of
50 acres or above;
      (2)   One shall be a representative of the Anne Arundel County Farm
Bureau;
      (3)   One shall be a representative of the Agricultural Preservation
Advisory Board; and
      (4)   Two individuals shall be involved in Future Farmers of America,
Anne Arundel County Young Farmers, 4-H, or another youth agricultural education
program.
   (b)   Non-voting members. The Commission shall include the following 12 non-
voting, ex-officio members, or their designees:
      (1)   the Deputy Chief Administrative Officer for Land Use;
      (2)   the Health Officer;
      (3)   the County Attorney;
      (4)   the Planning and Zoning Officer;
      (5)   a professional forester from the Department of Inspections and
Permits;
      (6)   the Agricultural and Woodland Preservation Program Administrator in
the Office of Planning and Zoning;
      (7)   the Director of the Department of Inspections and Permits;
      (8)   one representative of the Fire Investigation Bureau of the County
Fire Department;
      (9)   one representative of the Anne Arundel Economic Development
Corporation;
      (10)   one representative of the Anne Arundel County Soil Conservation
District;
      (11)   one consultant, director, or professor in the area of agricultural
education at a college, university, or related non-profit organization within
the State of Maryland; and
      (12)   the University of Maryland Anne Arundel County Agricultural
Extension Agent.
   (c)   Officers. The voting members shall elect a Chair and a Vice Chair from
among the voting members of the Commission, who shall serve a one year term, or
the remainder of the member’s term, whichever is shorter. The Chair, or the
Vice Chair in the absence of the Chair, shall:
      (1)   preside at all meetings of the Commission; meet as requested with
the County Executive and other County representatives;
      (2)   provide information to the Commission;
      (3)   represent the Commission at relevant meetings and functions;
      (4)   oversee preparation of an annual report to the County Executive and
the County Council; and
      (5)   enforce compliance with all applicable County and State laws,
regulations, and procedures, including the Maryland Open Meetings Act, and any
bylaws adopted by the Commission.
(Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-1-104. Appointment and terms of voting members.
   (a)   Generally. Voting members shall be appointed by the County Executive.
   (b)   Terms.
      (1)   The initial terms of newly appointed voting members shall be
staggered as follows: four members shall serve initial terms of two years, four
members shall serve initial terms of three years, and five members shall serve
initial terms of four years.
      (2)   After the expiration of the initial terms, voting members shall
serve four-year terms.
      (3)   A voting member whose term has expired holds over until a successor
is appointed. A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for
the remainder of the term and until a successor is appointed. A voting member
may serve up to three consecutive full terms, and, after a one-year lapse in
service, a voting member is eligible to be reappointed.
   (c)   Removal. Voting members shall serve at the pleasure of the County
Executive and may be removed at any time, with or without cause, including
absence from more than one-half of the meetings held during any 12-month
period.
   (d)   Vacancies. The County Executive shall fill a vacancy for the remainder
of an unexpired term of a member in the manner of the initial appointment.
(Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-1-105. Meetings and quorum.
   (a)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair, or in
their absence, the Vice Chair, or at the request of a majority of the voting
members, as frequently as required to perform its duties, but no less than
quarterly. All meetings shall comply with the Maryland Open Meetings Act and
this Code.
   (b)   Quorum. A quorum consists of a majority of the voting members. An
affirmative vote of a majority of those voting members present at any meeting
at which there is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of the
Commission.
   (c)   Annual Meeting. The Commission shall meet annually with the County
Executive, or their designee, and with the County Council.
(Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-1-106. Duties.
   Among its powers and duties, the Agriculture Commission shall:
   (a)   serve as a unified voice to represent the interests of the County’s
diverse agricultural community, and to seek consensus among the industry’s
diverse geographic and economic interests;
   (b)   provide expert opinion and analysis, based on agricultural industry
and trade positions, of the facts concerning the agricultural industry and
farming in the County and relevant matters pending before the County
administration, the County Council, or any County agency, board, or commission,
including any positive and negative aspects of a particular government action;
and
   (c)   make recommendations to any decision-making body, agency, board,
commission, or official or employee of the County on matters relating to the
agricultural industry and farming in the County.
(Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-1-107. Bylaws.
   The Commission may adopt bylaws to govern procedures for its meetings not
inconsistent with this subtitle.
(Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-1-108. Compensation.
   Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-1-109. Reports.
   On or before January 31 of each year, the Commission shall submit an annual
report to the County Executive and the County Council that sets forth its
accomplishments for the preceding year and the status of plans and progress as
well as goals and priorities for the next year.
(Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-1-110. Non-limiting.
   Except as otherwise prohibited by law, membership on the Commission does not
limit the ability or participation of Commission members to serve as appointed
or volunteer members of the Anne Arundel Economic Development Corporation or
any other appointed boards or commissions.
(Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 2. BOARD OF APPEALS
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
3-2-101.   Appointment.
   
3-2-102.   Compensation.
   
3-2-103.   Complaints against members.
   
3-2-104.   Right of appeal.
   
3-2-105.   Adoption of rules of practice and procedure.
   
3-2-106.   Communicating with Board member while appeal is pending.
Subtitle 2. Zoning Appeals
   
3-2-201.   Appeals of rezoning, critical area reclassifications, and special
exception decisions – Notice in general.
   
3-2-202.   Advertisements.
   
3-2-203.   Notice to community associations and other interested persons and
organizations.
   
3-2-204.   Readvertising and mailing costs.
   
3-2-205.   Standards and procedures for granting or denying rezoning.
   
3-2-206.   Standards and procedures for granting or denying critical area
reclassifications.
   
3-2-207.   Standards for granting variance.
   
3-2-208.   Standards for granting special exceptions.
   Charter reference – §§
601 et seq.
   State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-305.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 3-2-101. Appointment.
   (a)   Appointment and terms. The County Council shall appoint seven members
of the Board of Appeals for terms coterminous with those of the County Council.
   (b)   Restrictions on appointment. The County Council may not appoint to the
Board of Appeals any Councilmember’s spouse or parent, grandparent, uncle,
aunt, child, stepchild, grandchild, brother, sister, niece, or nephew or the
spouse of any of them.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 1-101) (Bill No. 10-98; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-2-102. Compensation.
   (a)   Generally. Each member of the Board of Appeals is entitled to an
annual salary of $5,250.
   (b)   Per diem allowance. In addition to the salary provided in subsection
(a), each member is entitled to a per diem allowance of $125 for each day on
which the member incurs necessary travel and incidental expenses while engaged
in the discharge of official duties. The allowance is subject to the approval
of the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Board of Appeals on a form prepared by
the Clerk to the Board of Appeals.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 1-102) (Bill No. 54-87; Bill No. 10-98; Bill No. 54-98;
Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 57-07; Bill No. 56-15; Bill No. 18-24; Bill No. 94-24)
   Charter reference – §§
601,
605.
§ 3-2-103. Complaints against members.
   (a)   Standards of conduct. Members of the Board of Appeals are expected to
be diligent, industrious, and judicious and participate in all appeals unless
there is good cause for their absence. Board members may not neglect their
duties, engage in misconduct, or attempt to perform their duties while impaired
by the use of alcohol or controlled dangerous substances. They shall avoid
actions that may embarrass or discredit the Board in the eyes of the public and
may not engage in activities that may have the appearance of impropriety. They
may not engage in behavior that may affect the Board’s efficient operation.
   (b)   Affidavit. A person may file an affidavit with the Clerk to the Board
of Appeals charging a member of the Board with a violation of this Code or of
the Board’s rules of practice and procedure. The contents of the affidavit and
the fact that it has been filed may not be made public until a hearing has been
scheduled before the County Council.
   (c)   Appointment of temporary Board members. If more than one Board member
is the subject of an allegation, the Board may request the County Council to
appoint temporary Board members to carry out the Board’s responsibilities under
the provisions of this section.
   (d)   Meeting to discuss allegation. The Chair or, if the Chair is a subject
of an allegation, a Board member designated by a majority of the Board members
not subjects of an allegation shall convene a confidential meeting of the Board
to discuss the allegation.
   (e)   Referral to County Council. If, after the meeting, at least four Board
members determine that there is a reasonable belief that there has been a
violation, the Board shall refer the matter to the County Council for action.
   (f)   Remedies for violations. If, after a review of the facts presented by
the Board, the County Council determines that there has been a violation, the
County Council may reprimand the member, suspend the member from the Board, or
remove the member from the Board.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 1-103) (Bill No. 78-92; Bill No. 10-98; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-2-104. Right of appeal.
   (a)   Generally. A person aggrieved by a decision of the Administrative
Hearing Officer who was a party to the proceedings may appeal the decision to
the Board of Appeals, except that a person who meets the threshold standing
requirements under federal law has standing to appeal a decision of the
Administrative Hearing Officer granting or denying a critical area variance for
development in the buffer to the Board of Appeals.
   (b)   Appeals from decisions of Administrative Hearing Officer. The right of
appeal to the Board of Appeals from a decision of the Administrative Hearing
Officer is granted to the Planning and Zoning Officer and is not limited to
cases in which the County has an interest in the land subject to the decision
of the Administrative Hearing Officer notwithstanding lack of a personal or
property right adversely affected by the decision of the Administrative Hearing
Officer.
   (c)   Other appeals. Other appeals to the Board of Appeals as set forth in §
602 of the Charter may be taken by a person aggrieved by, or an officer,
department, board, commission, or agency of the County affected by, any
decision of an officer or an employee of the executive branch of the County
government.
   (d)   Board of Appeals; panel. In appeals other than appeals from a decision
of the Administrative Hearing Officer granting or denying an application for
rezoning or for a critical area reclassification, the Board of Appeals may sit
in panels of less than six members.
   (e)   Appeals to Circuit Court of critical area variance decisions. A person
who meets the threshold standing requirements under federal law has standing to
file a petition in the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County for judicial
review of a decision of the Board of Appeals granting or denying a critical
area variance for development in the buffer.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 1-104) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 66-91; Bill No. 10-98;
Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 67-08; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 76-13; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-2-105. Adoption of rules of practice and procedure.
   (a)   Adoption. After a public session to consider the proposed rules or
amendments, the Board of Appeals shall adopt and periodically amend rules of
practice and procedure.
   (b)   Notice. The Board of Appeals shall give reasonable notice of the date,
time, and place of the public session and the category of rule or amendment to
be considered at the session.
   (c)   Review of rules. In addition to periodically amending the rules as the
need arises, the Board of Appeals shall conduct, in public sessions, a
comprehensive review of its rules within 60 days of the commencement of the
third year of its term.
   (d)   Submission to County Council. Whenever the Board of Appeals submits a
rule or an amendment to a rule to the County Council for approval, the
submission shall specify the date of adoption by the Board and the purpose to
be achieved by the rule or amendment.
   (e)   Publication. After they are approved by the County Council, the rules
of the Board of Appeals shall be published as an appendix to this Code and
shall be supplemented and annotated as appropriate.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 1-105) (Bill No. 10-98; Bill No. 94-24)
   Charter reference – §
603.
§ 3-2-106. Communicating with Board member while appeal is pending.
   A person may not communicate ex parte with a member of the Board of Appeals
regarding an appeal while the appeal is pending.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 1-106) (Bill No. 10-98; Bill No. 94-24)
   State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-305.
SUBTITLE 2. ZONING APPEALS
§ 3-2-201. Appeals of rezoning, critical area reclassifications, and special
exception decisions – Notice in general.
   The Board of Appeals shall transmit to the Purchasing Agent and the Office
of the County Executive written confirmation of the date scheduled for each
appeal to be heard relating to rezonings, critical area reclassifications, or
special exceptions. The confirmation or notice shall be transmitted within
three days following the scheduling of a hearing. Each appeal shall be
scheduled sufficiently in advance to meet the advertising and mailing
requirements of §§
3-2-202 and
3-2-203.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 2-101) (Bill No. 66-91; Bill No. 67-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-2-202. Advertisements.
   (a)   Publication. Whenever the law requires advertisement of notice of an
appeal to the Board of Appeals that relates to a rezoning, critical area
reclassification, or a special exception, the advertisement shall be published
in the manner specified in this section.
   (b)   Distribution of publication. The advertisement shall be published in
the newspaper or newspapers published in the County that, in the judgment of
the Purchasing Agent, will result in the widest distribution of the notice to
the residents of the County. In determining the newspaper or newspapers in
which to publish the advertisement, the Purchasing Agent may not consider the
advertising costs of competing newspapers unless the Purchasing Agent
determines that the competing newspapers would provide equal distribution of
notice.
   (c)   Compliance with law. The advertisement shall be published at the times
and in the newspaper or newspapers required by other provisions of law relating
to the advertising of notice of appeals that relate to rezonings, critical area
reclassifications, and special exceptions.
   (d)   Form and information. The advertisement shall be a display
advertisement and shall be in substantially the form and contain the
information specified below:
NOTICE OF HEARINGS
REZONINGS, CRITICAL AREA RECLASSIFICATIONS,
AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY, MARYLAND
   The following case(s) will be heard before the Board of Appeals:
   Address of the subject property (if available)
   Case and file numbers (including case number before the Administrative
Hearing Officer)
   Name of applicant
   Nature of appeal
   Location of property (including tax assessment district and nearest
intersecting roadway)
   Date, time, and location of hearing
   Further information on the case(s) listed above may be obtained from the
Office of Planning and Zoning (telephone number).
   (e)   Certification to Board of Appeals. The Purchasing Agent shall certify,
in writing, to the Board of Appeals that the advertisement has been published
in accordance with this section. The written certification shall be prima facie
evidence that the advertisement has been published in accordance with this
section.
   (f)   Certification condition precedent to hearing. The Board of Appeals may
not conduct a hearing on an appeal that relates to a rezoning, critical area
reclassification, or a special exception unless the Purchasing Agent certifies
that advertisement of the appeal has been published in accordance with this
section.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 2-102) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 66-91; Bill No. 67-08;
Bill No. 93-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-2-203. Notice to community associations and other interested persons and
organizations.
   (a)   Maintenance of list. The Office of the County Executive shall maintain
a list of all community associations in the County and all other persons and
organizations that request to receive the mailing described in this section.
   (b)   Notice to entities on list. At least two weeks before an appeal that
relates to a rezoning, critical area reclassification, or a special exception
is heard by the Board of Appeals, the Office of the County Executive shall
mail, either by U.S. Postal Service or by e-mail, to each community
association, person, and organization on the list the same information
advertised in accordance with §
3-2-202.
   (c)   Certification of mailing. The County Executive or a designee of the
County Executive shall certify, in writing, to the Board of Appeals that the
information has been mailed in accordance with this section. The written
certification shall be prima facie evidence that the information has been
mailed in accordance with this section.
   (d)   Certification condition precedent to hearing. The Board of Appeals may
not conduct a hearing on an appeal that relates to a rezoning, critical area
reclassification, or a special exception unless the County Executive or a
designee of the County Executive certifies that notification has been mailed in
accordance with this section.
   (e)   Notice – rezoning. For an appeal from a decision of the Administrative
Hearing Officer granting or denying an application for rezoning to a mixed use
district in accordance with §
3-2-205(i), the Board of Appeals shall send notice containing information about
the case and the date, time, and location of the hearing to the councilmember
for the Councilmanic District of the property to be affected and, if the
property abuts another Councilmanic District, the councilmember for any
abutting Councilmanic District. This notice may be given by e-mail.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 2-103) (Bill No. 66-91; Bill No. 67-08; Bill No. 65-13;
Bill No. 94-24; Bill No. 75-24)
§ 3-2-204. Readvertising and mailing costs.
   The Board of Appeals may require a person to pay the costs of readvertising
and mailing necessitated by the postponement of an appeal that has previously
been advertised.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 2-104) (Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-2-205. Standards and procedures for granting or denying rezoning.
   (a)   Rezonings. Rezonings shall be granted or denied in accordance with
appropriate zoning regulations, but a rezoning may not be granted except on the
basis of an affirmative finding that:
      (1)   there was a mistake in the zoning map or the character of the
neighborhood has changed to such an extent that the zoning map should be
changed;
      (2)   the new zoning classification conforms to the General Development
Plan in relation to land use, number of dwelling units or type and intensity of
nonresidential structures, and location;
      (3)   there is compatibility between the uses of the property as
reclassified and the surrounding land uses, so as to promote the health,
safety, and welfare of present and future residents of the County; and
      (4)   for property located in the critical area, the uses allowed in the
proposed zoning classification are compatible with the critical area land use
designation and development standards for the property and the Critical Area
Commission staff has recommended approval of the rezoning if the basis for the
rezoning is that the character of the neighborhood has changed to such an
extent that the zoning map should be changed.
   (b)   Granting of rezoning. The granting of a rezoning does not:
      (1)   operate as a waiver of any law or regulation for development of the
rezoned property; or
      (2)   constitute a commitment on the part of any agency or department to
provide roads, sewers, or water service to the property.
   (c)   Authority of Board of Appeals. Notwithstanding any provision to the
contrary, the Board of Appeals may:
      (1)   impose any additional restrictions, conditions, or limitations on a
new zoning classification as it considers appropriate to preserve, improve, or
protect the general character and design of the lands and improvements being
rezoned, or of the surrounding or adjacent lands and improvements; and
      (2)   retain or reserve the right to approve or disapprove the design of
buildings, construction, landscaping, or other improvements and changes made or
to be made on the subject land to ensure conformity with the intent and purpose
of this title and
Article 18 of this Code.
   (d)   Burden of proof. The applicant for a rezoning has the burden of proof,
including the burden of going forward with the evidence and the burden of
persuasion, with respect to any question of fact.
   (e)   Waiver of filing fee. The Office of Planning and Zoning need not pay
the filing fee in cases in which that Office appeals a decision of the
Administrative Hearing Officer to the Board of Appeals.
   (f)   Evidence of mistake or a change in the character of a neighborhood.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (f)(2), the use of property by or
on behalf of a unit of government not subject to zoning regulations in a manner
that otherwise would be contrary to zoning regulations is not evidence of a
mistake in zoning or a change in the character of a neighborhood.
      (2)   The construction or closing of a road may constitute evidence of a
change in the character of a neighborhood.
   (g)   Evidence of a mistake in the zoning map. Neither the approval of a
special exception for a suburban community center nor the development of a
center may be evidence of or constitute a mistake in the zoning map then
existing or a change in the character of the neighborhood.
   (h)   Restrictions.
      (1)   A lot located in an Odenton Town Center Zoning District may be
rezoned only to another Odenton Town Center Zoning District, and a lot that is
not located in an Odenton Town Center Zoning District may not be
administratively rezoned to an Odenton Town Center Zoning District.
      (2)   A lot that is not designated as a mixed use planned land use in the
General Development Plan or a region plan may not be administratively rezoned
to a mixed use district. If the General Development Plan or a region plan
adopted between January 1, 2025, and December 31, 2026, recommends a sector
plan or study for a lot designated as a mixed use planned land use, the lot may
not be administratively rezoned to a mixed use district unless the sector plan
or study is completed and recommends a rezoning to a mixed use district. If a
region plan adopted between May 6, 2024, and December 31, 2024, does not
recommend a sector plan or study for a lot designated as a mixed use planned
land use, a sector plan or study shall be required before an administrative
rezoning may be considered, and the lot may not be administratively rezoned to
a mixed use district unless the sector plan or study is completed and
recommends a rezoning to a mixed use district.
   (i)   Mixed use designation prior to a certain date. If a lot was not zoned
as part of a mixed use district in a comprehensive zoning ordinance adopted
between May 6, 2024, and December 31, 2026, and was designated as mixed use
planned land use in a region plan adopted between May 6, 2024, and December 31,
2026, the lot may be administratively rezoned to a mixed use district if the
requirements of subsection (h)(2) are met. The designation of mixed use planned
land use in the General Development Plan or a region plan and a recommendation
of rezoning to a mixed use district in a required sector plan or study shall
satisfy the requirement of subsection (a)(1).
   (j)   Mixed use application prior to a certain date. An administrative
rezoning to a mixed use district for which an application is filed under
Article 18, Title 16 before June 12, 2025 shall be governed by the law as it
existed prior to June 12, 2025.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 2-105) (Bill No. 49-88; Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 35-92;
Bill No. 36-96; Bill No. 20-00; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 84-23;
Bill No. 94-24; Bill No. 75-24; Bill No. 18-25)
§ 3-2-206. Standards and procedures for granting or denying critical area
reclassifications.
   (a)   Generally. Critical area reclassifications shall be granted or denied
in accordance with compatibility with the underlying zoning district, but may
not be granted except on the basis of an affirmative finding that:
      (1)   there was a mistake in the approved critical area map based on land
uses or natural features in existence on December 1, 1985, provided that a
property located within 2,000 feet of public water or sewer may not be
considered to have public water or sewer for purposes of reclassification and
may not be considered to be a mapping mistake;
      (2)   the proposed critical area classification conforms to the State and
County Critical Area mapping criteria;
      (3)   the proposed critical area classification conforms to the
environmental goals and standards of the General Development Plan;
      (4)   there is compatibility between the uses of the property as
reclassified and surrounding land uses, so as to promote the health, safety,
and welfare of present and future residents of the County and to promote
effective environmental land use management; and
      (5)   the applicant has notified the Critical Area Commission of the
proposed critical area reclassification in writing at least 30 days before any
hearing.
   (b)   Limitations. The granting of a critical area reclassification does
not:
      (1)   operate as a waiver of any law or regulation for development of the
property; or
      (2)   constitute a commitment on the part of any agency or department to
provide roads, sewers, or water service to the property.
   (c)   Authority of Board of Appeals. Notwithstanding any provision to the
contrary, the Board of Appeals may:
      (1)   impose any additional restrictions, conditions, or limitations on a
new critical area classification as it considers appropriate to preserve,
improve, or protect the general character and design of the lands and
improvements, or of the surrounding or adjacent lands and improvements; and
      (2)   retain or reserve the right on the reclassification of land in the
critical area to approve or disapprove the design of buildings, construction,
landscaping, or other improvements and changes made or to be made on the land
to ensure conformity with the intent and purpose of this title and
Article 18 of this Code.
   (d)   Burden of proof. The applicant for a critical area reclassification
has the burden of proof, including the burden of going forward with the
evidence and the burden of persuasion, with respect to any question of fact.
   (e)   Waiver of filing fee. The Office of Planning and Zoning need not pay
the filing fee in cases in which that Office appeals a decision of the
Administrative Hearing Officer to the Board of Appeals.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 2-106) (Bill No. 66-91; Bill. No. 49-03; Bill No. 4-05;
Bill No. 67-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-2-207. Standards for granting variance.
   (a)   Generally. The Board of Appeals may vary or modify the provisions of
Article 18 of this Code when it is alleged that practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships prevent carrying out the strict letter of that article,
provided the spirit of law shall be observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done. A variance may be granted only upon an affirmative
finding that:
      (1)   because of certain unique physical conditions, such as
irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size and shape, or exceptional
topographical conditions peculiar to and inherent in the particular lot, there
is no reasonable possibility of developing the lot in strict conformance with
Article 18 of this Code; or
      (2)   because of exceptional circumstances other than financial
considerations, the grant of a variance is necessary to avoid practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardship, and to enable the applicant to develop
the lot.
   (b)   Variances in the critical area or a bog protection area. For a
property located in the critical area or a bog protection area, a variance to
the requirements of the County critical area program or bog protection program
may be granted only upon an affirmative written finding that:
      (1)   because of certain unique physical conditions, such as exceptional
topographical conditions peculiar to and inherent in the particular lot, or
irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size and shape, strict
implementation of the County’s critical area program would result in an
unwarranted hardship, as that term is defined in the Natural Resources Article,
§ 8-1808, of the State Code, to the applicant;
      (2)   (i)   a literal interpretation of COMAR, Title 27, Criteria for
Local Critical Area Program Development, or the County critical area program
and related ordinances will deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by
other properties in similar areas, as permitted in accordance with the
provisions of the critical area program, within the critical area; or
         (ii)   the County’s bog protection program will deprive the applicant
of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in similar areas within the bog
protection area of the County.
      (3)   the granting of a variance will not confer on an applicant any
special privilege that would be denied by:
         (i)   COMAR, Title 27, or the County critical area program to other
lands or structures within the County critical area; or
         (ii)   the County’s bog protection program to other lands or
structures within a bog protection area;
      (4)   that the variance request:
         (i)   is not based on conditions or circumstances that are the result
of actions by the applicant, including the commencement of development activity
before an application for a variance was filed; and
         (ii)   does not arise from any condition relating to land or building
use on any neighboring property;
      (5)   that the granting of the variance:
         (i)   will not adversely affect water quality or adversely impact
fish, wildlife, or plant habitat within the County’s critical area or a bog
protection area; and
         (ii)   will be in harmony with the general spirit and intent of the
County critical area program or bog protection program;
      (6)   the applicant for a variance to allow development in the 100-foot
upland buffer has maximized the distance between the bog and each structure,
taking into account natural features and the replacement of utilities, and has
met the requirements of §
17-9-208 of this Code; and
      (7)   the applicant, by competent and substantial evidence, has overcome
the presumption contained in the Natural Resources Article, § 8-1808, of the
State Code.
   (c)   Conditions for granting a variance in the critical area.
      (1)   For a property with an outstanding violation the granting of a
variance in the critical area under subsection (b) shall be conditioned on the
applicant completing the following within 90 days of the date of decision, as
applicable:
         (i)   obtaining an approved mitigation or restoration plan;
         (ii)   completing the abatement measures in accordance with the County
critical area program; and
         (iii)   paying any civil fines assessed and finally adjudicated.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (c)(1), the Office
of Planning and Zoning may extend the time for abatement to the next planting
season because of adverse planting conditions. An applicant may also be granted
a 180 day extension to satisfy the conditions of a variance upon timely
application to the Planning and Zoning Officer and good cause shown.
   (d)   Lapse. Any critical area variance granted for a property with an
outstanding violation shall lapse by operation of law if the conditions of
subsection (c)(1) are not satisfied within 90 days or as extended.
   (e)   Required findings. A variance may not be granted under subsection (a)
or (b) unless the Board finds that:
      (1)   the variance is the minimum variance necessary to afford relief;
      (2)   the granting of the variance will not:
         (i)   alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in
which the lot is located;
         (ii)   substantially impair the appropriate use or development of
adjacent property;
         (iii)   reduce forest cover in the limited and resource conservation
areas of the critical area;
         (iv)   be contrary to acceptable clearing and replanting practices
required for development in the critical area or bog protection area; or
         (v)   be detrimental to the public welfare.
   (f)   Restrictions relating to the Odenton Town Center Master Plan. A
variance may not be granted to the provisions of the Odenton Town Center Master
Plan.
(1985 Code, Art. 3, § 2-107) (Bill No. 61-93; Bill No. 12-00; Bill No. 105-01;
Bill No. 69-03; Bill No. 65-04; Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 93-12;
Bill No. 18-18; Bill No. 64-23; Bill No. 84-23; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-2-208. Standards for granting special exceptions.
   (a)   Requirements. A special exception use may be granted only if the Board
of Appeals makes each of the following affirmative findings:
      (1)   The use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or
welfare;
      (2)   The location, nature, and height of each building, wall, and fence,
the nature an extent of landscaping on the site, and the location, size,
nature, and intensity of each phase of the use and its access roads will be
compatible with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in
which it is located;
      (3)   Operations related to the use will be no more objectionable with
regard to noise, fumes, vibration, or light to nearby properties than
operations in other uses allowed under this article;
      (4)   The use at the location proposed would not have any adverse effects
above and beyond those inherently associated with the use irrespective of its
locating within the zoning district;
      (5)   The proposed use will not conflict with an existing or programmed
public facility, public service, school, or road;
      (6)   The proposed use has the written recommendations and comments of
the Health Department;
      (7)   The proposed use is consistent with the County General Development
Plan;
      (8)   The applicant has presented sufficient evidence of public need for
the use;
      (9)   The applicant has presented sufficient evidence that the use will
meet and be able to maintain adherence to the criteria for the specific use;
      (10)   The application will conform to the critical area criteria for
sites located in the critical area; and
      (11)   The administrative site plan demonstrates the applicant’s ability
to comply with the requirements of the Landscape Manual.
   (b)   Phasing of development. If phasing of development is proposed for a
use allowed by special exception and the Planning and Zoning Officer has
approved a plan for phasing of development, the Board of Appeals may allow
phasing pursuant to the approved plan as a condition of special exception
approval.
(Bill No. 18-18; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 3. BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF ELECTIONS
Section
   
3-3-101.   Establishment of election districts.
   
3-3-102.   Definitions.
   
3-3-103.   Scope.
   
3-3-104.   Form of petition.
   
3-3-105.   Place and time of filing petitions.
   
3-3-106.   Statement of contributions and expenditures.
   
3-3-107.   Effect of disqualification or invalidity.
   
3-3-108.   Verification by Board.
   
3-3-109.   Certification by County Council.
   
3-3-110.   Notice and publication.
   
3-3-111.   Unlawful acts.
   State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 9-205.
§ 3-3-101. Establishment of election districts.
   The County is divided into seven election districts that shall conform to
the seven councilmanic districts established pursuant to §§
206 and
207 of the Charter.
(1985 Code, Art. 5, § 1-101) (Bill No. 94-24)
   State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-306.
§ 3-3-102. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Board” means the Board of Supervisors of Elections of Anne Arundel
County.
      (2)   “Contribution” means the gift, transfer, or promise of a gift or
transfer of money, goods, services, or other things of value.
      (3)   “Expenditure” means any gift, transfer, disbursement, or promise of
money or other thing of value.
      (4)   “Person” includes a partisan organization, political agent,
political committee, party, or political party, as defined by the Election Law
Article, § 1-101, of the State Code, and an organization or association that
promotes or assists in the promotion of petitioning an ordinance or part of an
ordinance to referendum.
      (5)   “Petition” means a paper containing the signatures of registered
voters requesting that an ordinance or part of an ordinance be submitted to the
voters for approval or rejection.
(1985 Code, Art. 5, § 2-101) (Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-3-103. Scope.
   This title applies to “The Referendum” established by §
308 of the Charter.
(1985 Code, Art. 5, § 2-102) (Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-3-104. Form of petition.
   (a)   Generally. In addition to the requirements of §
308(b) of the Charter, a petition shall be prepared in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   (b)   Signatures; required information. Each signature shall be followed by
the residence of the signator, the election district and precinct where the
signator is registered as a voter, and, immediately below the signature either
printed or typed, the name of the signator. If the signator’s residence differs
from the residence recorded in the voter registration records, the signator
shall state both residence addresses together with the date on which the
current residence was assumed.
   (c)   Form of petition. Each sheet of paper forming part of a petition shall
bear the text of the ordinance or part of the ordinance that is the subject of
the petition.
   (d)   Signature on both sides of paper. Signatures may appear on both sides
of a sheet of paper forming part of a petition. On the side of a sheet of paper
that does not bear the text of the ordinance or the part of the ordinance there
shall be a notice that the text of the ordinance or part of the ordinance that
is the subject of the petition appears on the reverse side of the page. The
notice shall be no smaller than eight-point bold type.
   (e)   Withdrawal of signature. A signator may not withdraw a signature after
the petition has been filed in accordance with §
3-3-105.
(1985 Code, Art. 5, § 2-103) (Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-3-105. Place and time of filing petitions.
   Referendum petitions shall be filed with the Board in accordance with §
308(a) of the Charter.
(1985 Code, Art. 5, § 2-104) (Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-3-106. Statement of contributions and expenditures.
   (a)   Generally. At the time of filing a petition with the Board, the person
who files the petition shall submit with it a statement, certified by the
person filing the petition, listing:
      (1)   the name and post office address of each person who made a
contribution to the expense of the petition and the amount of the contribution;
and
      (2)   the name and post office address of each person to whom and for
what service an expenditure was paid or promised on account of the petition or
which is to be paid.
   (b)   Certified statement required. If the certified statement is not filed
with the petition, the Board may not accept the petition.
   (c)   Proceeding to test validity of a petition; party. At a proceeding to
test the validity of a petition, the person certifying the statement required
in this section shall be a party. The proceeding shall be filed in the Circuit
Court of the County.
   (d)   Compliance with State law. If a person is required by State law to
file reports of contributions and expenditures, compliance with those
requirements shall constitute compliance with this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 5, § 2-105) (Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-3-107. Effect of disqualification or invalidity.
   Disqualification of a petitioner or the invalidation of a signature does not
affect or impair other portions of the page on which the signature appears.
(1985 Code, Art. 5, § 2-106) (Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-3-108. Verification by Board.
   The Board shall verify the registration of each signator, the form of the
petition, and the form of the statement of contributions and expenditures. The
Board shall report the results of its verification investigation to the County
Council. The County shall pay the expenses of the verification.
(1985 Code, Art. 5, § 2-107) (Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-3-109. Certification by County Council.
   (a)   Invalid petition. On receipt of a report from the Board that a
petition is invalid and does not comply with this title and with other
applicable laws and authority, the County Council shall note the report among
its minutes and the question may not be certified to the Board.
   (b)   Valid petition. On receipt of a report from the Board that a petition
is valid, the County Council shall:
      (1)   certify the question to the Board under the Election Law Article, §
7-103, of the State Code; and
      (2)   specify the form in which the question shall appear on the ballot
under the Election Law Article, § 7-103, of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 5, § 2-108) (Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-3-110. Notice and publication.
   (a)   Notice. The County Executive shall make available to the press and the
public a reasonable number of copies of the question following its
certification to the Board.
   (b)   Publication. The County Executive shall cause the ordinance or part of
the ordinance petitioned to referendum to be published in at least two
newspapers of general circulation in the County for two successive weeks prior
to the election at which the question is to be considered. The initial
publication shall be made at least 30 days and not more than 60 days before the
election.
(1985 Code, Art. 5, § 2-109) (Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-3-111. Unlawful acts.
   A person may not:
      (1)   knowingly or willfully circulate, publish, or exhibit any false
statement or representation concerning the contents, purport, or effect of a
petition for the purpose of obtaining a signature to the petition or of
persuading a person to sign it;
      (2)   refer to the Board a petition to which is attached, appended, or
subscribed a signature which the person knows to be false, fraudulent, or not
the genuine signature of the person purporting to sign the petition or the
person whose name is attached, appended, or subscribed in the petition;
      (3)   make a false affidavit on a petition;
      (4)   give, pay, or receive money or other valuable consideration or
inducement for signing a petition or for securing a signature on a petition;
      (5)   circulate or cause to circulate a petition, knowing it contains
false, forged, or fictitious names or signatures;
      (6)   knowingly sign a petition more than once; or
      (7)   sign a petition knowing that the signator lacks the requisite
qualifications.
(1985 Code, Art. 5, § 2-110) (Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 4. CORE SERVICE AGENCY
Section
   
3-4-101.   Core service agency.
§ 3-4-101. Core service agency.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (2)   “Core service agency” means the designated entity that is
responsible for planning, managing, and monitoring of publicly funded mental
health services.
      (3)   “Secretary” means the State Secretary of Health and Mental Hygiene.
   (b)   Private, nonprofit corporation. The County Executive may enter into an
agreement with a private, nonprofit corporation as the core service agency for
the County.
   (c)   Agreement with core service agency. The agreement:
      (1)   shall require the corporation to obtain and retain the Secretary’s
approval of its designation as the core service agency for the County;
      (2)   shall require the core service agency to comply with all applicable
provisions of State law;
      (3)   shall require the corporation to submit an annual report to the
County Executive and the County Council regarding its activities;
      (4)   shall authorize the County Controller and the County Auditor to
audit, individually or together, all corporate records;
      (5)   shall authorize the County to terminate the agreement on 90 days’
written notice to the Secretary and the corporation; and
      (6)   may contain any other provision not inconsistent with those
required by this section or any other law.
(Bill No. 65-10; Bill No. 94-24)
   State Code reference – Health-General Article, §§ 10-1201 et seq.
TITLE 5. COMMISSION ON DISABILITY ISSUES
Section
   
3-5-101.   Established.
   
3-5-102.   Purpose.
   
3-5-103.   Composition.
   
3-5-104.   Term of members.
   
3-5-105.   Chair.
   
3-5-106.   Meetings and quorum.
   
3-5-107.   Rules and regulations.
   
3-5-108.   Compensation.
   
3-5-109.   Powers and duties.
   
3-5-110.   Reports.
§ 3-5-101. Established.
   There is a Disabilities Commission to be known as the “Anne Arundel County
Commission on Disability Issues.”
(Bill No. 57-06; Bill No. 65-10; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-5-102. Purpose.
   The purpose of the Commission is to promote and enhance the quality of life
for individuals with disabilities by advising the County Executive and the
County Council on the coordination and development of government policies,
programs, services, and allocation of resources for individuals with
disabilities and by proposing the means to meet the needs of individuals with
disabilities.
(Bill No. 57-06; Bill No. 65-10; Bill No. 10-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-5-103. Composition.
   (a)   Number and type of members. The Commission consists of at least 22
members appointed by the County Executive. Of the members:
      (1)   fifteen shall be voting members selected from the following groups:
individuals with a disability, family members of individuals with a disability,
representatives of organizations or agencies that provide services for or
represent individuals with disabilities, persons interested in improving the
quality of life for individuals with disabilities, or persons having expertise
in matters pertaining to individuals with disabilities; and
      (2)   at least seven shall be non-voting members selected from any of the
following entities and agencies or any other entity or agency that the County
Executive deems appropriate: Anne Arundel County ADA Office, Department of
Aging and Disabilities, Department of Inspections and Permits, Department of
Public Works, Department of Recreation and Parks, Department of Social
Services, Office of Planning and Zoning, Department of Health, County Council,
and Police Department; Anne Arundel County Board of Education; Anne Arundel
Community College; Anne Arundel County Mental Health Agency, Inc.; the Anne
Arundel County Public Library; the State Department of Rehabilitation Services;
and the City of Annapolis.
   (b)   Residency. Each voting member shall be a resident of the County.
   (c)   ADA Coordinator. The ADA Coordinator in the Department of Aging and
Disabilities shall serve as the liaison between the Commission and the County
Executive and the Department of Aging and Disabilities. The ADA Coordinator
shall provide administrative assistance to the Commission.
(Bill No. 57-06; Bill No. 11-08; Bill No. 65-10; Bill No. 10-20; Bill No. 94-
24)
§ 3-5-104. Term of members.
   (a)   Generally. 
      (1)   Of the voting members, five shall be appointed for initial terms of
three years, five shall be appointed for initial terms of two years, and five
shall be appointed for initial terms of one year. After the expiration of the
initial terms, voting members shall be appointed for terms of three years.
      (2)   Non-voting members shall serve at the pleasure of the County
Executive.
      (3)   Voting members shall serve a maximum of two consecutive terms.
   (b)   Expiration. A member whose term has expired holds over until a
successor is appointed.
   (c)   Vacancies. The County Executive shall fill a vacancy for the remainder
of an unexpired term of a member.
   (d)   Removal. A member of the Commission may be removed by the County
Executive for cause, including absence from 25% or more of the schedule
meetings and hearings of the Commission during any 12-month period.
(Bill No. 57-06; Bill No. 65-10; Bill No. 10-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-5-105. Chair.
   The Chair shall be selected by the County Executive.
(Bill No. 57-06; Bill No. 65-10; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-5-106. Meetings and quorum.
   (a)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair, or at
the request of eight voting members, as frequently as required to perform its
duties, but no less than six times a year.
   (b)   Quorum. A quorum consists of a majority of the voting members. An
affirmative vote of a majority of the voting members present at any meeting at
which there is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of the Commission.
(Bill No. 57-06; Bill No. 65-10; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-5-107. Rules and regulations.
   The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern procedures for
its meetings.
(Bill No. 57-06; Bill No. 65-10; Bill No. 10-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-5-108. Compensation.
   Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Bill No. 57-06; Bill No. 65-10; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-5-109. Powers and duties.
   Among its powers and duties, the Commission shall:
      (1)    review available services and activities for individuals with
disabilities, gather data regarding their needs, and review reports and
publications of governmental agencies that provide services and support to
individuals with disabilities;
      (2)   review County, State and federal legislation that may impact
individuals with disabilities and make recommendations to the County Executive
regarding the legislation;
      (3)   provide direct communication among individuals with disabilities,
private and public organizations, and the general public regarding County
programs and services for individuals with disabilities as requested by the
Department of Aging and Disabilities;
      (4)   assist interagency planning groups and special task forces to
identify and assess needs of individuals with disabilities as requested by the
Department of Aging and Disabilities;
      (5)   identify common barriers to provision of services to individuals
with disabilities in the County;
      (6)   advise the County Executive on the coordination of services among
all public and private agencies, departments, and organizations, which provide
services and programs to individuals with disabilities; and
      (7)   identify and recommend to the County Executive sources of State and
federal financial assistance available for the purpose of expanding or
improving services and programs for individuals with disabilities.
(Bill No. 57-06; Bill No. 65-10; Bill No. 10-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-5-110. Reports.
   On or before January 31 of each year, the Commission shall submit a report
to the County Executive and the County Council setting forth its
accomplishments for the preceding year and its goals for the forthcoming year.
(Bill No. 57-06; Bill No. 65-10; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 6. COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AND REPAIR COMMISSION
Section
   
3-6-101.   Community Reinvestment and Repair Commission.
   
3-6-102.   Purpose.
   
3-6-103.   Membership.
   
3-6-104.   Terms of voting members.
   
3-6-105.   Chair.
   
3-6-106.   Meetings; quorum.
   
3-6-107.   Compensation.
   
3-6-108.   Duties.
§ 3-6-101. Community Reinvestment and Repair Commission.
   There is an Anne Arundel County Community Reinvestment and Repair
Commission.
(Bill No. 57-23; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-6-102. Purpose.
   The purpose of the Commission is to make recommendations for use of the
funds in the Community Reinvestment and Repair Special Revenue Fund.
(Bill No. 57-23; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-6-103. Membership.
   (a)   Voting members.
      (1)   The Commission consists of no more than 13 voting members appointed
by the County Executive as follows:
         (i)   two residents of the City of Annapolis, one nominated by the
Mayor of the City of Annapolis and one nominated by the Annapolis City Council;
         (ii)   two residents of the County nominated by the County Council;
and
         (iii)   no more than nine residents of the County chosen by the County
Executive.
      (2)   The voting membership shall include a diversity of experience and
expertise, and at least one voting member from each of the following
categories:
         (i)   workforce or economic development;
         (ii)   reentry services;
         (iii)   health, including public health;
         (iv)   education;
         (v)   justice, equity, and diversity;
         (vi)   community organization; and
         (vii)   social work.
   (b)    Non-voting ex officio members. The Commission shall include one
representative of each of the following as non-voting ex officio members:
      (1)   Anne Arundel Workforce Development Corporation;
      (2)   Anne Arundel Economic Development Corporation;
      (3)   Arundel Community Development Services, Inc.;
      (4)   Anne Arundel County Board of Education;
      (5)   Anne Arundel County Department of Social Services;
      (6)   the Health, Equity, and Racial Justice Division of the Anne Arundel
County Department of Health;
      (7)   Anne Arundel Community College; and
      (8)   County Office of Equity and Human Rights.
(Bill No. 57-23; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-6-104. Terms of voting members.
   (a)   Generally. The initial terms of voting members shall be staggered so
that four members shall serve initial terms of one year, four members shall
serve initial terms of two years, and five members shall serve initial terms of
three years. After the expiration of the initial terms, all members shall serve
three-year terms. A member whose term has expired holds over until a successor
is appointed. A voting member shall serve no more than three full successive
terms.
   (b)   Removal. A member of the Commission may be removed by the County
Executive for any reason, including absence from 25% or more of the scheduled
meetings of the Commission during any 12-month period.
   (c)   Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the
manner of original appointment.
(Bill No. 57-23; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-6-105. Chair.
   The County Executive shall appoint one voting member as Chair of the
Commission.
(Bill No. 57-23; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-6-106. Meetings; quorum.
   (a)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair, or at
the request of seven voting members, as frequently as required to perform its
duties, but no less than four times per year. All meetings shall comply with
the Maryland Open Meetings Act and this Code.
   (b)   Quorum; majority vote. A quorum consists of a majority of the voting
members. An affirmative vote of a majority of the voting members present at any
meeting at which there is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of the
Commission.
(Bill No. 57-23; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-6-107. Compensation.
   Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Bill No. 57-23; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-6-108. Duties.
   (a)   Grant process. The Commission shall develop and administer a public
grant application process for interested parties to apply for grant funding
from the Community Reinvestment and Repair Special Revenue Fund.
   (b)   Use of funds. The Commission shall develop its recommendations, with
community input, for the use of the funds in the Community Reinvestment and
Repair Special Revenue Fund for the upcoming fiscal year. These
recommendations, a summary of community input, and a summary of applicants
shall be delivered to the County Executive and posted on the County website by
March 1, 2024, and each March 1 thereafter. The Commission’s recommendations
are advisory in nature and do not require the County Executive to award any
particular grant.
   (c)   Annual report. The Commission shall prepare an annual report detailing
the distribution of grants from the Community Reinvestment and Repair Special
Revenue Fund for the prior fiscal year. The report shall be delivered to the
County Executive by November 1, 2024, and each November 1 thereafter.
   (d)   Meeting with County Executive. The Commission shall meet annually with
the County Executive or the designee of the County Executive.
(Bill No. 57-23; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 7. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
3-7-101.   Definitions.
   
3-7-102.   Anne Arundel County Economic Development Program.
   
3-7-103.   Economic Development Program Grant Agreement.
§ 3-7-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Anne Arundel County Economic Development Corporation” means a
nonprofit, nonstock corporation that:
         (i)   is organized and operated under the laws of the State of
Maryland;
         (ii)   is headquartered in Anne Arundel County, Maryland;
         (iii)   meets the requirements for tax-exempt status under 26 U.S.C. §
501;
         (iv)   performs all of the functions previously performed by the
County Office of Economic Development;
         (v)   has as its exclusive corporate purpose the operation of the Anne
Arundel County Economic Development Program; and
         (vi)   provides, by its charter or bylaws, for a majority of the
members of its board of directors to be appointed by and subject to removal by
the County Executive and for the County Executive’s Economic Development
Officer to serve, ex officio, as the corporation’s chief executive officer.
      (2)   “Anne Arundel County Economic Development Incentive Loan Program”
means a program to provide financing assistance to businesses to start, expand,
retain, or relocate a business activity in Anne Arundel County if the business
demonstrates that start-up, expansion, retention, or relocation financing
cannot be obtained on reasonable terms in the conventional commercial
marketplace.
      (3)   “Anne Arundel County Economic Development Program” means a program
to promote economic development in Anne Arundel County, including at a minimum:
         (i)   promoting Anne Arundel County as a world-class business
environment;
         (ii)   recruiting new business to Anne Arundel County;
         (iii)   expanding the commercial and industrial tax base of Anne
Arundel County;
         (iv)   advocating policies, regulations, and laws that encourage sound
economic growth;
         (v)   developing job opportunities for County residents;
         (vi)   assisting existing employers to remain and grow in Anne Arundel
County; and
         (vii)   administering the Economic Development Incentive Loan Program.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 9-101) (Bill No. 41-93; Bill No. 30-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-7-102. Anne Arundel County Economic Development Program.
   (a)   Creation. There is an Anne Arundel County Economic Development Program
and, as part of the Program, an Anne Arundel County Economic Development
Incentive Loan Program.
   (b)   Administration. The Anne Arundel County Economic Development Program
is administered by the Anne Arundel Economic Development Corporation pursuant
to an economic development grant agreement.
   (c)   Funding. The program is funded by private and public funds, including
grants from the County in accordance with the annual budget and pursuant to the
economic development grant agreement.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 9-102) (Bill No. 41-93; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-7-103. Economic Development Program Grant Agreement.
   (a)   Grant. Consistent with the annual County budget, the County Executive
shall enter into an economic development program grant agreement with the Anne
Arundel County Economic Development Corporation to provide an economic
development program for Anne Arundel County.
   (b)   Contents. The grant agreement:
      (1)   shall grant to the Corporation for use in the economic development
incentive loan program all or part of the funds in the Economic Development
Incentive Loan Fund that have been appropriated for that purpose and all or
part of the funds in the Small Business Loan Fund that have been appropriated
for that purpose and are not required to meet existing obligations under the
Small Business Loan Fund Program;
      (2)   may assign, except as otherwise prohibited by law or contractual
obligation, to the Corporation any or all of the County’s rights, benefits,
entitlements, and obligations under existing small business loans and
guarantees;
      (3)   may not pledge or authorize the Corporation to pledge the full
faith or credit of the County;
      (4)   may not provide for the County to incur any pecuniary liability
other than the amount of the grant;
      (5)   shall require that, in the event of dissolution of the Corporation
and after payment of all creditors, the County shall be reimbursed for the
County’s investment in the Corporation on a pro rata, parity basis with all
other grantors other than the County and the method to be used for determining
the County’s investment in the Corporation;
      (6)   shall require the Corporation to submit to the County and obtain
the County’s approval of quarterly financial statements, an annual financial
statement audited by an independent certified public accountant, other
financial information requested by the Controller or County Auditor, and an
annual budget;
      (7)   shall authorize the Controller and the County Auditor to audit,
individually or together, all corporate records;
      (8)   shall require the Corporation to submit to the County Executive and
the County Council an annual report concerning its activities;
      (9)   may provide for the Corporation to lease, at a nominal rate, office
space in a County-owned building; and
      (10)   may contain any other provision not inconsistent with those
required by this section or any other law.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 9-103) (Bill No. 41-93; Bill No. 15-99; Bill No. 17-00;
Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 8. HIV/AIDS COMMISSION
Section
   
3-8-101.   Established.
   
3-8-102.   Purpose.
   
3-8-103.   Composition.
   
3-8-104.   Term of members.
   
3-8-105.   Chair.
   
3-8-106.   Meetings and quorum.
   
3-8-107.   Rules and regulations.
   
3-8-108.   Compensation.
   
3-8-109.   Powers and duties.
   
3-8-110.   Reports.
§ 3-8-101. Established.
   There is an HIV/AIDS Commission to be known as the “Anne Arundel County
Commission on HIV/AIDS.”
(Bill No. 96-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-8-102. Purpose.
   The purpose of the Commission is to provide education and training on the
prevention of HIV and AIDS and to promote and enhance the quality of life for
persons living with HIV/AIDS by advising the County Executive and the County
Council on the coordination and development of government policies, programs,
services, and allocation of resources for education and prevention, diagnosis
and treatment, and community support for persons with HIV/AIDS.
(Bill No. 96-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-8-103. Composition.
   (a)   Number and type of members. The Commission consists of at least 15
members appointed by the County Executive. Of the 15 members:
      (1)   nine shall be voting members selected from the following groups:
persons or family members of persons living with HIV/AIDS, representatives of
organizations or agencies that provide services for or represent persons with
HIV/AIDS, persons interested in improving the quality of life for persons with
HIV/AIDS disabilities, or persons having expertise in matters pertaining to
public health and the prevention of HIV/AIDS; and
      (2)   at least six shall be ex officio members selected from any of the
following entities and agencies or any other entity or agency that the County
Executive deems appropriate: Anne Arundel County Department of Social Services,
Department of Health, County Council, and Police Department; Anne Arundel
County Board of Education; Anne Arundel County Mental Health Agency, Inc.; and
the City of Annapolis.
   (b)   Residency. Each member shall be a resident of the County.
(Bill No. 96-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-8-104. Term of members.
   (a)   Generally. Of the voting members, three shall be appointed for initial
terms of three years, three shall be appointed for initial terms of two years,
and three shall be appointed for initial terms of one year. After the
expiration of the initial terms, all terms shall be for three-year terms. Ex
officio members shall serve at the pleasure of the County Executive.
   (b)   Expiration. A member whose term has expired holds over until a
successor is appointed.
   (c)   Vacancies. The County Executive shall fill a vacancy for the remainder
of an unexpired term of a member.
(Bill No. 96-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-8-105. Chair.
   The Chair shall be selected by the County Executive.
(Bill No. 96-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-8-106. Meetings and quorum.
   (a)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair, or at
the request of six voting members, as frequently as required to perform its
duties, but no less than four times a year.
   (b)   Quorum. A quorum consists of a majority of the voting members. An
affirmative vote of a majority of the voting members present at any meeting at
which there is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of the Commission.
(Bill No. 96-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-8-107. Rules and regulations.
   The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern its procedures
and activities.
(Bill No. 96-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-8-108. Compensation.
   Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Bill No. 96-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-8-109. Powers and duties.
   Among its powers and duties, the Commission shall:
      (1)   review available services and activities for persons with HIV/AIDS,
gather data regarding their needs, and review reports and publications of
governmental agencies that provide services and support to persons with HIV/
AIDS;
      (2)   review County, State and federal legislation that may impact public
health initiatives and services for person with HIV/AIDS and make
recommendations to the County Executive, County Council, and the County
Delegation to the State Legislature regarding legislation;
      (3)   recommend ways of maximizing the use of facilities and services
available to prevent HIV/AIDS and provide resources for persons with HIV/AIDS;
      (4)   provide direct communication among individuals, private and public
organizations, and the general public regarding programs and services for
persons with HIV/AIDS;
      (5)   assist interagency planning groups and special task forces to
identify and assess needs of persons with HIV/AIDS and the needs of communities
for the prevention of HIV/AIDS;
      (6)   identify barriers to service delivery and advocate for services to
persons with HIV/AIDS;
      (7)   promote the coordination of services among all public and private
agencies, departments, and organizations, which provide services and programs
to persons with disabilities; and
      (8)   identify and recommend to the County Executive sources of State and
federal financial assistance available for the purpose of expanding or
improving services and programs for persons with HIV/AIDS and for community
outreach efforts on the prevention of HIV/AIDS.
(Bill No. 96-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-8-110. Reports.
   On or before January 31 of each year, the Commission shall submit a report
to the County Executive and the County Council setting forth its
accomplishments for the preceding year and its goals for the forthcoming year.
(Bill No. 96-08; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 9. HOUSING AUTHORITY
Section
   
3-9-101.   Findings of County Council.
   
3-9-102.   Declaration of need.
   
3-9-103.   Funding of Housing Authority.
   State Code reference – Housing and Community Development Article, Division
II.
§ 3-9-101. Findings of County Council.
   The County Council finds that unsanitary and unsafe inhabited dwelling
accommodations exist in the County and that there is a shortage of safe and
sanitary dwelling accommodations in the County for persons of low income at
rentals they can afford.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 3-301) (Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-9-102. Declaration of need.
   The County Council declares that there is a need for a Housing Authority to
function in the County and that the Housing Authority may function in the
County.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 3-302) (Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-9-103. Funding of Housing Authority.
   The County Council intends that projects initiated by the Housing Authority
be self-supporting and that, under any agreement presented, the Authority will
make an appropriate payment in lieu of taxes to the County as authorized by
State law.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 3-303) (Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 10. HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
3-10-101.   Definitions.
   
3-10-102.   Agreement.
§ 3-10-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Community Development Programs” means publicly or privately funded
programs that advance the general welfare of County residents, especially those
with low or moderate income or special needs, in the provision of housing,
public facilities, commercial revitalization, and services, and includes the
review and monitoring of mobile home park relocation plans required under Title
8A of the Real Property Article of the State Code and
Article 17 of this Code.
      (2)   “Community services corporation” means a nonprofit, nonstock
corporation that:
         (i)   is organized and operates under the laws of the State of
Maryland;
         (ii)   is headquartered in Anne Arundel County, Maryland;
         (iii)   meets the requirements for tax-exempt status under § 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)); and
         (iv)   has as its principal corporate purpose the provision of
community development programs.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 4A-101) (Bill No. 40-93; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 20-14; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-10-102. Agreement.
   The County Executive may enter into an agreement with a community services
corporation to administer federal, State, and County Community Development
Programs. The programs are funded by private and public funds, including grants
from the County in accordance with the annual budget and pursuant to the
agreement. The agreement:
      (1)   shall provide that the community services corporation will
administer, implement, and manage on behalf of the County those federal, State,
and County Community Development Programs designated in the agreement and in
accordance with the legal requirements of those programs;
      (2)   shall require the corporation to perform, on behalf of the County,
all matters necessary to maintain eligibility for the receipt of funds under
the designated federal and State Community Development Programs, except those
which by law must be performed by the County;
      (3)   may provide, except as otherwise provided by law or contractual
obligation, for the assignment to the corporation of any or all of the County’s
rights, benefits, entitlements, and obligations under existing notes,
mortgages, grant mortgages, deeds of trust, purchase money deeds of trust, and
other similar liens, that were created through transactions funded under
federal, State, or County Community Development Programs;
      (4)   shall provide that revenue and receipts from prepayments and
repayments of transactions funded in whole or part through federal, State, or
County programs shall be received, held, expended, and accounted for in
accordance with all applicable federal, State, and County requirements;
      (5)   shall provide that the corporation may not obligate the County,
except as required by law under federal, State, and County Community
Development Programs administered by the corporation on behalf of the County,
or as expressly authorized in the agreement;
      (6)   shall require the corporation to submit to the County financial
statements of a type and frequency acceptable to the Controller, as specified
in the agreement;
      (7)   shall require the corporation to submit an annual audit to the
County, in conformity with all federal, State, and County program requirements,
and an annual report to the County Executive and the County Council concerning
its activities;
      (8)   shall authorize the County Executive’s designees and the County
Auditor to audit, individually or together, all corporate financial and program
records;
      (9)   shall provide that, in the event of dissolution, bankruptcy,
receivership, or failure of the corporation to meet its material obligations
under the agreement, the corporation shall assign back to the County all
assignable rights, benefits, entitlements, and obligations under the notes,
mortgages, grant mortgages, deeds of trust, purchase money deeds of trust, and
other similar liens previously assigned to the corporation by the County;
      (10)   may not pledge or authorize the corporation to pledge the full
faith or credit of the County;
      (11)   may grant, transfer, and release to the corporation any and all
right, title, and interest that the County has in vehicles, equipment,
supplies, and materials that were purchased with federal Community Development
Block Grant funds;
      (12)   may provide for the corporation to lease, at a nominal rate,
office space in a County-owned building;
      (13)   may require the corporation to review, approve and monitor
compliance with mobile home park relocation plans, and shall provide that the
corporation may charge a mobile home park owner a fee as established in
Article 17 of this Code for the review, approval and monitoring of a mobile
home park relocation plan; and
      (14)   may contain any other provision not inconsistent with those
required by this section or by any other law.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 4A-101) (Bill No. 40-93; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 20-14; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 11. HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
Section
Subtitle 1. General
   
3-11-101.   Established.
   
3-11-102.   Purpose.
   
3-11-103.   Composition; Human Relations Officer; Student Member.
   
3-11-104.   Term of members.
   
3-11-105.   Chair.
   
3-11-106.   Meetings; quorum.
   
3-11-107.   Compensation.
   
3-11-108.   Powers and duties of the Commission.
   
3-11-109.   Powers and duties of the Human Relations Officer.
   
3-11-110.   Annual reporting.
Subtitle 2. Procedures Before the Human Relations Commission
   
3-11-201.   Definitions.
   
3-11-202.   Hearings without the filing of a complaint.
   
3-11-203.   Complaints alleging discrimination.
   
3-11-204.   Initial review of the complaint.
   
3-11-205.   Pre-hearing resolution.
   
3-11-206.   Investigation, referral, and hearing.
   
3-11-207.   Hearing.
   
3-11-208.   Decision and order.
   
3-11-209.   Appeals.
SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL
§ 3-11-101. Established.
   There is a Human Relations Commission to be known as the “Anne Arundel
County Human Relations Commission.”
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-102. Purpose.
   The purpose of the Commission is to promote and enhance the ability of all
Anne Arundel County residents to pursue their lives free of discrimination.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 94-19; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-103. Composition; Human Relations Officer; Student Member.
   (a)   Number and type of members. The Commission consists of 13 voting
members as follows:
      (1)   (i)   one member from each councilmanic district recommended by the
County Council member for the district;
         (ii)   four members recommended by the County Executive;
         (iii)   one student member; and
         (iv)   the Executive Director of Arundel Community Development
Services, Inc., or their designee.
      (2)   All voting members, except the Executive Director of Arundel
Community Development Services, Inc., or their designee, shall be residents of
the County.
      (3)   All voting members, except the Executive Director of Arundel
Community Development Services, Inc., or their designee, shall be nominated by
the County Executive and approved by resolution of the County Council.
      (4)   The Executive Director of Arundel Community Development Services,
Inc., or their designee, shall be appointed by the County Executive.
      (5)   At least four of the thirteen members shall reflect the ethnicity
and minority diversity of the residents of the County; and
      (6)   At least one of the thirteen members shall be trained in or have
experience with mediation.
   (b)   Human Relations Officer.
      (1)   The Human Relations Officer shall be the Director of the Office of
Equity and Human Rights, or their designee.
      (2)   The Human Relations Officer shall be the Secretary to the
Commission.
   (c)   Student member. The student member shall: be of good character; be in
good standing in an Anne Arundel County public high school; be nominated by the
Chesapeake Regional Association of Student Councils of Anne Arundel County in
accordance with a method of its choosing; serve a term of one year beginning on
July 1 of each year; and continue to serve until a successor is appointed.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 94-19; Bill No. 98-21; Bill No. 21-24; Bill No. 94-
24)
§ 3-11-104. Term of members.
   (a)   Generally. The initial terms of the members other than the student
member and the Executive Director of Arundel Community Development Services,
Inc., or their designee shall be staggered so that four members shall serve
initial terms of one year, four members shall serve initial terms of two years,
and three members shall serve initial terms of three years. After the
expiration of the initial terms, all members other than the student member and
the Executive Director of Arundel Community Development Services, Inc., or
their designee shall serve three year terms. A member whose term has expired
holds over until a successor is appointed.
   (b)   Removal. A member of the Commission may be removed by the County
Executive for cause, including absence from 25% or more of the scheduled
meetings and hearings of the Commission during any 12-month period.
   (c)   Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the
manner of original appointment.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 98-21; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-105. Chair.
   The County Executive shall appoint one voting member as the Chair of the
Commission.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-106. Meetings; quorum.
   (a)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair, or at
the request of six voting members, as frequently as required to perform its
duties, but no less than quarterly. All meetings shall comply with the Maryland
Open Meetings Act and this Code.
   (b)   Quorum; majority vote. A quorum consists of a majority of the voting
members. An affirmative vote of a majority of the voting members present at any
meeting at which there is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of the
Commission.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-107. Compensation.
   Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-108. Powers and duties of the Commission.
   (a)   Powers. The Commission may:
      (1)   receive, mediate, and adjudicate complaints of discrimination in
violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code, provided, however, that complaints of
discrimination against a County employee by another County employee shall not
be subject to this title and instead shall be initiated and resolved pursuant
to
Article 6 of this Code and the Employee Relations Manual;
      (2)   initiate matters relating to discrimination in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code;
      (3)   provide mediation services;
      (4)   adopt rules of procedure after posting the proposed rules on the
County’s webpage and providing a reasonable period of time for comment;
      (5)   conduct public hearings in accordance with Subtitle 2 of
Title 11;
      (6)   provide training and seminars in human relations;
      (7)   conduct training and educational programs, including programs to
promote positive human relations and to notify the public of the availability
of remedies under this subtitle;
      (8)   collect, research, assemble, analyze, and disseminate data and
educational materials to assist in the elimination of discrimination;
      (9)   make recommendations to the County Executive, the County Council,
and County departments and offices on matters involving human relations,
including discrimination in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code, prejudice, and inter-group relations;
      (10)   suggest proposed legislation to the County Executive or the County
Council; and
      (11)   cooperate with federal, State, and local commissions, agencies,
organizations, and groups.
   (b)   Duties. On or before January 31 of each year, the Commission shall
submit a report to the County Executive and the County Council setting forth
its accomplishments for the preceding year and its goals for the forthcoming
year.
   (c)   Delegation. The Commission may delegate authority to the Human
Relations Officer to conduct mediations or to provide referrals for mediation
services for complaints filed under this title.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 94-19; Bill No. 21-24; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-109. Powers and duties of the Human Relations Officer.
   (a)   Powers and duties. The Human Relations Officer, with the Office of
Equity and Human Rights or its designee, may investigate:
      (1)   any internal complaints of discrimination by County employees in
violation of this title and provide findings, conclusions and recommendations
to the Personnel Officer; and
      (2)   any other complaints of discrimination in violation of this title
and provide findings, conclusions and recommendations to the Human Relations
Commission, as provided in this title.
   (b)   Access to County records. The Human Relations Officer shall have
access to all internal records of the County as may be necessary to complete an
investigation under this title.
   (c)   Compliance testing allowed. The Human Relations Officer, with the
Office of Equity and Human Rights, may, at their own initiative or upon request
from the Commission, test any facility or organization for compliance with this
title and
Article 1, Title 9 of this Code.
(Bill No. 21-24; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-110. Annual reporting.
   (a)   Annual reports. The Commission shall make an annual report to the
County Executive and the County Council on or before October 1 of each year,
summarizing its activities during the preceding fiscal year. The report shall
include statistics indicating the number and type of complaints filed and the
disposition of complaints, data on race and ethnic characteristics of those who
have filed a complaint under this subtitle, any actions or programs undertaken
during the year to advance human rights, and any other matters relevant to the
authorized activities of the Commission, including recommendations for
legislative or administrative action to further the purposes and policies
established by this subtitle. The report shall be published by the County
Executive on the County website.
   (b)   Interim reports. The County Executive or County Council may require
the Commission to make interim reports, including reports of investigations.
(Bill No. 21-24; Bill No. 94-24)
SUBTITLE 2. PROCEDURES BEFORE THE HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
§ 3-11-201. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meaning indicated.
      (1)   “Commission” means the Human Relations Commission.
      (2)   “Serve” means to:
         (i)   email, with a request for a read receipt, a copy of a document
to the parties when email addresses are available; and
         (ii)   mail a copy of the document to the parties by first class mail,
postage prepaid; or
         (iii)   deliver the complaint in accordance with Maryland Rule 2-121
with respect to the Commission’s duty to serve the complaint on the respondent
under §
3-11-203(c).
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-202. Hearings without the filing of a complaint.
   (a)   Authority. The Commission may hold hearings regarding alleged
discrimination in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code that is reported to or otherwise discovered
by the Commission but that is not the subject matter of a complaint filed with
the Commission.
   (b)   Purpose. The purpose of a hearing under subsection (a) is to gather
facts and make nonbinding recommendations to appropriate persons or agencies.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 21-24; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-203. Complaints alleging discrimination.
   (a)   Filing and contents of complaint. A complaint filed with the
Commission alleging discrimination in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code shall include the name, address, telephone
number, and email address of the complainant; the name, address, and, if known,
the telephone number and email address of the respondent; and a concise
statement of the facts.
   (b)   Time for filing. The complaint shall be filed no later than the later
of 300 days after the alleged violation occurs or six months after the
complainant discovers the alleged violation.
   (c)   Service. The Chair of the Commission shall serve a copy of the
complaint on the respondent.
   (d)   Amendment. The complainant may amend the complaint at any time but no
later than 30 days before a scheduled hearing date.
   (e)   Withdrawal; settlement. The complainant may withdraw or settle the
complaint at any time.
   (f)   Answer. No later than 30 days after service of the complaint, the
respondent may file an answer to the complaint with the Commission, and shall
serve a copy of the answer on the complainant.
   (g)   Preemption. A complaint of discrimination filed with the State or a
federal agency with jurisdiction over the complaint that is based on the same
operative facts as a complaint filed under this section shall preempt and
terminate any complaint filed under this title.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 21-24; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-204. Initial review of the complaint.
   (a)   Sufficiency of complaint. The Human Relations Officer, with the
assistance of the Office of Equity and Human Rights, shall review the complaint
within 14 days of filing to determine whether the facts alleged are sufficient
to support a claim for discrimination in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code.
   (b)   Dismissal. If the Human Relations Officer, after consultation with the
Office of Equity and Human Rights, determines that the facts alleged would be
insufficient to establish discrimination in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code, the Human Relations Officer shall:
      (1)   dismiss the complaint in writing, setting forth the reasons for the
dismissal and a description of the process to seek reconsideration; and
      (2)   serve a copy of the dismissal on the parties.
   (c)   Reconsideration. The complainant may request reconsideration of the
dismissal by sending a letter by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
Chair of the Commission within 15 days after the date that the dismissal was
served on the complainant. The letter shall state the reasons why the
complainant disagrees with the dismissal.
   (d)   Decision of the Commission on reconsideration request.
      (1)   If the voting members of the Commission determine that the facts
alleged would be sufficient to establish discrimination in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code, the Chair shall reinstate the complaint by
letter and serve the letter on the parties.
      (2)   If the voting members of the Commission determine that the facts
alleged would be insufficient to establish discrimination in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code, the Chair shall uphold the dismissal by the
Human Relations Officer by letter and serve the letter on the parties.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 21-24; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-205. Pre-hearing resolution.
   (a)   Request for a meeting. The Human Relations Officer or a member of the
Commission may request that the parties meet with designated members to discuss
a resolution of the allegations contained in the complaint.
   (b)   The meeting. The Chair of the Commission shall appoint one or more
members of the Commission to conduct the meeting.
   (c)   Results of the meeting. If the parties agree to a resolution of the
allegations at the meeting, the agreement shall be reduced to a contract signed
by the complainant and the respondent. If the parties do not agree to a
resolution of the allegations at the meeting, the Commission shall hold a
hearing on the complaint.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-206. Investigation, referral, and hearing.
   (a)   Investigation. For any complaint not dismissed after initial review by
the Human Relations Officer, the Human Relations Officer, with the assistance
of the Office of Equity and Human Rights, shall investigate the allegations of
the complaint.
   (b)   Referral.
      (1)   If the Human Relations Officer determines that the facts alleged in
the complaint sustain a claim for discrimination in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code, the Human Relations Officer shall prepare
and provide findings, conclusions and recommendations to the Human Relations
Commission no later than 90 days after the filing of the complaint. The
referral to the Human Relations Commission shall include any answer to the
complaint filed by the respondent. The Human Relations Commission shall
schedule and conduct a hearing on the referred complaint as provided in this
subtitle.
      (2)   The 90-day period for referral to the Commission may be extended by
the Human Relations Officer for an additional 60 days provided the Human
Relations Officer notifies the Commission of the need for additional time prior
to the expiration of the 90-day referral period.
(Bill No. 21-24; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-207. Hearing.
   (a)   Hearing panel. The Chair of the Commission shall appoint at least
three members who did not participate in a pre-hearing meeting under §
3-11-205 to serve as the hearing panel for a hearing on the complaint.
   (b)   Notice of hearing. The Chair shall serve a notice of the date, time,
and place of the hearing on the parties at least 15 days prior to the date of
hearing.
   (c)   Subpoenas. Prior to the hearing, at the request of the Commission or a
party, the Human Relations Officer may issue, one or more subpoenas pursuant to
§
1-2-101 of this Code.
   (d)   Hearing. At the hearing, the Human Relations Officer shall administer
the oath to each witness in accordance with §
1-2-102 of this Code. The Commission shall consider all relevant evidence to
determine whether the respondent has engaged in one or more acts of
discrimination in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code. The burden of proof shall be on the
complainant and the burden of persuasion shall be by a preponderance of the
evidence.
   (e)   Hearing is open; authority to close. A hearing shall be open to the
public but may be closed in accordance with § 3-305 of the General Provisions
Article of the State Code.
   (f)   Rules of procedure. Hearings shall be conducted pursuant to the Rules
of Procedure that are adopted by the Commission and posted on the Human
Relations Commission website.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 21-24; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-208. Decision and order.
   (a)   Dismissal. If the Commission finds that the respondent has not engaged
in an act of discrimination in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code, within 60 days after the date of the
hearing, the Commission shall issue a written decision and order, stating its
findings of fact and conclusions of law and ordering the dismissal of the
complaint. The Commission shall serve a copy of the dismissal on the parties.
   (b)   Finding of discrimination.
      (1)   Decision and order. If the Commission finds that the respondent has
committed one or more acts of discrimination in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code, within 60 days after the date of the
hearing, the Commission shall issue a written decision stating its findings of
fact and conclusions of law and order any or all of the following:
         (i)   to cease and desist from discriminating in violation of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code;
         (ii)   for a violation of Subtitle 2 of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code, order the respondent to sell or rent
property to the complainant;
         (iii)   for a violation of Subtitles 3 or 4 of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code, assess a civil fine of up to $5,000 per
offense; or
         (iv)   for a violation of Subtitle 2 of
Title 9 of Article 1 of this Code, assess a civil fine of up to $10,000 for a
first offense, up to $25,000 for a second offense within five years of a prior
offense, and up to $50,000 for a third or subsequent offense within seven years
of a second offense.
      (2)   Service. The Commission shall serve a copy of the decision and
order on the parties.
      (3)   Enforcement. If the time for an appeal to the Board of Appeals has
expired and no appeal was taken under §
3-11-209, the Commission, through the Office of Law, may file a petition in the
Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County to enforce an order issued under this
section.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 21-24; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-11-209. Appeals.
   (a)   Board of Appeals. An appeal of the decision and order of the
Commission shall be to the County Board of Appeals in accordance with §
602 of the Charter and the applicable provisions of this Code.
   (b)   Judicial review. A person may seek judicial review of the decision of
the County Board of Appeals in accordance with the Maryland Rules.
(Bill No. 57-19; Bill No. 21-24; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 12. ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY PARTNERSHIP FOR CHILDREN, YOUTH, AND FAMILIES
   Editor’s note – Section 2 of Bill No. 89-08 provides that the members
formerly appointed to the Local Management Board for Children, Youth, and
Families shall continue as members of the Anne Arundel County Partnership for
Children, Youth, and Families; that the Anne Arundel County Partnership for
Children, Youth, and Families shall succeed to the powers and duties of the
Local Management Board for Children, Youth, and Families as of the January 18,
2009; and that all records and similar documents shall be transferred to, and
shall be considered to be the property of, the newly constituted Anne Arundel
County Partnership for Children, Youth, and Families.
Section
   
3-12-101.   Definitions.
   
3-12-102.   Board established.
   
3-12-103.   Composition.
   
3-12-104.   Terms of members.
   
3-12-105.   Chair.
   
3-12-106.   Removal of a citizen member.
   
3-12-107.   Compensation.
   
3-12-108.   Meetings and quorum.
   
3-12-109.   Powers and duties.
   
3-12-110.   Executive Director.
   
3-12-111.   Local management agency.
   
3-12-112.   Annual report.
§ 3-12-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Child Service Agencies” means the Board of Education, the
Department of Health, the Department of Social Services, the State Department
of Juvenile Services, the State Mental Hygiene Administration, and any other
agency that is brought within the scope of community partnerships by State law.
      (2)   “Community partnerships” means the State program by which services
provided to children, youth, and families are to be coordinated and delivered
through an interagency system.
      (3)   “Partnership” means the Anne Arundel County Partnership for
Children, Youth and Families.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 10-101) (Bill No. 123-93; Bill No. 67-00; Bill No. 89-08;
Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-12-102. Board established.
   There is an Anne Arundel County Partnership for Children, Youth, and
Families.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 10-201) (Bill No. 123-93; Bill No. 67-00; Bill No. 89-08;
Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-12-103. Composition.
   (a)   Generally. The Partnership consists of at least 11 members.
    (b)   Appointed members. The following members are appointed by the County
Executive:
      (1)   the Special Assistant for Minority Affairs;
      (2)   one County official;
      (3)   four to six citizen members, including two parents of children
served by Child Service Agencies, and at least one member of the County
business community.
   (c)   Ex officio members. The following serve as ex officio members:
      (1)   the Director of Social Services, or the Director’s designee;
      (2)   the Health Officer, or the Health Officer’s designee;
      (3)   the Superintendent of the Board of Education, or the
Superintendent’s designee;
      (4)   one representative of the local office of the State Department of
Juvenile Services, designated by the Secretary of the Department; and
      (5)   the President of the Board of the CORE Service Agency, or the
President’s designee.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 10-202) (Bill No. 123-93; Bill No. 67-00; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 89-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-12-104. Terms of members.
   (a)   Generally. A member appointed by the County Executive serves only
until the County Executive’s term ends.
   (b)   Expiration. A member whose term has expired and who was appointed by
the County Executive holds over until a successor is appointed.
   (c)   Vacancies. The County Executive shall fill a vacancy for the remainder
of the unexpired term of a Partnership member who was appointed by the County
Executive.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 10-203) (Bill No. 123-93; Bill No. 67-00; Bill No. 89-08;
Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-12-105. Chair.
   The County Executive shall designate the Chair.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 10-204) (Bill No. 123-93; Bill No. 67-00; Bill No. 89-08;
Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-12-106. Removal of a citizen member.
   The County Executive may remove a citizen member of the Partnership for
neglect of duty or any change in status of that member that renders the person
ineligible to serve.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 10-205) (Bill No. 123-93; Bill No. 67-00; Bill No. 89-08;
Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-12-107. Compensation.
   Members of the Partnership may not receive compensation for their service.
Citizen members shall be reimbursed, in accordance with the budget, for
reasonable and necessary expenses in the discharge of their duties.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 10-206) (Bill No. 123-93; Bill No. 67-00; Bill No. 89-08;
Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-12-108. Meetings and quorum.
   (a)   Meetings. The Partnership shall meet at the call of the Chair or at
the request of eight members, but not less than eight times per year.
   (b)   Quorum. A quorum consists of a majority of the Partnership members. An
affirmative vote of a majority of those present at any meeting at which there
is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of the Partnership.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 10-207) (Bill No. 123-93; Bill No. 67-00; Bill No. 89-08;
Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-12-109. Powers and duties.
   Among its powers and duties, the Partnership may:
      (1)   develop plans for non-categorical interagency family preservation
services to those populations identified by the State as appropriate for those
services;
      (2)   identify barriers to integration of and access to interagency
services and develop plans to overcome those barriers;
      (3)   provide for community involvement in service delivery, including
involvement in the planning process and provision of financial and in-kind
resources for services;
      (4)   develop measures for specific outcomes, including reduction of the
numbers of children entering out-of-home and out-of-State placements;
      (5)   promote training for all involved parties, including Board members,
agency staff, and the community, to assure an understanding of the goals of the
interagency service delivery system;
      (6)   develop criteria to monitor and evaluate the implementation and
quality of the interagency service delivery system;
      (7)   administer State and County funding for community partnerships and
seek alternative sources of funding;
      (8)   recommend changes to the budget, mandate, or mission of community
partnerships;
      (9)   receive and evaluate information from the child service agencies on
service statistics, revenues, expenses, and operating costs;
      (10)   develop an integrated data collection capacity to evaluate the
effectiveness of interagency service delivery and provide for data collection;
and
      (11)   prepare periodic evaluations of the results of community
partnerships for the State and County governments.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 10-208) (Bill No. 123-93; Bill No. 67-00; Bill No. 89-08;
Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-12-110. Executive Director.
   (a)   Selection. The Chief Administrative Officer shall select, employ, and
supervise an Executive Director. Before selecting the Executive Director, the
Chief Administrative Officer shall consult with the Partnership or, if
constituted, the Executive Committee of the Partnership.
   (b)   Duties. The Executive Director is an employee of the County who shall:
      (1)   be responsible for the daily operations of the Partnership;
      (2)   implement the Partnership’s policies; and
      (3)   employ and supervise staff as provided in the annual County budget.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 10-301) (Bill No. 67-00; Bill No. 89-08; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-12-111. Local management agency.
   The Partnership is the local management agency required to be established by
the provisions of the Human Services Article, § 8-301, of the State Code. It is
a public agency and an instrumentality of County government. The Partnership
shall ensure the implementation of a local, interagency service delivery system
for children, youth, and families.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 10-401) (Bill No. 123-93; Bill No. 67-00; Bill No. 89-08;
Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-12-112. Annual report.
   On or before December 1 of each year, the Partnership shall submit an annual
report to the County Executive concerning its activities for the preceding
fiscal year and its recommendations for future consideration.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 10-501) (Bill No. 123-93; Bill No. 67-00; Bill No. 89-08;
Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 13. MARITIME INDUSTRY ADVISORY BOARD
Section
   
3-13-101.   Established.
   
3-13-102.   Purpose.
   
3-13-103.   Composition.
   
3-13-104.   Term of members.
   
3-13-105.   Chair.
   
3-13-106.   Compensation.
   
3-13-107.   Non-limiting.
   
3-13-108.   Meetings and quorum.
   
3-13-109.   Powers and duties.
   
3-13-110.   Assistance.
§ 3-13-101. Established.
   There is a Maritime Industry Advisory Board to be known as the “Anne Arundel
County Maritime Industry Advisory Board.”
(Bill No. 56-07; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-13-102. Purpose.
   The purpose of the Board is to represent the interests of the County’s
maritime industry and to offer guidance and provide assistance to County
officials and boards in matters concerning the commercial and recreational
maritime industry in Anne Arundel County.
(Bill No. 56-07; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-13-103. Composition.
   Number and type of members. The Board consists of at least 16 members
appointed by the County Executive.
      (1)   Voting members. Of the 16 members, 11 shall be voting members who
are residents of Anne Arundel County. Of the 11 voting members:
         (i)   eight shall represent the maritime industry and its
geographically and economically diverse interests, including but not limited
to: full-service marinas and specialized marine trades; large and small craft;
charter boat and tourism business; commercial waterman trade; sailboats and
powerboats; and human-powered watercrafts;
         (ii)   two shall be members of a yacht club or similar recreational,
pleasure-boating organization; and
         (iii)   one shall be a designee from a not-for-profit Anne Arundel
County watershed organization.
      (2)   Councilmanic district representation. Of the 11 voting members
specified in subsection (1), no more than five members shall be residents of
the same councilmanic district.
      (3)   Nonvoting ex-officio members. The following shall serve as non-
voting ex-officio members:
         (i)   a member of the County Council, selected by the County Executive
and the Chairman of the Anne Arundel County Council;
         (ii)   the President of the Anne Arundel County Economic Development
Corporation or their designee;
         (iii)   the Marine Trades Association of Maryland Vice-President for
Anne Arundel County or their designee;
         (iv)   the Chair of the City of Annapolis Maritime Industry Advisory
Board or their designee; and
         (v)   other individuals designated by the County Executive as desired.
(Bill No. 56-07; Bill No. 15-11; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-13-104. Term of members.
   (a)   Generally. Of the voting members, four shall be appointed for initial
terms of three years, four shall be appointed for initial terms of two years,
and three shall be appointed for initial terms of one year. After the
expiration of the initial terms, all terms shall be for three-year terms. Ex
officio members shall serve at the pleasure of the County Executive.
   (b)   Expiration. A member whose term has expired holds over until a
successor is appointed.
   (c)   Reappointment. Members are eligible for reappointment.
   (d)   Vacancies. The County Executive shall fill a vacancy for the remainder
of an unexpired term of a member in the same manner as the original
appointment.
(Bill No. 56-07)
§ 3-13-105. Chair.
   The County Executive shall appoint a Chairman from among the 11 voting
members.
(Bill No. 56-07; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-13-106. Compensation.
   Members shall serve without compensation.
(Bill No. 56-07; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-13-107. Non-limiting.
   Membership on the Board does not limit the ability or participation of Board
members to serve as appointed or volunteer members of the Anne Arundel Economic
Development Corporation, Severn River Commission, Planning Advisory Board, or
other appointed commissions.
(Bill No. 56-07; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-13-108. Meetings and quorum.
   (a)   Meetings. The Board shall meet at the call of the Chair, or at the
request of six voting members, as frequently as required to perform its duties,
but no less than four times a year.
   (b)   Quorum. A quorum consists of a majority of the voting members. An
affirmative vote of a majority of the voting members present at any meeting at
which there is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of the Board.
(Bill No. 56-07; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-13-109. Powers and duties.
   Among its powers and duties, the Board shall:
      (1)   serve as a unified voice to represent the interests of the County’s
diverse maritime community, and to seek consensus among the industry’s diverse
geographic and economic interests;
      (2)   provide expert opinion and analysis, based on maritime industry and
trade positions, of the facts concerning the marine industry and boating in the
County and relevant matters pending before the County Council, or any County
agency, board, or commission, including benefits and drawbacks of particular
government action; and
      (3)   make recommendations to any decision-making body, agency board,
commission, or official of the County on matters relating to the marine
industry and boating in the County.
(Bill No. 56-07; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-13-110. Assistance.
   Subject to the appropriation of funds the County, in coordination with the
Anne Arundel Economic Development Corporation, shall provide professional
administrative support and technical staff assistance to the board in
performance of its duties.
(Bill No. 56-07; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 14. ODENTON TOWN CENTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Section
   
3-14-101.   Odenton Town Center Advisory Committee.
§ 3-14-101. Odenton Town Center Advisory Committee.
   (a)   Established; purpose. There is an Odenton Town Center Advisory
Committee. The purpose of the Committee shall be to advocate for the vision,
goals, policies, and strategies of the Odenton Town Center Master Plan.
   (b)   Composition.
      (1)   The Committee consists of nine voting members appointed by the
County Executive, including one member from the councilmanic district in which
the Odenton Town Center is located recommended to the County Executive by the
County Councilmember for the district.
      (2)   The composition of the Committee shall include balanced
representation covering resident, business, and developer interests.
      (3)   Non-voting members may be appointed at the discretion of the County
Executive.
   (c)   Term of members.
      (1)   Voting members shall be appointed for terms of up to three years,
with appointments staggered. Voting members may serve for no more than three
terms.
      (2)   A voting member may be removed by the County Executive for cause,
including absence from 25% or more of the scheduled meetings of the Committee
during any 12-month period.
      (3)   Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner of
the original appointment.
   (d)   Chair. The County Executive shall appoint one voting member as Chair.
The Chair may serve a two-year term and may be reappointed.
   (e)   Meetings.
      (1)   The Committee shall meet on a regular basis as frequently as
required to perform its duties. All meetings shall comply with the Maryland
Open Meetings Act and this Code.
      (2)   The Committee shall hold meetings to review all applications for
sketch plans or preliminary plans, incentive program applications, revisions or
updates to the Odenton Town Center Master Plan, and the Odenton Town Center
Annual Report prepared by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
      (3)   If a developer is required to hold a community meeting pursuant to
§
17-2-107 of this Code, the community meeting may be held in conjunction with a
Committee meeting.
   (f)   Quorum. A quorum consists of a majority of the voting members. An
affirmative vote of a majority of those voting members present at any meeting
at which there is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of the Committee.
   (g)   Development application submittals; notice.
      (1)   A developer shall submit all sketch plans, preliminary plans, final
plans, site development plans, or incentive program applications to the
Committee.
      (2)   A developer shall present a sketch plan, preliminary plan, or an
incentive program application at a meeting of the Committee prior to submittal
to the Office of Planning and Zoning or at the next meeting immediately
following submittal.
   (h)   Compensation. Members of the Committee shall receive no compensation
for their services.
   (i)   Duties.
      (1)   The Committee shall adopt rules and regulations to govern
procedures for its meetings.
      (2)   The Committee shall make written advisory recommendations to the
Office of Planning and Zoning on:
         (i)   an application for approval of a sketch plan, preliminary plan,
or incentive program application, indicating whether an application is
consistent with the goals of the Odenton Town Center Master Plan;
         (ii)   any modifications, revisions, or updates to the Odenton Town
Center Master Plan; and
         (iii)   the Odenton Town Center Annual Report.
(Bill No. 84-23; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 15. PENSION OVERSIGHT COMMISSION
Section
   
3-15-101.   Nomination.
   
3-15-102.   Voting.
§ 3-15-101. Nomination.
   Nomination of the four members of the classified service to the Pension
Oversight Commission, as required by §
606 of the Charter, shall be by secret ballot and be supervised by the Office
of Personnel.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 2B-101) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-15-102. Voting.
   The Pension Oversight Commission may vote on an issue before it only in a
meeting at which a quorum is present.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 2B-102) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 16. POLICE ACCOUNTABILITY BOARD
Section
   
3-16-101.   Definitions.
   
3-16-102.   Police Accountability Board created.
   
3-16-103.   Membership.
   
3-16-104.   Chair.
   
3-16-105.   Terms of voting members.
   
3-16-106.   Quorum; meetings.
   
3-16-107.   Training.
   
3-16-108.   Budget and staff.
   
3-16-109.   Compensation and expenses.
   
3-16-110.   Duties.
   
3-16-111.   Recordkeeping.
   
3-16-112.   Administrative Charging Committee and Trial Hearing Boards.
§ 3-16-101. Definitions.
   The following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Hearing Board” means “trial board” as used in Title 3, Subtitle 1
of the Public Safety Article of the State Code.
      (2)   “Law enforcement agency” means a governmental police force,
sheriff’s office, or security force or law enforcement organization of the
State, a county, or a municipal corporation that by statute, ordinance, or
common law is authorized to enforce the general criminal laws of the State.
      (3) “Police misconduct” means a pattern, practice, or conduct by a police
officer or law enforcement agency that includes:
         (i)   depriving persons of rights protected by the Constitution or
laws of the State or the United States;
         (ii)   a violation of a criminal statute; and
         (iii)   a violation of law enforcement agency standards and policies.
      (4)   “Police officer” has the meaning set forth in § 3-101 of the Public
Safety Article of the State Code.
      (5)   “Ride-along” means an arrangement to spend a shift in the passenger
seat of an emergency vehicle and observe the work day of a County police
officer or other law enforcement officer in the County.
(Bill No. 16-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-16-102. Police Accountability Board created.
   Pursuant to Title 3, Subtitle 1 of the Public Safety Article of the State
Code, there is a Police Accountability Board.
(Bill No. 16-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-16-103. Membership.
   (a)   Voting members.
      (1)   The Police Accountability Board consists of nine voting members,
all of whom shall be residents of the County, appointed as follows:
         (i)   Eight voting members shall have resided in the County for at
least three years prior to appointment and shall be appointed by the County
Executive and approved by resolution of the County Council;
         (ii)   One voting member shall have resided in the City of Annapolis
for at least three years and shall be appointed by the County Executive upon
recommendation of the Mayor and City Council;
         (iii)   Each member of the County Council shall have a reasonable
opportunity to recommend to the County Executive a resident of that Council
member’s district for potential appointment to the Board.
      (2)   An active police officer may not be a voting member of the Police
Accountability Board.
      (3)   To the extent practicable, the voting membership of the Police
Accountability Board shall reflect the racial, gender, gender-identity, sexual
orientation, and cultural diversity of the County.
      (4)   To the extent practicable, the voting membership of the Police
Accountability Board shall include representation from the populations,
identities, geographic areas, and communities that historically experienced or
currently experience a higher frequency of interactions with law enforcement.
      (5)   To the extent practicable, the voting membership of the Police
Accountability Board shall include a diversity of experience and expertise,
including in such areas as:
         (i)   community organization;
         (ii)   civil rights;
         (iii)   law enforcement;
         (iv)   criminal law;
         (v)   behavioral health;
         (vi)   faith-based leadership;
         (vii)   community policing;
         (viii)   policing standards;
         (ix)   sociology;
         (x)   education;
         (xi)   social work;
         (xii)   criminology;
         (xiii)   personnel management and discipline;
         (xiv)   juvenile services; or
         (xv)   other life experience that may be valuable to the Board.
      (6)   (i)   Voting members shall be subject to a criminal background
investigation before beginning to serve.
         (ii)   A person may not be appointed as a voting member of the Board
if the person has been convicted of, pled guilty to, or received probation
before judgement for the following:
            1.   a crime of violence, as defined in § 14-101 of the Criminal
Law Article of the State Code;
            2.   domestic violence;
            3.   a felony in Maryland;
            4.   a crime that is a felony in another State or in a federal
proceeding that would be a felony in Maryland; or
            5.   theft, dishonesty, fraud, or another crime of moral turpitude.
         (iii)   A person who has been convicted of crimes other than as set
forth in paragraph (6)(ii) may be appointed to serve as a voting member of the
Board subject to the appointment procedures in this title.
      (7)   Voting members shall file financial disclosure forms as required by
§
7-6-101 of this Code, and shall recuse themselves in the case of conflicts of
interest.
   (b)   Application process. For the members appointed pursuant to (a)(1)(i):
      (1)   an advertisement to apply for membership shall be published at
least 30 days prior to any appointment by the County Executive; and
      (2)   a resolution to approve the appointment of any member may not be
considered or acted on by the County Council less then seven days after its
date of introduction and shall receive a public hearing.
   (c)   Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for any unexpired term in the
same manner as the original appointment.
(Bill No. 16-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-16-104. Chair.
   Every three years, the County Executive shall designate a Chair from the
membership of the Board subject to the approval of the County Council by
resolution.
(Bill No. 16-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-16-105. Terms of voting members.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   The initial terms of voting members shall be staggered so that four
members, including the Chair, shall serve initial terms of three years and five
members shall serve initial terms of two years.
      (2)   After the initial terms, the term of a voting member is three
years.
      (3)   At the end of any term, a voting member continues to serve until a
successor is appointed and qualifies.
      (4)   A voting member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only
for the remainder of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.
      (5)   There is no limit on the number of terms a voting member may serve,
provided that a voting member may not serve more than two full consecutive
terms.
   (b)   Removal.
      (1)   (i)   The County Executive may remove a member for cause, including
but not limited to a change of address to a location outside of Anne Arundel
County, improper use or disclosure of information, being charged with a crime,
or absence from 25% or more of the scheduled meetings during any 12-month
period.
         (ii)   Within 10 days, the County executive shall send written notice
of the removal that includes the reasons for the removal and the effective date
to the Chair of the Board and to the County Council.
      (2)   The Chair of the Board shall:
         (i)   notify the County Executive of any member who is absent from 25%
or more of the scheduled meetings of the Board during any 12-month period;
         (ii)   include in the notification any known extenuating
circumstances; and
         (iii)   send a copy of the notification to each member of the Board.
      (3)   The County Executive may excuse absences for good cause such as
illness, emergency situations, or other extenuating circumstances.
      (4)   Within two business meetings after receipt of a notice of removal,
the County Council may reinstate the removed member of the Board by a
resolution adopted by the affirmative vote of five members.
(Bill No. 16-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-16-106. Quorum; meetings.
   (a)   Quorum. Five voting members of the Board is a quorum. An affirmative
vote of a majority of the voting members present at any meeting at which there
is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of the Board.
   (b)   Meetings. The Board shall meet at the call of the Chair or at the
request of five members as frequently as required to perform the duties of the
Board, but no less than quarterly. All meetings shall comply with the Maryland
Open Meetings Act and this Code and shall provide an opportunity for public
comment.
(Bill No. 16-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-16-107. Training.
   As soon as practicable after appointment and at the intervals specified,
each voting member of the Board shall complete the following training:
      (1)   ethics training annually;
      (2)   implicit bias training annually;
      (3)   the citizen’s police academy one time per term;
      (4)   a ride-along annually, that includes, whenever possible, riding
along with different County police districts or divisions or other County
agencies in each subsequent year to facilitate broad training exposure; and
      (5)   any other training specified by the State, the County Executive, or
majority vote of the Board.
(Bill No. 16-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-16-108. Budget and staff.
   (a)   Budget. The County Executive shall propose a budget for the Board to
be included in the annual budget and appropriation ordinance adopted by the
County Council.
   (b)   Staff.
      (1)   Executive Director. There shall be an Executive Director to the
Board who is appointed by the County Executive and confirmed by resolution of
the County Council. The Executive Director shall be an attorney in good
standing of the State of Maryland and shall possess at least three years of
relevant experience. The Executive Director shall supervise staff assigned to
the Board and manage contractual services as needed. The Executive Director may
be removed by the County Executive, unless the County Council, by resolution on
the affirmative vote of not less than five members, votes to prevent the
removal of an Executive Director appointed by the County Executive.
      (2)   Administrative Secretary. There shall be, in the exempt service, an
Administrative Secretary to the Executive Director to provide support and
assistance to the Board.
      (3)   Other staff and contractual services. The Board may be assigned
additional staff and provided with contractual services as needed and as
provided for in the annual budget.
(Bill No. 16-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-16-109. Compensation and expenses.
   (a)   Compensation. Voting members of the Board may be compensated for their
services as provided for in the annual budget.
   (b)   Expenses. Voting members of the Board may be reimbursed for expenses
incurred related to their duties at the discretion of the Executive Director
and subject to appropriation and availability of funds in the annual budget.
Such expenses may include the cost of child care and transportation necessary
to attend a scheduled meeting of the Board.
(Bill No. 16-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-16-110. Duties.
   (a)   Meetings with law enforcement. The Board shall hold at least quarterly
meetings with heads of law enforcement agencies and otherwise work with law
enforcement agencies and other County agencies to improve matters of policing.
   (b)   Appointments. The Board shall appoint members to the Administrative
Charging Committee and Trial Hearing Boards as provided for in Title 3,
Subtitle 1 of the Public Safety Article of the State Code and this Code.
   (c)   Complaints.
      (1)   The Board shall receive complaints of police misconduct from
members of the public.
      (2)   Complaints of police misconduct may be filed using an online
portal.
      (3)   Complaints of police misconduct filed with the Board must be in
writing and shall include:
         (i)   the name of the police officer accused of misconduct;
         (ii)   a description of the facts on which the complaint is based;
         (iii)   contact information for the complainant or a person filing on
behalf of the complainant for investigative follow-up; and
         (iv)   a statement that the complainant affirms under penalty of
perjury that the contents of the complaint are true to the best of their
knowledge, information, and belief.
      (4)   Complaints of police misconduct need not be notarized.
      (5)   Complaints of police misconduct filed with the Board shall be
forwarded to the appropriate law enforcement agency within three days after
receipt by the Board.
      (6)   Complaints of police misconduct filed with a law enforcement agency
shall be forwarded to the Police Accountability Board within three days after
receipt by the law enforcement agency.
   (d)   Reporting.
      (1)   On a quarterly basis, the Board shall review outcomes of
disciplinary matters considered by the Administrative Charging Committee
required by § 3-104 of the Public Safety Article of the State Code.
      (2)   On or before December 31 of each year, the Board shall submit a
report to the County Executive and the County Council that:
         (i)   identifies any trends in the disciplinary process of police
officers in the County; and
         (ii)   makes recommendations on changes to policy that would improve
police officer accountability in the County.
      (3)   Annual reports and any other reports created by the Police
Accountability Board must be shared in a timely manner with the County
Executive and County Council and be available for public view at all Anne
Arundel County public libraries.
(Bill No. 16-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-16-111. Recordkeeping.
   (a)   Maintenance. The Executive Director of the Board shall keep and
maintain records of the Board.
   (b)   Retention. The Board shall formulate a retention schedule for the
records of the Board that is consistent with State and County law.
   (c)   Production. Records and other information shall be produced as
permitted and required by the Maryland Public Information Act. Any records or
information that is not permitted to be produced to the public shall be kept
confidential by all members and staff of the Board.
(Bill No. 16-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-16-112. Administrative Charging Committee and Hearing Boards.
   (a)   Administrative Charging Committee.
      (1)   The Administrative Charging Committee shall have the composition,
powers, and duties as set forth in Title 3, Subtitle 1 of the Public Safety
Article of the State Code.
      (2)   The Administrative Charging Committee shall:
         (i)   review the findings of a law enforcement agency’s investigation
conducted and forwarded in accordance with § 3-104 the Public Safety Article of
State Code;
         (ii)   make a determination that the police officer who is subject to
investigation shall be:
            1.   administratively charged; or
            2.   not administratively charged;
         (iii)   if the police officer is charged, recommend discipline in
accordance with the law enforcement agency’s disciplinary matrix established in
accordance with § 3-105 of the Public Safety Article of State Code;
         (iv)   review any body camera footage that may be relevant to the
matters covered in the complaint of misconduct;
         (v)   authorize a police officer called to appear before an
Administrative Charging Committee to be accompanied by a representative;
         (vi)   issue a written opinion that describes in detail its findings,
determinations, and recommendations;
         (vii)   forward the written opinion to the chief of the law
enforcement agency, the police officer, and the complainant.
      (3)   In executing its duties, the Administrative Charging Committee may:
         (i)   request information or action from the law enforcement agency
that conducted the investigation, including requiring additional investigation
and the issuance of subpoenas;
         (ii)   if the police officer is not administratively charged, make a
determination that:
            1.   the allegations against the police officer are unfounded; or
            2.   the police officer is exonerated; and
         (iii)   record, in writing, any failure of supervision that caused or
contributed to a police officer’s misconduct.
      (4)   The Administrative Charging Committee shall meet once per month or
as needed.
      (5)   A member of the Administrative Charging Committee shall maintain
confidentiality relating to a matter being considered by the Administrative
Charging Committee until final disposition of the matter.
      (6)   The County Executive shall advertise to solicit applications for
the appointees to the Administrative Charging Committee at least 30 days prior
to any appointment.
   (b)   Hearing Boards. The Hearing Boards shall have the composition, powers,
and duties as set forth in Title 3, Subtitle 1 of the Public Safety Article of
the State Code.
   (c)   Compensation and staff. 
      (1)   Members of any Administrative Charging Committee and Hearing Boards
required by State law may be compensated as provided for in the annual budget.
      (2)   Administrative Charging Committee and Hearing Boards may be
assigned additional staff and provided with contractual services as needed and
as provided for in the annual budget.
(Bill No. 16-22; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 17. RECREATIONAL FACILITIES REVENUE AUTHORITY
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
3-17-101.   Establishment, functions authorized.
Subtitle 2. Establishment of Authority
   
3-17-201.   Definitions.
   
3-17-202.   Authority created.
   
3-17-203.   Purpose.
   
3-17-204.   Membership.
   
3-17-205.   Chair.
   
3-17-206.   Quorum; meetings.
   
3-17-207.   Compensation; expenses.
   
3-17-208.   Executive Director.
   
3-17-209.   Secretary-Treasurer.
   
3-17-210.   Powers – In general.
   
3-17-211.   Budget.
   
3-17-212.   Bonds – Authorization.
   
3-17-213.   Security; application of proceeds.
   
3-17-214.   Remedies.
   
3-17-215.   Revenues.
   
3-17-216.   Contracts for construction, services, and the like.
   
3-17-217.   Deposit and audit of funds; publication of financial statement;
inspection of records.
   
3-17-218.   Tax exemption; assessments.
   
3-17-219.   Constituted Authority.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 3-17-101. Establishment, functions authorized.
   (a)   Establishment. Anne Arundel County, Maryland, may establish by local
legislation a Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority.
   (b)   Authority to legislate. The County is authorized to enact, by local
legislation, the provisions of this section and provisions to supplement the
provisions of this section, if not in conflict with this section.
   (c)   County authority. The County may:
      (1)   specify the organization and membership of the Recreational
Facilities Revenue Authority;
      (2)   specify the purposes of the Recreational Facilities Revenue
Authority;
      (3)   specify the powers to be exercised by the Recreational Facilities
Revenue Authority;
      (4)   provide for the exercise of all powers, authority, rights, and
obligations required under this section; and
      (5)   specify any other matters related to the Recreational Facilities
Revenue Authority as the County may determine.
   (d)   Required provisions. Local legislation establishing the Recreational
Facilities Revenue Authority shall contain the following provisions:
      (1)   a provision establishing the Recreational Facilities Revenue
Authority as a body corporate and politic, which shall be deemed an
instrumentality of the County and a public corporation;
      (2)   a provision establishing the purposes of the Recreational
Facilities Revenue Authority;
      (3)   a provision establishing the powers to be exercised by the
Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority, to include all powers necessary or
convenient for carrying out its purposes;
      (4)   a provision establishing regulations relative to members and
employees;
      (5)   a provision establishing that the Recreational Facilities Revenue
Authority may provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable, taxable and
tax exempt revenue bonds, revenue refunding bonds, and other evidences of
indebtedness to pay all or part of the cost or purchase price of one or more
projects or to refund outstanding revenue bonds, which revenue bonds may be
issued without an election referendum or any other proceedings or the
occurrence of any other conditions or events;
      (6)   a provision establishing that the revenue bond proceeds are trust
funds for the purposes for which the bonds are authorized;
      (7)   a provision establishing a lien on the revenue bond proceeds in
favor of the holders of any bonds or any trustee until the moneys are applied
to the purposes for which the bonds are authorized.
      (8)   a provision establishing that the Recreational Facilities Revenue
Authority may secure any revenue bond issued to provide funds for any project
by a trust indenture between the Authority and a corporate trustee;
      (9)   a provision establishing that the Recreational Facilities Revenue
Authority may fix rates, fees, rents, and charges for the use of any of its
projects sufficient to operate and maintain the project, pay the principal of
and interest on its bonds, and maintain a sinking fund pledged and charged with
the payment of interest on the principal of the bonds, administrative charges
by the depository of the fund paying such principal and interest, and any
premium on the bonds retired by call or purchase;
      (10)   a provision establishing that except for revenues required to pay
the cost of operating and maintaining any project and pay the principal of and
interest on the bonds and maintain the sinking fund, all other revenues may be
placed in a fund pledged and charged with financing projects devoted wholly or
partially for public recreational use, including parks, swimming pools, no more
than three golf courses, tennis courts, and recreational facilities;
      (11)   a provision establishing the rights and remedies of bondholders;
      (12)   a provision establishing that unless otherwise provided in the
resolution authorizing any issue of bonds, or unless otherwise provided in the
trust indenture that secures the bonds, all moneys be deposited by the
Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority in one or more banks or trust
companies in one or more special accounts;
      (13)   a provision establishing that the Recreational Facilities Revenue
Authority shall have an annual examination of its books, accounts, and records
by a certified public accountant; and
      (14)   a provision establishing that the Recreational Facilities Revenue
Authority is performing an essential governmental function and is not required
to pay any tax or assessment on any facility or part of a facility, activities
in the operation of any facility, any revenues from operation of any facility
or project, or the bonds of the Authority or the interest on them.
   (e)   Limitation of rights. The State does hereby pledge to and agree with
any person, firm or corporation, or federal agency subscribing to or acquiring
the revenue bonds to be issued by the Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority
for the construction, extension, improvement, equipping, furnishing or
enlargement of any project or part thereof that the State shall not limit or
alter the rights hereby vested in the Authority until any revenue bonds issued
by the Authority, together with the interest thereon, are fully met and
discharged, it being the intent of this section that the Authority shall
continue to have and may exercise all powers granted in this title, so long as
the same shall be necessary or desirable for the carrying out of the purposes
of this section.
   (f)   Application of County Charter or other County laws. No provision of
the County Charter or other County law regarding the duties, powers, or
organization of the Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority apply to the
Authority, unless the County expressly provides by law that the Charter
provision or law applies to the Authority.
   (g)   Conveyance of title. The County Executive with the approval of the
County Council is authorized and empowered to convey to the Recreational
Facilities Revenue Authority the County’s title to any lands, streets, alleys,
buildings, facilities, or other public places.
   (h)   Advancement or assignment of rates, rentals, fees, or charges. The
County Executive with the approval of the County Council is authorized and
empowered to advance or assign to the Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority
any rates, rentals, fees, or charges now being or hereinafter received by the
County, such advance or assignment to be made for the purpose of providing
additional security for any bonds to be issued by the Authority or for such
other purposes as may be agreed between the Authority and the County.
   (i)   Advance of funds.
      (1)   The County Council is authorized and empowered to advance to the
Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority from the general funds of the County,
sums to be used by the Authority to defray expenses for investigation,
engineering and architectural studies, opinions, and compensation of employees
and counsel which may be incurred prior to sale of its revenue bonds.
      (2)   Advances shall be repaid out of the first proceeds of the sale of
revenue bonds by the Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority following any
such advance.
      (3)   The advances may be made in accordance with subsection (k).
   (j)   Issuance of revenue bonds, notes, or other evidence of indebtedness.
The Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority established by the County may
issue revenue bonds, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness on behalf of the
County for public recreational purposes of the Authority.
   (k)   Revenue bonds, notes, or other evidence of indebtedness generally.
      (1)   The revenue bonds, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness issued
under the provisions of this section may not be deemed to constitute a debt of
the County or a pledge of the faith and credit of the County or of the State of
Maryland or any political subdivision of the State of Maryland.
      (2)   The revenue bonds, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness shall
be payable from the funds of the Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority
provided from revenues of the project or projects of the Authority.
      (3)   All revenue bonds shall contain a statement on their face to the
effect that the full faith and credit of the State, County, or any other
political subdivision of the State is not pledged to pay bonds or the interest
thereon.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (k)(5), the issuance of
the revenue bonds, certificates, or other evidences of indebtedness under the
provisions of this section may not directly, indirectly, or contingently
obligate the County to levy or pledge any form of taxation or any appropriation
for their payment.
      (5)   The County Executive, with the approval of the County Council, may
collaterally agree to provide sufficient moneys from the general fund of the
County to pay any deficiency in the debt service requirements of bonds for any
year in which there is a deficit.
      (6)   An advance of moneys from the general fund of the County shall be
repaid from the receipts, rentals, or revenues of the Recreational Facilities
Revenue Authority in the next succeeding year in which such receipts, rentals,
or revenues exceed debt service requirements and operating expenses.
      (7)   An advance of moneys from the general fund of the County under any
agreement or agreements may not exceed and shall be limited and restricted to a
maximum amount established by local legislation, or in the absence of local
legislation, a maximum payment by the County of $25,000 for any one fiscal
year.
   (l)   Revenue bonds as security.
      (1)   Revenue bonds issued by the Recreational Facilities Revenue
Authority authorized by this section are hereby made securities in which all
public officers and public agencies of the State and its political
subdivisions, and all banks, trust companies, savings and loan associations,
investment companies, and others carrying on a banking business, all insurance
companies and insurance associations and others carrying on a banking business,
all administrators, executors, guardians, trustees and other fiduciaries, and
all other persons may legally and properly invest funds, including capital, in
their control or belonging to them.
      (2)   Revenue bonds issued by the Recreational Facilities Revenue
Authority are hereby made securities which may properly and legally be
deposited with and received by any State or municipal officer or any agency or
political subdivision of the State for any purpose for which the deposit of
bonds or other obligations of the State is now or may hereafter be authorized
by law.
   (m)   Tax exemption. The tax exempt bonds, notes, and other evidences of
indebtedness issued by the Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority, their
transfer, the interest payable on them, and any income derived from them,
including any profit realized in their sale or exchange, shall be exempt at all
times from taxation by the State, or by any of its counties, municipal
corporations, or public agencies of any kind.
   (n)   State Code exemption. The bonds, notes, and other evidences of
indebtedness issued by the Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority
established by the County shall be exempt from the provisions of Local
Government Article, §§ 19-201, 19-205, 19-206, and 19-211 et seq., of the State
Code, or any successor provision.
   (o)   Acquisition of property. The Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority
established by the County may acquire real and personal property and interests
in real and personal property within or outside of the County and may pledge,
mortgage, encumber, sell, lease, transfer, or convey any interest in its real
and personal property to the County or any person.
   (p)   Earnings. Earnings of the Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority
established by the County may not inure to the benefit of private persons.
   (q)   Dissolution of Authority. In the event of dissolution of the
Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority established by the County, the title
to all property financed by the proceeds of bonds, notes, or other evidences of
indebtedness issued by the Authority shall revert to the County.
   (r)   Intent. It is the intent of this section that the Recreational
Facilities Revenue Authority established by the County be a “constituted
authority” within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and the
relevant regulations, rulings, and procedures. The powers of the Recreational
Facilities Revenue Authority shall be construed to give effect to this intent.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-101) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
   State Code reference – 1996 Md. Laws, Ch. 302, § 1.
SUBTITLE 2. ESTABLISHMENT OF AUTHORITY
§ 3-17-201. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Authority” means the Anne Arundel County Recreational Facilities
Revenue Authority.
      (2)   “Bonds” includes revenue bonds, refunding bonds, certificates or
other evidences of indebtedness or obligations.
      (3)   “Compensation” includes a monetary payment in the form of a fixed
salary or bonus, and insurance and pension benefits.
      (4)   “Golf course” means a grassy tract or tracts of land consisting of
at least 14 acres that contains tees, fairways, greens, traps, obstacles, and
at least nine holes, in addition to having a combined length from tee to green
of at least 1,000 yards, and the term includes accessory uses such as golf
driving ranges, parking, retail pro shops, dining and refreshment areas, and
other recreational amenities consistent with the game of golf.
      (5)   “Project” means a structure, facility, or undertaking, including
real property, interests in real property, and related or accessory property or
facilities, devoted wholly or partially to public recreational use within Anne
Arundel County, including parks, swimming pools, golf courses, tennis courts,
and recreational facilities, but excluding stadia or areas, any activity
involving gaming or wagering, marinas, or other similar water-based
recreational facilities, and health clubs, bowling alleys, and miniature golf
courses.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-201) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-202. Authority created.
   There is a body corporate and politic to be known as the Anne Arundel County
Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority. The Authority is an instrumentality
of the County and a public corporation.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-202) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-203. Purpose.
   The Authority is created for the purpose of acquiring, constructing,
improving, equipping, furnishing, maintaining, operating, and disposing of
projects.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-203) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-204. Membership.
   (a)   Composition. The Authority consists of nine members appointed by the
County Executive. Each of the members shall be a resident of Anne Arundel
County, an individual of integrity who has demonstrated abilities in business
and public affairs based on education or relevant experience, and selected
without regard to the member’s representation of or support for any special
interest.
   (b)   Advisory member. The Director of Recreation and Parks shall serve as a
non-voting advisor to the Authority.
   (c)   Restrictions on membership. A member may not be a County elected
official, County appointed official, or County employee. Neither the members
nor the member’s grandfather, grandmother, father, mother, son, daughter,
stepson, stepdaughter, grandson, granddaughter, brother, sister, niece, or
nephew, or the spouse of any of them may have a financial interest in any
project with respect to which the Authority has jurisdiction or any power or
authorization to act.
   (d)   Oath of office. Before undertaking the duties of a member, each member
of the Authority shall take a constitutional oath of office before the Clerk of
the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County.
   (e)   Term of office. The term of a member is five years. The terms of
members shall be staggered so that of the initial members, the term of at least
one member, but no more than two members, ends on December 31 of each of the
five years following establishment of the Authority. At the end of a term, a
member continues to serve until a successor is appointed and qualifies. A
member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the rest of the
term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies. A member may be
reappointed.
   (f)   Removal of members. The County Executive may remove a member of the
Authority for cause, including absence from 25% or more of the scheduled
meetings and hearings of the Authority during any 12-month period. The Chair of
the Authority shall notify the County Executive of any member who is absent
from 25% or more of the scheduled meetings and hearings during any 12-month
period, include in the notification any known extenuating circumstances, and
send a copy of the notification to each member of the Authority. The County
Executive may excuse the absences for good cause, such as illness, emergency
situations, or other extenuating circumstances.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-204) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-205. Chair.
   The County Executive annually shall designate a Chair from the members of
the Authority.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-205) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-206. Quorum; meetings.
   (a)   Quorum. Five members of the Authority is a quorum for the transaction
of any business, the exercise of any power, or the performance of any duty
authorized or imposed by law.
   (b)   Taking action. The affirmative vote of five members of the Authority
present and voting is sufficient for the taking of any action.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-206) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-207. Compensation; expenses.
   (a)   Compensation. Each member of the Authority is entitled to an annual
salary in an amount not to exceed $5,000, as determined by the members of the
Authority, and reimbursement for reasonable and necessary expenses.
   (b)   Reimbursement of expenses. Salary and reimbursement of the members
shall be made solely from funds received by the Authority under the provisions
of this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-207) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-208. Executive Director.
   (a)   Appointment. The members of the Authority shall appoint an Executive
Director who shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the members.
   (b)   Qualifications. The Executive Director shall be of good character,
integrity, and business experience.
   (c)   Financial interest prohibited. Neither the Executive Director nor the
Executive Director’s grandfather, grandmother, father, mother, son, daughter,
stepson, stepdaughter, grandson, granddaughter, brother, sister, niece, or
nephew, or the spouse of any of them may have a financial interest in any
project with respect to which the Authority has jurisdiction or any power or
authorization to act.
   (d)   Compensation. The Executive Director shall receive compensation as may
be fixed by the Authority from time to time.
   (e)   Additional duties. In addition to other duties as may be imposed by
the Authority, the Executive Director is responsible for the daily operations
of the Authority and the appointment of all employees, determination of their
duties and conditions of employment, and fixing their compensation, consistent
with the bylaws, policies, and procedures adopted by the Authority.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-208) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-209. Secretary-Treasurer.
   (a)   Appointment. The members of the Authority shall appoint a Secretary-
Treasurer. The Secretary-Treasurer may, but need not be, a member of the
Authority.
   (b)   Compensation. The Secretary-Treasurer shall receive compensation as
may be fixed by the Authority from time to time, even if the Secretary-
Treasurer is a member of the Authority.
   (c)   Financial interest prohibited. Neither the Secretary-Treasurer nor the
Secretary- Treasurer’s grandfather, grandmother, father, mother, son, daughter,
stepson, stepdaughter, grandson, granddaughter, brother, sister, niece, or
nephew, or the spouse of any of them may have a financial interest in any
project with respect to which the Authority has jurisdiction or any power or
authorization to act.
   (d)   Surety bond. Before the issuance of any bonds under the provisions of
this title, the Secretary-Treasurer shall execute a surety bond in a penal sum
to be fixed by the Authority. The surety bond shall be conditioned on the
faithful performance of the duties of office and executed by a surety company
authorized to transact business in this State as surety. The Authority shall
pay the premium on the surety bond.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-209) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-210. Powers – In general.
   (a)   Generally. The Authority has and may exercise all powers necessary or
convenient for carrying out the purposes set forth in §
3-17-203, including:
      (1)   to have perpetual existence as a corporation;
      (2)   to sue and be sued;
      (3)   to adopt, use, and alter at will a corporate seal;
      (4)   to acquire, hold, and use any property, real, personal, or mixed,
tangible or intangible, or any interest necessary or desirable for carrying out
the purposes of the Authority;
      (5)   to lease as lessee any property, real, personal, or mixed, or any
interest in property, for a term not exceeding 99 years at a nominal rental or
such annual rental as may be determined by the Authority;
      (6)   to lease as lessor to the State, the County, any political
subdivision, or any person, any project at any time constructed by the
Authority, whether wholly or partially completed, and any property, real,
personal, or mixed, tangible or intangible, or any interest in property, at any
time acquired by the Authority, whether wholly or partially completed;
      (7)   to sell, transfer, and convey to the County any project at any time
constructed by the Authority, and any property, real, personal, or mixed,
tangible or intangible, or any interest in property, at any time acquired by
the Authority;
      (8)   to acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise, and to construct,
improve, equip, furnish, maintain, repair, and operate projects, but no more
than three golf courses;
      (9)   to appoint officers, to prescribe their duties, and to fix their
compensation;
      (10)   to retain professional services;
      (11)   to make bylaws for the management and regulation of its affairs
and to adopt personnel policies and procedures;
      (12)   to fix, charge, and collect rates, fees, rents, and charges for
the use of its projects, or for the services rendered by the Authority or its
projects, at rates to be determined by it, for the purpose of:
         (i)   operating and maintaining projects;
         (ii)   paying the principal of and interest on its bonds;
         (iii)   maintaining the funds as established in §
3-17-212 pledged and charged with payment of interest on and the principal of
the bond, administrative charges by the depository of the fund paying principal
and interest, and any premium on the bonds retired by call or purchase;
         (iv)   providing for the payment of expenses of the Authority; and
         (v)   fulfilling the terms and provisions of any agreements made with
the purchasers or holders of any bonds;
      (13)   to borrow money and issue negotiable bonds and to secure the
payment of bonds, or any part of the bonds, by pledge, mortgage, or indenture
of trust of all or any part of its property, projects, revenues, rentals,
receipts, and funds available from any source whatsoever, all as may be
provided or authorized in the resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds, and
to make agreements with the purchasers or holders of bonds or with others in
connection with any bonds whether issued or to be issued, as the Authority
considers advisable, and in general to provide for the security for bonds and
the rights of the holders of bonds;
      (14)   to make contracts and to execute all instruments necessary or
convenient for the carrying on of its business;
      (15)   to borrow money and accept grants or assignments from, and enter
into contracts, leases, or other transactions with, any federal, State, County
or municipal agency;
      (16)   to pledge, hypothecate, or otherwise encumber all or any of the
revenues or receipts of the Authority as security for all or any of the
obligations of the Authority;
      (17)   to acquire by assignment from the State or the County, contracts
that are not completed and that involve constructing, improving, equipping,
furnishing, maintaining, and operating the structures, facilities, or
undertakings that the Authority is authorized to undertake as projects;
      (18)   to convey to the County all of its right, title, and interest in
any project if the bonds issued under this subtitle to provide funds for the
costs of the project have been paid and retired; and
      (19)   to do all acts and things necessary or convenient to carry out the
powers granted to it by law.
   (b)   Delegation of powers and duties. The Authority may delegate to one or
more of its members, or to its officers, agents, and employees, the powers and
duties that it considers proper.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-210) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-211. Budget.
   (a)   Fiscal year. The fiscal year of the Authority shall be from July 1 to
June 30.
   (b)   Capital budget and program. An improvement or extension of an existing
project may not be undertaken unless approved in the capital budget and
program. The capital budget and program shall include all capital projects and
programs of the Authority, including substantial improvements and extensions of
projects previously authorized.
   (c)   Coverage of capital budget and program. The capital budget and program
shall cover six fiscal years and shall:
      (1)   include a statement of the objectives of the capital program and
relationship of this program to the County’s adopted long-range development
plans as provided in §
18-2-103 of this Code;
      (2)   present a capital projects schedule and a construction schedule;
and
      (3)   provide an estimate of costs and a statement of all funding
sources.
   (d)   Submission. No later than March 1 before the beginning of a fiscal
year, the Authority shall submit a copy of the proposed operating budget and
capital budget and program for the next fiscal year to the County Executive and
the County Council. No later than April 1 before the beginning of a fiscal
year, the Authority shall hold one or more public hearings on the proposed
operating budget and capital budget and program. No later than May 1 before the
beginning of a fiscal year, the Authority shall adopt the operating budget and
capital budget and program and forward the adopted budgets to the County
Executive and County Council.
   (e)   Deletion of projects. By a resolution adopted no later than 30 days
before the beginning of a fiscal year, the County Council may delete a project
in its entirety from the capital budget and program, but may not otherwise
alter or amend the project. The County Council may not delete a project if
bonds have been issued and remain outstanding for the project, if the Authority
has executed a binding contract to sell bonds for the project, or if the
Authority has executed a binding contract for construction and construction has
commenced.
   (f)   Final capital budget and program. The final capital budget and program
shall consist of the capital budget and program as submitted to the County
Council, exclusive of projects deleted by the County Council.
   (g)   Amendments. The Authority may amend its capital budget and program
during a fiscal year, effective 30 days after the Authority submits an
amendment to the County Executive and the County Council. By resolution adopted
not later than 30 days after submission of the amendment, the County Council
may reject the amendment, in which event the capital budget and program may not
be amended with that amendment.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-211) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-212. Bonds – Authorization.
   (a)   Generally. The Authority may provide by resolution for the issuance of
negotiable, taxable, and tax-exempt bonds to pay all or part of the cost or
purchase price of one or more projects or to refund outstanding bonds. The
resolution authorizing the bonds shall specify, in general detail, the project
to be financed or refinanced with the proceeds of the bonds.
   (b)   Specifications. The resolution authorizing the bonds may specify and
prescribe, or may authorize the Chair of the Authority or other designated
member of the Authority, by order, to specify and prescribe any of the
following, as the Chair or the member considers appropriate, to effect the
financing or refinancing of the project:
      (1)   the actual principal amount of the bonds to be issued;
      (2)   the actual rate or rates of interest the bonds are to bear;
      (3)   the manner in which and the terms on which the bonds are to be
sold, that may be at public sale or private negotiated sale at a price at,
above, or below par;
      (4)   the time or times that the bonds may be executed, issued, and
delivered;
      (5)   the form and tenor of the bonds and the denominations in which the
bonds may be issued and the manner in which the bonds are to be executed;
      (6)   the manner in which and the times and places that the principal of
and interest on the bonds are to be paid;
      (7)   the provisions under which any or all of the bonds may be called
for redemption prior to their stated maturity dates;
      (8)   the terms and provisions of any trust indenture, assignment,
mortgage, deed of trust, guaranty, security instrument, general or standby
letter of credit, revolving credit facility, repurchase agreement, escrow
agreement, or other instrument executed and delivered in connection with the
issuance and sale of the bonds, the securing of the bonds, the marketing or
remarketing of the bonds, or the accomplishment of the purpose or purposes of
the financing or refinancing, and, where applicable, the manner of execution of
the instrument on behalf of the Authority;
      (9)   the establishment of any debt service reserve fund, depreciation
fund, bond fund, or other similar fund with respect to the bonds;
      (10)   the terms and provisions of any covenant of the Authority with
regard to rates, fees, rents, or charges of the Authority;
      (11)   the terms and provisions of any bond insurance, letter of credit,
or other credit enhancement of the bonds;
      (12)   any limitations on the issuance of additional bonds;
      (13)   in the case of the issuance of refunding bonds, the plan of
refinancing;
      (14)   the identity of any trustee, paying agent, registrar, or escrow
agent in connection with the issuance, sale, and delivery of the bonds;
      (15)   the identity of any investment banker, underwriter, placement
agent or other broker to be employed by or on behalf of the Authority in
connection with the issuance, sale, and delivery of the bonds and the form of
any preliminary and final official statement issued in connection with any
public offering of the bonds or any offering memorandum or other official
information or document prepared in connection with any private placement of
the bonds; the date, time and place when any purchasing agreement or proposal
shall be submitted for the bonds, the terms or provisions of the agreement or
proposal, and any other matters as the underwriters, investment bankers, or
other placement agents employed in connection with the issuance of the bonds
may request; and
      (16)   any other provision consistent with this title and other
applicable law as determined by the Authority to be necessary or desirable to
effect the financing or refinancing of the project.
   (c)   Compliance with law. The authorizing resolution and the bonds
authorized by the resolution shall fully comply with the requirements of this
title.
   (d)   Issuance. The bonds may be issued without an election referendum or
any other proceedings or the occurrence of any other events.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-212) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-213. Security; application of proceeds.
   (a)   Generally. The Authority may secure any bond by a trust indenture by
and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, that may be any trust
company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside this
State.
   (b)   Proceeds as trust funds. All bond proceeds are trust funds for the
purposes for which the bonds are authorized.
   (c)   Lien on proceeds. There is a lien on bond proceeds in favor of the
purchasers or holders of the bonds or any trustee appointed with respect to any
bonds until the moneys are applied to the purposes for which the bonds are
authorized.
   (d)   Depository of proceeds. Any bank or trust company having the powers of
a trust company within or outside this State may act as depository of the
proceeds of the bonds or revenues received from projects.
   (e)   Use of proceeds. In the case of bonds issued to finance a project,
bond proceeds shall be used to pay the cost of the project for which the bond
is issued, including:
      (1)   the cost of all land, property rights, easements, and franchises
necessary for the construction and establishment of a project;
      (2)   the cost of all labor, materials, machinery and equipment,
financing charges, interest before and during construction and for one year
after completion of construction, and the funding of reserves;
      (3)   the cost of engineering, architectural, and legal services, plans,
specifications, surveys, estimates of cost and of revenues, other expenses
necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of
construction, and administrative expenses; and
      (4)   other expenses necessary or incident to the financing authorized in
this title, including bond issuance costs, bond insurance premiums, letter of
credit, or other financing expenses and the construction and establishment of a
project, including purchase, remodeling, reconstruction, and placing in
operation of any existing facility acquired by the Authority as a project.
   (f)   Application and investment of proceeds. In the case of bonds issued to
refund outstanding bonds, bond proceeds may be applied to the funding of
reserves and shall otherwise be applied and invested in the same manner as
prescribed in Local Government Article, § 19-207, of the State Code for the
application and investment of proceeds of refunding bonds issued under Local
Government Article, § 19-207, of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-213) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-214. Remedies.
   The resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds, any order executed
pursuant to the resolution, or the trust indenture may contain provisions for
protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be
reasonable and proper, including:
      (1)   covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to
the construction, acquisition, improvement, installation, maintenance,
operation, repair, and insurance of any project, and the custody, safeguarding,
and application of all proceeds;
      (2)   provisions that a project shall be constructed and paid for under
the supervision and approval of consulting engineers employed or designated by
the Authority and satisfactory to the trustee or, if none, the original
purchasers of the bonds; and
      (3)   provisions setting forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders
and of the trustee and restricting the individual right of action of
bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures
of corporations.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-214) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-215. Revenues.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “net income” means total revenues less
amounts required for:
      (1)   operating and maintaining projects;
      (2)   paying the principal of and interest on bonds;
      (3)   maintaining the funds as established in §
3-17-212 pledged and charged with payment of interest on and the principal of
the bonds, administrative charges by the depository of the fund paying
principal and interest, and any premium on the bonds retired by call or
purchase; and
      (4)   fulfilling the terms and provisions of any agreements made with the
purchasers or holders of any bonds.
   (b)   Annual payment. The Authority shall make an annual payment to the
County in the amount of 20% of net income, unless the County Executive, with
the approval of the County Council by resolution, makes a written waiver of the
payment in whole or in part for good cause shown. The Authority may place the
remaining balance of its net income in a fund pledged and charged with
financing projects.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-215) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-216. Contracts for construction, services, and the like.
   (a)   Adoption of rules and regulations. The Authority may make rules and
regulations for the submission of bids and the construction, equipping,
furnishing, and improvement of any project or portion of a project.
   (b)   Competitive bidding. If any project, any portion of a project, or any
improvement of a project is constructed, equipped, or furnished under a
contract and the estimated cost exceeds $25,000, the Authority shall award the
contract on the basis of a competitive bidding process, except for emergency
purchasers, professional services, and contracts involving material and
equipment of a non- competitive nature as may be defined and governed by the
regulations adopted by the Authority.
   (c)   Non-discrimination. All construction contracts shall contain
provisions obligating the contractor not to discriminate in any manner against
any employee or applicant for employment because of race, creed, color, or
national origin and obligating the contractor to include a similar clause in
all subcontracts, except subcontracts for standard commercial supplies or raw
materials. In addition, the contractor and subcontractor shall agree to post in
conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment,
notices setting forth the provisions of the non-discrimination clause.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-216) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-217. Deposit and audit of funds; publication of financial statement;
inspection of records.
   (a)   Payment to Secretary-Treasurer. Unless otherwise provided in the
resolution authorizing any issuance of bonds under this title, or unless
otherwise provided by the indenture of trust that secures the bonds, all moneys
received by the Authority from whatever source derived shall be paid to the
Secretary-Treasurer of the Authority.
   (b)   Deposit of funds. The Secretary-Treasurer shall deposit all moneys in
one or more banks or trust companies in one or more special accounts. Funds on
deposit to a special account shall be invested at all times in accordance with
the requirements applicable to the County for the investment of public funds.
   (c)   Payment from accounts. The moneys in such accounts shall be paid out
on the warrant or other order of the Chair of the Authority, or of another
person authorized by the Authority to execute warrants or orders.
   (d)   Annual audited financial statements. Each year the Authority shall
publish audited financial statements prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. A copy of the audit shall be delivered to the
County Executive, the County Council, and to any other persons named to receive
the audit in the resolution that authorized the issuance of the bonds or in the
trust indenture that secures them.
   (e)   Publication of financial statement. A concise financial statement of
the Authority shall be published annually in a newspaper of general circulation
in the County.
   (f)   Examination of books, accounts, and records. The County Attorney,
Controller, or County Auditor may examine the books, accounts, and records of
the Authority.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-217) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-218. Tax exemption; assessments.
   (a)   Declaration of public purpose. It is hereby found, determined, and
declared that the establishment of any project under the provisions of this
title is in all respects for the benefit of the inhabitants of the County and
is a public purpose, and that the County, the State, and the Authority will be
performing an essential governmental function in the exercise of the powers
conferred by this title.
   (b)   Tax exemption. The Authority may not be required to pay any taxes or
assessments on any facility or part of a facility, activities in the operation
of any facility, any revenues from operation of any facility or project, or the
bonds of the Authority or the interest on them.
   (c)   Retail sales tax. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
exempting the Authority from collecting retail sales tax as required by State
law.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-218) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-17-219. Constituted Authority.
   It is the intent of the County Council that the Authority is a Constituted
Authority within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and the
relevant regulations, rulings, and procedures. The powers of the Authority
shall be construed to give effect to this intent.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 11-219) (Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 18. RESILIENCE AUTHORITY OF ANNAPOLIS AND ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY
Section
   
3-18-101.   Definitions.
   
3-18-102.   Resilience Authority created.
   
3-18-103.   Membership.
   
3-18-104.   Chair.
   
3-18-105.   Quorum; meetings.
   
3-18-106.   Expenses.
   
3-18-107.   Resilience Authority Director.
   
3-18-108.   Chief Financial Officer.
   
3-18-109.   Net earnings.
   
3-18-110.   Powers.
   
3-18-111.   Bonds.
   
3-18-112.   Bond transactions.
   
3-18-113.   Reporting.
§ 3-18-101. Definitions.
   In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   (i)   “Bond” means an obligation for the payment of money, by
whatever name known or source of funds secured, issued by the Resilience
Authority under State or County law.
         (ii)   “Bond” includes a refunding bond, a note, and any other
obligation.
      (2)   “Capital costs” mean costs incurred for acquisition, planning,
design, construction, repair, renovation, reconstruction, expansion, site
improvement, and capital equipping.
      (3)   “Climate change” includes sea level rise, nuisance flooding,
increased rainfall events, erosion, and temperature rise.
      (4)   “Resilience Authority” means the Resilience Authority of Annapolis
and Anne Arundel County.
      (5)   (i)   “Resilience infrastructure” means infrastructure that
mitigates the effects of climate change for the general welfare or safety of
the public.
         (ii)   “Resilience infrastructure” includes flood barriers, green
spaces, building elevation, and stormwater infrastructure.
      (6)   “Resilience infrastructure project” means a project to finance or
refinance the capital costs associated with resilience infrastructure.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-18-102. Resilience Authority created.
   (a)   Creation; articles of incorporation.
      (1)   Pursuant to Title 22 of the Local Government Article of the State
Code, there is a Resilience Authority of Annapolis and Anne Arundel County, the
purpose of which is to undertake and support resilience infrastructure projects
in Anne Arundel County and the City of Annapolis.
      (2)   Upon the acceptance by the State Department of Assessments and
Taxation of the articles of incorporation required by State law, the Resilience
Authority of Annapolis and Anne Arundel County shall be a body corporate and
politic of the County and the City of Annapolis.
      (3)   Acceptance of the articles of incorporation for record by the State
Department of Assessments and Taxation is conclusive evidence of the formation
of the Resilience Authority.
   (b)   Amendment of articles of incorporation.
      (1)   The County, with the concurrence of the City of Annapolis, may
adopt amendments to the articles of incorporation of the Resilience Authority.
      (2)   The amendments shall be proposed by the County Executive and
approved by resolution of the County Council.
      (3)   The amendments may contain any provision that lawfully could be
contained in the articles of incorporation at the time of the amendment.
      (4)   The amendments shall be filed for record with the State Department
of Assessments and Taxation.
      (5)   The amendments are effective as of the date and time that the State
Department of Assessments and Taxation accepts the amendments for record.
      (6)   Acceptance of the amendments for record by the State Department of
Assessments and Taxation is conclusive evidence that the amendments have been
lawfully and properly adopted.
   (c)   Modification or termination.
      (1)   Subject to the provisions of this title and any limitations imposed
by law on the impairment of contracts, the County, with the concurrence of the
City of Annapolis, may:
         (i)   set or change the powers, structure, organization, procedures,
programs, or activities of the Resilience Authority;
         (ii)   determine the revenue sources of the Resilience Authority,
including any use of general fund revenue and general obligation bonds;
         (iii)   establish the budgetary and financial procedures of the
Resilience Authority; and
         (iv)   terminate the Resilience Authority.
      (2)   On termination of the Resilience Authority:
         (i)   title to all property of the Resilience Authority shall be
transferred to and vest in the County and the City of Annapolis; and
         (ii)   all obligations of the Resilience Authority shall be
transferred to and assumed by the County and the City of Annapolis.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-18-103. Membership.
   (a)   Composition.
      (1)   The Resilience Authority consists of twelve members appointed as
follows:
         (i)   Nine members shall be residents of the County appointed by the
County Executive; and
         (ii)   Three members shall be residents of the City of Annapolis
appointed by the Mayor.
      (2)   Each of the members shall be an individual of integrity who has
demonstrated abilities in business and public affairs based on education or
relevant experience and shall be selected without regard to the member’s
representation of or support for any special interest.
      (3)   Neither the member nor the member’s grandparent, parent, child,
grandchild, step-parent, step-child, sibling, step-sibling, uncle, aunt, niece,
or nephew, or the spouse of any of them, may have a financial interest in any
project with respect to which the Resilience Authority has jurisdiction or any
power or authorization to act.
      (4)   A member may not be a County or city elected official, appointed
official, or employee.
      (5)   The County Director of Public Works, the County Director of
Emergency Management, the County Planning and Zoning Officer, the Director of
the Department of Public Works for the City of Annapolis, the Director of
Emergency Management for the City of Annapolis, the Deputy City Manager for
Resilience and Sustainability for the City of Annapolis, and the Director of
Planning and Zoning for the City of Annapolis, or any of their designees, shall
serve as non-voting advisors to the Resilience Authority.
   (b)   Oath. Before undertaking the duties of a member, each member of the
Resilience Authority shall take a constitutional oath of office before the
Clerk of the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County.
   (c)   Terms.
      (1)   Initial appointments of members by the County Executive and Mayor
shall be as follows:
         (i)   The County Executive shall appoint three members and the Mayor
shall appoint one member whose terms end on September 30, 2025;
         (ii)   The County Executive shall appoint three members and the Mayor
shall appoint one member whose terms end on September 30, 2026; and
         (iii)   The County Executive shall appoint three members and the Mayor
shall appoint one member whose terms end on September 30, 2027.
      (2)   Members appointed after the initial appointments shall serve four
year terms. At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor
is appointed and qualifies. A member who is appointed after a term has begun
serves only for the remainder of the term and until a successor is appointed
and qualifies. A member may be reappointed, but no member shall serve more than
three consecutive terms.
   (d)   Removal.
      (1)   The appointing authority of a member of the Resilience Authority
may remove the member for cause, including absence from 25% or more of the
scheduled meetings and hearings of the resilience authority during any 12-month
period.
      (2)   The Chair of the Resilience Authority shall:
         (i)   notify the appointing authority of any member who is absent from
25% or more of the scheduled meetings and hearings during any 12-month period;
         (ii)   include in the notification any known extenuating
circumstances; and
         (iii)   send a copy of the notification to each member of the
Resilience Authority.
      (3)   The appointing authority may excuse the absences for good cause
such as illness, emergency situations, or other extenuating circumstances.
   (e)   Personnel matters. Except as otherwise provided by State law or in
this title, the procedures of the County control any personnel matter relating
to the internal administration of the Resilience Authority.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 23-23; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-18-104. Chair.
   The County Executive annually shall designate a Chair from the membership of
the Resilience Authority.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-18-105. Quorum; meetings.
   Seven members of the Resilience Authority is a quorum for the transaction of
any business, the exercise of any power, or the performance of any duty
authorized or imposed by law. An affirmative vote of a majority of the members
of the Resilience Authority is required for the taking of any action.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-18-106. Expenses.
   Each member of the Resilience Authority is entitled to reimbursement for
reasonable and necessary expenses. Reimbursement shall be made solely from
funds received by the Resilience Authority under the provisions of this title.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-18-107. Resilience Authority Director.
   (a)   Appointment.
      (1)   The County Executive, with the concurrence of the Mayor of the City
of Annapolis, shall appoint the first Resilience Authority Director.
      (2)   Any subsequent Resilience Authority Director shall be appointed by
the County Executive, after advice and recommendation by members of the
Resilience Authority and with the concurrence of the Mayor of the City of
Annapolis.
      (3)   The Resilience Authority Director shall be an employee of the
Resilience Authority and shall serve at the pleasure of the County Executive.
   (b)   Qualifications. The Resilience Authority Director shall be of good
character, integrity, and business experience, and shall meet all requirements
of a job description developed by the County Executive with the concurrence of
the Mayor of the City of Annapolis.
   (c)   Financial interest prohibited. Neither the Resilience Authority
Director nor the Resilience Authority Director’s grandparent, parent, child,
grandchild, step-parent, step-child, sibling, step-sibling, uncle, aunt, niece,
or nephew, or the spouse of any of them, may have a financial interest in any
project with respect to which the Resilience Authority has jurisdiction or any
power or authorization to act.
   (d)   Additional duties. In addition to other duties as may be imposed by
the Resilience Authority, and consistent with the job description developed
under subsection (b), the Resilience Authority Director is responsible for
daily operations of the Resilience Authority, supervision of any activities or
tasks performed by employees, and appointment of all employees, determination
of their duties and conditions of employment, and fixing their compensation,
consistent with the bylaws, policies, and procedures adopted by the Resilience
Authority.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 23-23; Bill No. 94-24; Bill No. 47-25)
§ 3-18-108. Chief Financial Officer.
   (a)   Nomination and Appointment. The Resilience Authority Director shall
nominate a candidate for Chief Financial Officer. The Resilience Authority
Director shall appoint the candidate to the position upon confirmation of the
candidate’s nomination by a majority of the members of the Resilience
Authority.
   (b)   Qualifications. The Chief Financial Officer shall be of good
character, integrity, and business experience, and shall meet all requirements
of a job description developed by the Resilience Authority Director and
approved by the members.
   (c)   Compensation. The Chief Financial Officer shall receive compensation
as may be fixed by the Resilience Authority from time to time.
   (d)   Financial interest prohibited. Neither the Chief Financial Officer nor
the Chief Financial Officer’s grandparent, parent, child, grandchild, step-
parent, step-child, sibling, step-sibling, uncle, aunt, niece, or nephew, or
the spouse of any of them, may have a financial interest in any project with
respect to which the Resilience Authority has jurisdiction or any power or
authorization to act.
   (e)   Surety bond. Before the issuance of any bonds under the provisions of
this title, the Chief Financial Officer shall execute a surety bond in a penal
sum to be fixed by the Resilience Authority. The surety bond shall be
conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of office and executed by
a surety company authorized to transact business in this State as surety. The
Resilience Authority shall pay the premium on the bond.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 23-23; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-18-109. Net earnings.
   Except as necessary to pay debt service or implement the public purposes or
programs of the County or the City of Annapolis, the net earnings of the
Resilience Authority may benefit only the County or the City of Annapolis, and
may not benefit any person.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-18-110. Powers.
   (a)   Generally. Except as limited by its articles of incorporation, the
Resilience Authority has all the powers under this title.
   (b)   Enumerated. The Resilience Authority has and may exercise all powers
necessary or convenient to undertake, finance, manage, acquire, own, convey, or
support resilience infrastructure projects, including, but not limited to, the
power to:
      (1)   acquire by purchase, lease, or other legal means, but not by
eminent domain, property for resilience infrastructure;
      (2)   establish, construct, alter, improve, equip, repair, maintain,
operate, and regulate resilience infrastructure owned by the County, the City
of Annapolis, or the Resilience Authority;
      (3)   receive money from the County, the City of Annapolis, the State,
other governmental units, or private organizations;
      (4)   charge and collect fees for its services;
      (5)   subject to the approval of the County Executive and by resolution
of the County Council, and the City of Annapolis, charge and collect fees to
support its bond issuances;
      (6)   have employees and consultants as it considers necessary;
      (7)   engage the services of other governmental units;
      (8)   act as necessary or convenient to carry out the powers granted by
law;
      (9)   sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in
all courts of competent jurisdiction; and
      (10)   draft and approve by-laws for the management and regulation of its
affairs, which will be provided upon approval or revision to each appointing
authority.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-18-111. Bonds.
   (a)   Authority. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Resilience
Authority may issue and sell bonds periodically:
      (1)   for resilience infrastructure projects;
      (2)   to refund outstanding bonds;
      (3)   to pay the costs of preparing, printing, selling, and issuing the
bonds;
      (4)   to fund reserves; and
      (5)   to pay the interest on the bonds in the amount and for the period
the Resilience Authority considers reasonable.
   (b)   Limitation. Bonds issued by the Resilience Authority are limited
obligations and are not a pledge of the faith and credit or taxing power of the
County or the City of Annapolis.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-18-112. Bond transactions.
   (a)   Resolution required. For each issue of its bonds, the Resilience
Authority shall adopt a resolution that:
      (1)   specifies and describes the resilience infrastructure being
financed;
      (2)   generally describes the public purpose to be served;
      (3)   describes the financing transaction;
      (4)   specifies the maximum principal amount of the bonds that may be
issued; and
      (5)   imposes terms or conditions on the issuance and sale of bonds it
considers appropriate.
   (b)   Resolution permitted. The Resilience Authority, by corporate
resolution, may:
      (1)   specify, determine, prescribe, and approve matters, documents, and
procedures that relate to the authorization, sale, security, issuance,
delivery, and payment of and for the bonds;
      (2)   create security for the bonds;
      (3)   provide for the administration of bond issues through trust or
other agreements with a bank or trust company that cover a countersignature on
a bond, the delivery of a bond, or the security for a bond; and
      (4)   take other action it considers appropriate concerning the bonds.
   (c)   Contracts. A contract for a resilience infrastructure project may
include the requirement for surety and labor and material bonds.
   (d)   Conclusiveness. A finding by the County Council, the City Council, or
the Board of Directors of the Resilience Authority as to the public purpose of
an action taken under this title, and the appropriateness of that action to
serve the public purpose, is conclusive in a proceeding involving the validity
or enforceability of a bond or security for a bond issued under this title.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-18-113. Reporting.
   (a)   Annual report. By January 1 of each year, the Resilience Authority
shall provide a written report and audited financial statements prepared in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States,
to the County Executive, the County Council, the Mayor of the City of
Annapolis, and the Annapolis City Council on the activities and financial
position of the Resilience Authority for and as of the end of the prior fiscal
year.
   (b)   Report to State.
      (1)   Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, by January 1 of each
year, the Resilience Authority shall submit a report in accordance with § 2-
1257 of the State Government Article of the State Code to:
         (i)   the Senate Budget and Taxation, and Education, Health, and
Environmental Affairs Committees; and
         (ii)   the House Appropriations, and Environment and Transportation
Committees.
      (2)   The report required under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall
include, at a minimum:
         (i)   a copy of the report required under subsection (a) of this
section;
         (ii)   a description of the resilience infrastructure projects funded
by the Resilience Authority; and
         (iii)   the sources of revenue for the resilience infrastructure
projects undertaken by the Resilience Authority.
   (c)   Examination of books, accounts, and records. The County Controller,
County Auditor, County Attorney, and City Manager, or their designees, may
examine the books, accounts, and records of the Authority.
(Bill No. 31-21; Bill No. 23-23; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 19. SALARY STANDARD COMMISSION
Section
   
3-19-101.   Salary Standard Commission.
§ 3-19-101. Salary Standard Commission.
   There is a Salary Standard Commission composed of seven members appointed by
the County Council. The Commission shall report to the County Council in
accordance with Local Government Article, § 10-302, of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 2-101) (Bill No. 35-86; Bill No. 39-90; Bill No. 56-94;
Bill No. 13-98; Bill No. 64-98; Bill No. 4-02; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 20. SCENIC AND HISTORIC ROADS COMMISSION
Section
   
3-20-101.   Scenic and Historic Roads Commission.
   
3-20-102.   Powers and duties.
   
3-20-103.   Criteria for designation of scenic and historic roads.
§ 3-20-101. Scenic and Historic Roads Commission.
   (a)   Established. There is a Scenic and Historic Roads Commission.
   (b)   Composition. The Commission consists of 17 members, of the 17 members:
      (1)   two shall be from each councilmanic district; and
      (2)   three shall be members of the Anne Arundel Trade Council.
   (c)   Chair and Vice Chair. The Chair and Vice Chair shall be elected by the
members of the Commission.
   (d)   Meetings; quorum.
      (1)   The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair or at the
request of nine members, as frequently as required to perform its duties, but
no less than four times a year.
      (2)   A quorum consists of a majority of the Commission members. An
affirmative vote of a majority of those present at any meeting at which there
is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of the Commission.
   (e)   Technical advice and staff support. The Commission shall receive
technical advice and staff support from the Office of Planning and Zoning and
the Department of Public Works.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 8-101) (Bill No. 70-94; Bill No. 20-00; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-20-102. Powers and duties.
   (a)   Generally. Among its powers and duties, the Commission shall develop a
scenic and historic roads program, and recommend to the County Executive and
the County Council:
      (1)   the designation of certain County roads as scenic or historic
roads;
      (2)   amendments to this Code, including zoning and subdivision
provisions, to promote the preservation of scenic and historic roads; and
      (3)   changes to the General Development Plan, the Comprehensive
Transportation Plan, the Design Manual, and other County plans and procedures
that impact scenic and historic roads.
   (b)   Consultation. The Commission shall consult with the Office of Planning
and Zoning and the Department of Public Works in developing a scenic and
historic roads program and in making its recommendations.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 8-102) (Bill No. 70-94; Bill No. 20-00; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-20-103. Criteria for designation of scenic and historic roads.
   (a)   Considerations. In designating a road as scenic or historic, the
Commission shall consider;
      (1)   the visual quality of the road itself and its right-of-way, and the
view from the roadside and the environment through which the road passes; and
      (2)   the historic significance of the road, its right-of-way, or the
bordering land.
   (b)   Criteria for designation. For designation as a scenic or historic
road, a road shall meet at least two of the criteria set forth in this section.
   (c)   Specific criteria. A scenic or historic rural road shall:
      (1)   have outstanding natural features along its right-of-way or
borders;
      (2)   have outstanding vistas of rural landscape;
      (3)   have historic significance or be a component of a historic
landscape;
      (4)   have low traffic volume, with the road designed primarily for local
use;
      (5)   be narrow, without sidewalks, curbs, or gutters;
      (6)   have a winding horizontal or undulating vertical alignment, with
steep side embankments; or
      (7)   have integrity and the ability to convey its significance.
   (d)   Requirements. A scenic or historic neighborhood road shall:
      (1)   have a scale compatible with the neighborhood;
      (2)   have alignments that are integrated with the natural and created
features of the neighborhood;
      (3)   have views of historic resources, pass through neighborhoods
containing historic buildings, or possess its own historic significance;
      (4)   have integrity and the ability to convey its significance; or
      (5)   be part of a network of like roads that together create a cohesive
neighborhood.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 8-103) (Bill No. 70-94; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 21. SELF-INSURANCE FUND COMMITTEE
Section
   
3-21-101.   Established; purpose; coverage.
   
3-21-102.   Sovereign or governmental immunity.
   
3-21-103.   Annual appropriation.
   
3-21-104.   Reserves for health insurance program.
   
3-21-105.   Self-Insurance Fund Committee.
   
3-21-106.   Approval of claims by the County Council.
   
3-21-107.   Duties of Central Services Officer.
   
3-21-108.   Duties of insureds.
   
3-21-109.   Legal counsel.
   
3-21-110.   Fiscal management.
   
3-21-111.   Termination of fund.
§ 3-21-101. Established; purpose; coverage.
   (a)   Fund established; purpose. There is a Self-Insurance Fund for the
County. The Fund shall be used to secure:
      (1)   the liability of the County, The Public Library Association of
Annapolis and Anne Arundel County, Inc., and the volunteer fire companies and
rescue squads for which the County provides insurance coverage, for the payment
of property damage, automobile liability, and general liability claims against
themselves and their respective agents, servants, and employees; and
      (2)   the liability of the County for the payment of workers’
compensation benefits to persons whose salaries are paid from the County
payroll, persons to whom benefits are otherwise required to be paid by the
County under State or County law, and other persons for whom the County elects
to provide workers’ compensation benefits under an agreement.
   (b)   Coverage. The Self-Insurance Fund constitutes the insurance coverage
required to be maintained by the County pursuant to the Transportation Article,
of the State Code, and the Labor and Employment Article, of the State Code, on
approval of the State Motor Vehicle Administration and the State Workers’
Compensation Commission, respectively.
   (c)   Agreements. The County may cooperate with and enter into agreements
with the Board of Education of Anne Arundel County and the Anne Arundel
Community College to provide insurance coverage for property damage, workers’
compensation and liability claims against the Board of Education and the
Community College, and their respective agents, servants, and employees.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 5-101) (Bill No. 58-86; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-21-102. Sovereign or governmental immunity.
   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the establishment and
maintenance of the Self-Insurance Fund and an excess of other insurance do not
constitute a waiver of sovereign or governmental immunity, and those immunities
shall be invoked against the claims to which they apply.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 5-102; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-21-103. Annual appropriation.
   Annually, the County shall appropriate and pay from the general fund of the
County to the Self- Insurance Fund an amount sufficient to maintain a monetary
reserve of not less than $900,000 as of the beginning of each fiscal year.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 5-103; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-21-104. Reserves for health insurance program.
   (a)   Authority to hold monetary reserves. The County may hold monetary
reserves in the Self-Insurance Fund for claims incurred but not paid by the
Employees Group Health Plan and for deposit premium savings related to the
Employees Group Health Plan.
   (b)   Transfer of reserves. Monetary reserves established under this section
may be transferred for expenditure as necessary to meet the funding
requirements of the Employees Group Health Plan only by ordinance.
   (c)   Use of reserves restricted. The County may not pay claims or make
other payments related to the Employees Group Health Plan directly from the
Self-Insurance Fund or use monetary reserves established under this section for
any other purpose in the Self-Insurance Fund.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 5-103.1) (Bill No. 45-94; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-21-105. Self-Insurance Fund Committee.
   (a)   Established. There is a Self-Insurance Fund Committee.
   (b)   Membership. The Committee consists of the Chief Administrative
Officer, the County Attorney, the Central Services Officer, the Controller, a
member of the Board of Trustees of the Public Library Association of Annapolis
and Anne Arundel County, Inc., a member of the Board of Trustees of Anne
Arundel Community College, and a member of the Board of Education, or their
respective designees. Annually, the Committee shall elect a Chair from among
its members.
   (c)   Approval of decisions. Each decision made by the Committee shall be
approved by at least three of its members, except that review and approval of
all claims for payment from the Fund that are $100,000 or greater shall include
participation and vote for approval by at least four of the total members. Any
member of the Committee with a direct personal interest in the claim may not
participate in or vote on the decision to settle the claim.
   (d)   Duties. The Committee shall:
      (1)   review and approve all claims for payment from the Fund for
property damage and automobile liability where the amount to be paid exceeds
$25,000 but is less than $100,000;
      (2)   review and approve all claims for payment from the Fund for general
liability and settlements of workers’ compensation claims where the amount to
be paid exceeds $25,000 but is less than $100,000;
      (3)   review and conditionally approve and submit to the County Council
for final approval by resolution all claims for payment from the fund that are
$100,000 or greater;
      (4)   establish policies relating to the operation and maintenance of the
Fund; and
      (5)   adopt rules and regulations necessary for the operation of the
Fund, including rules to establish the nature of losses to be paid from the
Fund, the limits of liability payable from the Fund if not otherwise provided
by law, and the nature of administrative expenses to be paid by the Fund if not
otherwise provided by law.
   (e)   Adoption of rules. The Committee may adopt rules for the conduct of
its business.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 5-104) (Bill No. 58-86; Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 75-12;
Bill No. 15-15; Bill No. 43-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-21-106. Approval of claims by the County Council.
   Within two business days of receipt of a proposed resolution to approve a
claim for payment under §
3-21-105(d)(3), the County Council shall schedule a hearing to act on the
resolution, such hearing to be held not more than five business days from the
date of receipt of the resolution. The failure of the County Council to hear
and approve the resolution within five business days shall constitute approval
of the claim for payment.
(Bill No. 75-12; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-21-107. Duties of Central Services Officer.
   The Central Services Officer shall:
      (1)   provide for the investigation and processing of claims;
      (2)   review and approve all claims for payment from the Fund for
property damage and automobile liability claims where the amount to be paid is
$25,000 or less;
      (3)   review and approve all claims for payment from the Fund for general
liability and settlements of workers’ compensation claims where the amount to
be paid is $25,000 or less;
      (4)   obtain administrative and consulting services as the Central
Services Officer finds necessary after the approval of the Self-Insurance Fund
Committee and in accordance with the availability of funds;
      (5)   provide a monthly report to the Self-Insurance Fund of all claims
for payment made in the preceding month and the reserves for all claims; and
      (6)   annually recommend to the Chief Administrative Officer the amount
of monetary reserve necessary to support the Fund during the next fiscal year,
excess insurance necessary to secure the liability for payment of claims above
limits payable from the Fund, and other insurance necessary to secure the
liability for the payment of claims arising from losses not payable from the
Fund.
   (b)   The Central Services Officer may delegate the duties in (a)(2), (a)(3)
and (a)(5) to the Safety and Insurance Manager.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 5-105) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 75-12; Bill No. 15-15;
Bill No. 43-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-21-108. Duties of insureds.
   (a)   Generally. All persons whose liability is secured under this title
shall:
      (1)   cooperate with the Self-Insurance Fund Committee and the County
Attorney;
      (2)   abide by the policies, rules and regulations established by the
Self-Insurance Fund Committee;
      (3)   assist in the conduct of suits and enforcement of any right of
contribution or indemnity against any other person who may be liable to that
person; and
      (4)   attend hearings, depositions, and trials and assist in securing and
giving evidence as required by the County Attorney.
   (b)   Failure to cooperate. On failure to cooperate with the Self-Insurance
Fund Committee or the County Attorney, a person may be denied coverage at the
discretion of the Committee or the County Attorney.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 5-105.1) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 75-12; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-21-109. Legal counsel.
   (a)   Generally. The County Attorney shall provide legal counsel, advice,
and representation to all persons whose liability is secured under this title,
including the Board of Education of Anne Arundel County and the Anne Arundel
Community College.
   (b)   Fees for legal counsel. All fees for legal counsel appointed by the
County Attorney shall be paid from the Self-Insurance Fund.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 5-105.2) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 75-12; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-21-110. Fiscal management.
   The Controller is responsible for the fiscal management of the Self-
Insurance Fund, including the receipt of annual appropriations, investment of
Fund reserves, and payment of approved claims. The investment of Fund reserves
shall be governed by an investment policy approved by resolution of the County
Council.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 5-106) (Bill No. 75-12; Bill No. 48-14; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-21-111. Termination of fund.
   If the County Executive determines that the Self-Insurance Fund is no longer
feasible or desirable as a method of maintaining insurance coverage, the County
Council by ordinance shall provide for the termination of the Fund and the
disposition of all reserves and assets remaining in the Fund.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 5-107) (Bill No. 75-12; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 22. TIPTON AIRPORT AUTHORITY
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
3-22-101.   Establishment; functions authorized.
Subtitle 2. Establishment of Authority
   
3-22-201.   Definitions.
   
3-22-202.   Authority created.
   
3-22-203.   Purpose.
   
3-22-204.   Membership.
   
3-22-205.   Chair.
   
3-22-206.   Quorum; meetings.
   
3-22-207.   Compensation; expenses.
   
3-22-208.   Airport Manager.
   
3-22-209.   Chief Financial Officer.
   
3-22-210.   Powers – In general.
   
3-22-211.   Budget.
   
3-22-212.   Bonds – Authorization.
   
3-22-213.   Security; application of proceeds.
   
3-22-214.   Remedies.
   
3-22-215.   Revenues.
   
3-22-216.   Contracts for construction, services, and the like.
   
3-22-217.   Deposit and audit of funds; publication of financial statement;
inspection of records.
   
3-22-218.   Tax exemption; assessments.
   
3-22-219.   Constituted Authority.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 3-22-101. Establishment; functions authorized.
   (a)   Establishment. The governing body of Anne Arundel County may establish
by local legislation a public corporation to be known as the Tipton Airport
Authority.
   (b)   Functions. The Authority may acquire, equip, maintain, and operate an
airport or landing field and appurtenant facilities at Fort George G. Meade in
Anne Arundel County.
   (c)   County authority. The County may:
      (1)   specify the organization and membership of the Authority;
      (2)   specify the powers to be exercised by the Authority;
      (3)   provide for the exercise of all power, authority, rights, and
obligations required under this title; and
      (4)   specify any other matters relating to the Authority as the County
may deem prudent or necessary.
   (d)   County duties. The County shall:
      (1)   establish the Authority as a body corporate and politic, which
shall be deemed an instrumentality of the County and a public corporation;
      (2)   provide that the powers to be exercised by the Authority include
all powers necessary or convenient for carrying out the purposes of the
Authority; and
      (3)   provide for the establishment of regulations relating to membership
of the Authority.
   (e)   Issuance of bonds. The County may provide that the Authority, by
resolution, may issue negotiable, taxable and tax exempt revenue bonds, revenue
refunding bonds, notes, and other evidences of indebtedness in accordance with
the following:
      (1)   the bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall be used to pay
all or part of the cost or purchase price of one or more projects or to refund
outstanding revenue bonds that are issued with or without an election
referendum, any other proceedings, or the occurrence of any other conditions or
events;
      (2)   any revenue bond proceeds shall become trust funds for the purposes
for which the bonds are authorized;
      (3)   a lien shall be established on the revenue bond proceeds in favor
of the holders of any bonds or any trustee until moneys are applied to the
purposes for which the bonds are authorized;
      (4)   the Authority may secure any revenue bond issued to provide funds
for any project by a trust indenture between the Authority and a corporate
trustee;
      (5)   the Authority may fix rates, fees, rents, and charges for the use
of any of its projects sufficient to operate and maintain the project, pay the
principal of and interest on its bonds, and maintain a sinking fund pledged and
charged with the payment of interest on the principal of the bonds,
administrative charges by the depository of the fund paying the principal and
interest, and any premium on the bonds retired by call or purchase;
      (6)   except for revenues required to pay the cost of operating and
maintaining any project and to pay the principal of and interest on the bonds
and maintain the sinking fund, all other revenues may be placed in a fund
pledged and charged with financing projects devoted wholly or partially to the
operation and maintenance of Tipton Airport;
      (7)   the bondholders have the rights and remedies established by the
County;
      (8)   unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing any issue
of bonds, or unless otherwise provided in the trust indenture that secures the
bonds, all moneys may be deposited by the Authority in one or more banks or
trust companies in one or more special accounts; and
      (9)   the Authority shall have an annual examination of its books,
accounts, and records by a certified public accountant.
   (f)   Tax exemption. Because the Authority is performing an essential
governmental function, it is not subject to any tax or assessment on any
facility or part of a facility, activities in the operation of any facility,
any revenues from operation of any facility or project, or the bonds of the
Authority or the interest on the bonds.
   (g)   Limitation of rights. The State hereby pledges to and agrees with any
person, firm, corporation, or federal agency subscribing to or acquiring the
revenue bonds to be issued by the Authority for the construction, extension,
improvement, equipping, furnishing, or enlargement of any project or part
thereof that the State shall not limit or alter the rights hereby vested in the
Authority until any revenue bonds issued by the Authority, together with the
interest thereon, are fully met and discharged, it being the intent of this
title that the Authority shall continue to have and may exercise all powers
herein granted, so long as the same shall be necessary or desirable for the
carrying out of the purposes of this title.
   (h)   Issuance of revenue bonds, notes, or other evidence of indebtedness.
      (1)   The Authority may issue revenue bonds, notes, or other evidences of
indebtedness on behalf of the County for the purposes of the Authority.
      (2)   The revenue bonds, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness issued
under the provisions of this title may not be deemed to constitute a debt of
the County or a pledge of the faith and credit of the County or of the State of
Maryland or any political subdivision of the State of Maryland.
      (3)   The revenue bonds, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness shall
be payable from the funds of the Authority provided from revenues of the
project or projects of the Authority.
      (4)   All revenue bonds shall contain a statement on their face to the
effect that the full faith and credit of the State, County, or any other
political subdivision of the State is not pledged to pay bonds or the interest
thereon.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (f), the issuance of the
revenue bonds, certificates, or other evidences of indebtedness under the
provisions of this section may not directly, indirectly, or contingently
obligate the County to levy or pledge any form of taxation or any appropriation
for their payment.
      (6)   The County Executive may, with the approval of the County Council,
collaterally agree to provide sufficient moneys from the general fund of the
County to pay any deficiency in the debt service requirement of such bonds for
any year in which there is a deficit.
      (7)   An advance of moneys from the general fund of the County shall be
repaid from the receipts, rentals, or revenues of the Authority in the next
succeeding year in which such receipts, rentals or revenues exceed debt service
requirements and operating expenses.
      (8)   An advance of moneys from the general fund of the County under any
agreement or agreements may not exceed the lesser of $25,000 or an amount
established by local law.
      (9)   (i)   Revenue bonds issued by the Authority authorized by this
title are hereby made securities in which all public officers and public
agencies of the State and its political subdivisions, and all banks, trust
companies, savings and loan associations, investment companies, and others
carrying on a banking business, all administrators, executors, guardians,
trustees, and other fiduciaries, and all other persons may legally and properly
invest funds, including capital, in their control or belonging to them.
         (ii)   Revenue bonds issued by the Authority are hereby made
securities which may properly and legally be deposited with and received by any
State or municipal officer or any agency or political subdivision of the State
for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the
State is now or may hereafter be authorized by law.
      (10)   The tax exempt bonds, notes, and other evidences of indebtedness
issued by the Authority, their transfer, the interest payable on them, and any
income derived from them, including any profit realized in their sale or
exchange, shall be exempt at all times from taxation by the State, or by any of
its counties, municipal corporations, or public agencies of any kind.
      (11)   The bonds, notes, and other evidences of indebtedness issued by
the Authority established by the County shall be exempt from the provisions of
Local Government Article, §§ 19-201, 19-205, 19-206, and 19-211 et seq., of the
State Code, or any successor provision.
   (i)   County Executive authority.
      (1)   The County Executive, with the approval of the County Council, may
convey to the Authority the County’s title to any lands, streets, alleys,
buildings, facilities, or other public places.
      (2)   The County Executive, with the approval of the County Council, may
advance or assign to the Authority any rates, rentals, fees, or charges now
being or hereinafter received by the County. The advance or assignment shall be
made for the purpose of providing additional security for any bonds to be
issued by the Authority or for other purposes as agreed between the Authority
and the County.
      (3)   The County Executive, with the approval of the County Council, may
advance to the Authority from the general funds of the County, sums to be used
by the Authority to defray expenses for investigation, engineering and
architectural studies, opinions, and compensation of employees and counsel
which may be incurred prior to the sale of its revenue bonds. Advances shall be
repaid out of the first proceeds of the sale of revenue bonds by the Authority
following any such advance.
      (4)   No provision of the County Charter or other County law applies to
the Authority regarding the duties, powers, or organization of the Authority,
unless the County expressly provides by law that the Charter provision or law
applies to the Authority.
   (j)   Authority’s powers and duties.
      (1)   The Authority may acquire real and personal property and interests
in real and personal property in its own name and may pledge, mortgage,
encumber, sell, lease, transfer, or convey any interest in its real and
personal property to the County or any person.
       (2)   The Authority may exercise the powers of eminent domain in order
to acquire in its own name aviation easements that the Authority requires for
the operation or maintenance of Tipton Airport.
      (3)   The Authority may not extend any runway to a length in excess of
4,200 feet. The Authority may not extend a runway to a length in excess of
3,000 feet until a public meeting is held in which the proposed extension is
explained and for which the comments are accepted and final approval is granted
by an affirmative majority vote of the County Council.
   (k)   Earnings. Earnings of the Authority may not inure to the benefit of
private persons. In the event of dissolution of the Authority, the title to all
property financed by the proceeds of bonds, notes, or other evidences of
indebtedness issued by the Authority shall revert to the County.
   (l)   Intent. It is the intent of this title that the Authority be a
“Constituted Authority” within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code, as
amended, and the relevant regulations, rulings, and procedures. The powers of
the Authority shall be construed to give effect to this intent.
   (m)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this title to provide for the
maintenance and operation of Tipton Airport in a prudent and economical manner,
and this title shall be liberally construed as giving to the Authority full and
complete power reasonably required to give effect to the purposes of the
Authority as provided by this title. The provisions of this title are in
addition to and not in derogation of any power existing in Anne Arundel County
under any constitutional, statutory, or charter provisions.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-101) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 94-24)
   State Code reference – 1997 Md. Laws, Ch. 539, § 1.
   Editor’s notes –
      Bill No. 115-97, § 1, cited one section of the 1997 Md. Laws to be
included in this section. At the request of the County, the entire enabling
language of 1997 Md. Laws, Ch. 539, § 1, has been included in this section.
      House Bill 262, effective October 1, 2009, amended subsection (j) by
increasing the maximum runway length from 4,000 feet to 4,200 feet.
SUBTITLE 2. ESTABLISHMENT OF AUTHORITY
§ 3-22-201. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Airport” means Tipton Airport that is located within the
boundaries of Fort George G. Meade, and the term includes aviation easements or
other property or property rights held by the Authority.
      (2)   “Authority” means the Anne Arundel County Tipton Airport Authority.
      (3)   “Bonds” includes revenue bonds, refunding bonds, certificates or
other evidences of indebtedness or obligations.
      (4)   “Compensation” includes a monetary payment in the form of a fixed
salary or bonus, and insurance and pension benefits.
      (5)   “Fixed base operator” means a person or entity retained by the
Authority to perform designated functions at the airport on behalf of the
Authority.
      (6)   “Project” means a structure, facility, equipment, or undertaking,
including real property, interests in real property, and related or ancillary
property or facilities, for acquiring, constructing, improving, equipping,
furnishing, maintaining, and operating the airport.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-201) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-202. Authority created.
   There is a body corporate and politic to be known as the Anne Arundel County
Tipton Airport Authority. The Authority is an instrumentality of the County and
a public corporation.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-202) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-203. Purpose.
   The Authority is created for the purpose of acquiring, constructing,
improving, equipping, furnishing, maintaining, and operating Tipton Airport.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-203) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-204. Membership.
   (a)   Composition.
      (1)   The Authority consists of nine members appointed by the County
Executive.
      (2)   Each of the members shall be a resident of Anne Arundel County; an
individual of integrity who has demonstrated abilities in business and public
affairs based on education or relevant experience; and selected without regard
to the member’s representation of or support for any special interest.
      (3)   Neither the member nor the member’s grandfather, grandmother,
father, mother, son, daughter, stepson, stepdaughter, grandson, granddaughter,
brother, sister, uncle, aunt, niece, or nephew, or the spouse of any of them,
may have a financial interest in any project with respect to which the
Authority has jurisdiction or any power or authorization to act.
      (4)   A member may not be a County elected official, County appointed
official, or County employee.
      (5)   The Director of Public Works or the Director’s designee shall serve
as a non-voting adviser to the Authority.
   (b)   Oath of office. Before undertaking the duties of a member, each member
of the Authority shall take a constitutional oath of office before the Clerk of
the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County.
   (c)   Term of office. The term of a member is five years. The terms of
members are staggered so that of the initial members, the term of at least one
member, but not more than two members, ends on December 31 of each of the five
years following establishment of the Authority. At the end of a term, a member
continues to serve until a successor is appointed and qualifies. A member who
is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the rest of the term and
until a successor is appointed and qualifies. A member may be reappointed.
   (d)   Removal of members.
      (1)   A member of the Authority may be removed by the County Executive
for cause, including absence from 25% or more of the scheduled meetings and
hearings of the Authority during any 12-month period.
      (2)   The Chair of the Authority shall:
         (i)   notify the County Executive of any member who is absent from 25%
or more of the scheduled meetings and hearings during any 12-month period;
         (ii)   include in the notification any known extenuating
circumstances; and
         (iii)   send a copy of the notification to each member of the
Authority.
      (3)   The County Executive may excuse the absences for good cause such as
illness, emergency situations, or other extenuating circumstances.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-204) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-205. Chair.
   The County Executive annually shall designate a Chair from the membership of
the Authority.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-205) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-206. Quorum; meetings.
   Five members of the Authority is a quorum for the transaction of any
business, the exercise of any power, or the performance of any duty authorized
or imposed by law. An affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the
Authority is required for the taking of any action.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-206) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-207. Compensation; expenses.
   Each member of the Authority is entitled to an annual salary in an amount
not to exceed $5,000, as determined by the members of the Authority, and
reimbursement for reasonable and necessary expenses. Salary and reimbursement
of the members shall be made solely from funds received by the Authority under
the provisions of this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-207) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-208. Airport Manager.
   (a)   Appointment. The County Executive, after advice from and
recommendation by members of the Authority, shall appoint an Airport Manager
who shall serve at the pleasure of the County Executive.
   (b)   Qualifications. The Airport Manager shall be of good character,
integrity, and business experience.
   (c)   Financial interest prohibited. Neither the Airport Manager nor the
Airport Manager’s grandfather, grandmother, father, mother, son, daughter,
stepson, stepdaughter, grandson, granddaughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
niece, or nephew, or the spouse of any of them, may have a financial interest
in any project with respect to which the Authority has jurisdiction or any
power or authorization to act.
   (d)   Compensation. The Airport Manager shall receive compensation as may be
fixed by the Authority from time to time.
   (e)   Additional duties. In addition to other duties as may be imposed by
the Authority, the Airport Manager is responsible for daily operations of the
Authority, supervision of any activities or tasks performed by the fixed base
operator, and appointment of all employees, determination of their duties and
conditions of employment, and fixing their compensation, consistent with the
bylaws, policies, and procedures adopted by the Authority.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-208) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-209. Chief Financial Officer.
   (a)   Appointment. The members of the Authority shall appoint a Chief
Financial Officer. The Chief Financial Officer may not be a member of the
Authority.
   (b)   Compensation. The Chief Financial Officer shall receive compensation
as may be fixed by the Authority from time to time.
   (c)   Financial interest prohibited. Neither the Chief Financial Officer nor
the Chief Financial Officer’s grandfather, grandmother, father, mother, son,
daughter, stepson, stepdaughter, grandson, granddaughter, brother, sister,
uncle, aunt, niece, or nephew, or the spouse of any of them, may have a
financial interest in any project with respect to which the Authority has
jurisdiction or any power or authorization to act.
   (d)   Surety bond. Before the issuance of any bonds under the provisions of
this title, the Chief Financial Officer shall execute a surety bond in a penal
sum to be fixed by the Authority. The surety bond shall be conditioned on the
faithful performance of the duties of office and executed by a surety company
authorized to transact business in this State as surety. The Authority shall
pay the premium on the bond.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-209) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-210. Powers – In general.
   (a)   Generally. The Authority has and may exercise all powers necessary or
convenient for carrying out the purposes set forth in §
3-22-203, including:
      (1)   to have perpetual existence as a corporation;
      (2)   to sue and be sued;
      (3)   to adopt, use, and alter at will a corporate seal;
      (4)   to acquire, hold, and use any property, real, personal, or mixed,
tangible or intangible, or interest necessary or desirable for carrying out the
purposes of the Authority;
      (5)   to lease as lessee any property, real, personal, or mixed, or any
interest in property, for a term not exceeding 99 years at a nominal rental or
such annual rental as may be determined by the Authority;
      (6)   to lease, sublease, or license to the State, the County, any
political subdivision, or any person, any project at any time constructed by
the Authority, whether wholly or partially completed, and any property, real,
personal, or mixed, tangible or intangible, or any interest in property, at any
time acquired by the Authority, whether wholly or partially completed;
      (7)   to sell, transfer, and convey to the County at any time, the
airport or any other property, real, personal, or mixed, tangible or
intangible, or any interest in property, that is acquired by the Authority;
      (8)   to acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise, and to construct,
improve, equip, furnish, maintain, repair, and operate the airport;
      (9)   to appoint officers, to prescribe their duties, and to fix their
compensation;
      (10)   to retain professional services;
      (11)   to make bylaws for the management and regulation of its affairs
and to adopt personnel policies and procedures;
      (12)   to fix, charge, and collect rates, fees, rents, and charges for
the use of any portion of the airport or any projects of the Authority, or for
the services rendered by the Authority or its projects, at rates to be
determined by it, for the purpose of:
         (i)   operating and maintaining the airport and projects of the
Authority;
         (ii)   paying the principal of and interest on its bonds;
         (iii)   maintaining the funds as established in §
3-22-212 pledged and charged with payment of interest on and the principal of
the bonds, administrative charges by the depository of the fund paying
principal and interest, and any premium on the bonds retired by call or
purchase;
         (iv)   providing for the payment of expenses of the Authority; and
         (v)   fulfilling the terms and provisions of any agreements made with
the purchases or holders of any bonds;
      (13)   to borrow money and issue negotiable bonds and to secure the
payment of bonds, or any part of the bonds, by pledge, mortgage, or indenture
of trust of all or any part of its property, projects, revenues, rentals,
receipts, and funds available from any source whatsoever, all as may be
provided or authorized in the resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds, and
to make agreements with the purchasers or holders of bonds or with others in
connection with any bonds whether issued or to be issued, as the Authority
considers advisable, and in general to provide for the security for bonds and
the rights of the holders of bonds;
      (14)   to make contracts and to execute all instruments necessary or
convenient for the carrying on of its business;
      (15)   to borrow money and accept grants or assignments from, and enter
into contracts, leases, or other transactions with, any federal, State, County,
or municipal agency;
      (16)   to pledge, hypothecate, or otherwise encumber all or any of the
revenues or receipts of the Authority as security for all or any part of the
obligations of the Authority;
      (17)   to acquire, by assignment from the State or the County, contracts
that are not completed and that involve constructing, improving, equipping,
furnishing, maintaining, and operating the structures, facilities, or
undertakings that the Authority is authorized to undertake as projects;
      (18)   to convey to the County all of its rights, title, and interest in
the airport if the bonds issued under this subtitle to provide funds for the
costs of the project have been paid and retired;
      (19)   to accept grants from the County or any other party; and
      (20)   to do all acts and things necessary or convenient to carry out the
powers granted to it by law.
   (b)   Delegation of powers and duties. The Authority may delegate to one or
more of its members, or to its officers, agents, and employees, the powers and
duties that it considers proper.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-210) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-211. Budget.
   (a)   Fiscal year. The fiscal year of the Authority shall be from July 1 to
June 30.
   (b)   Capital budget and program. An improvement or extension of an existing
project may not be undertaken unless approved in the Authority’s capital budget
and program. The capital budget and program shall include all capital projects
and programs of the Authority, including substantial improvements and
extensions of projects previously authorized.
   (c)   Coverage of capital budget and program. The capital budget and program
shall cover six fiscal years and shall:
      (1)   include a statement of the objectives of the capital program and
relationship of the program to the County’s adopted long-range development
plans as provided in §
18-2-103 of this Code;
      (2)   present a capital projects schedule and a construction schedule;
and
      (3)   provide an estimate of costs and a statement of all funding
sources.
   (d)   Submission. No later than April 1 before the beginning of a fiscal
year, the Authority shall submit a copy of the proposed operating budget and
capital budget and program for one fiscal year to the County Executive and the
County Council. No later than May 1 before the beginning of a fiscal year, the
Authority shall hold one or more public hearings on the proposed operating
budget and capital budget and program. No later than June 15 before the
beginning of a fiscal year, the Authority shall adopt the operating budget and
capital budget and program and forward the adopted budgets to the County
Executive and County Council.
   (e)   Amendments. The Authority may amend its capital budget and program
during a fiscal year, effective 30 days after submission of the amendment by
the Authority to the County Executive and the County Council.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-211) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-212. Bonds – Authorization.
   (a)   Generally. The Authority may provide by resolution for the issuance of
negotiable, taxable, and tax-exempt bonds to pay all or part of the cost or
purchase price of one or more projects or to refund outstanding bonds. The
resolution authorizing the bonds shall specify, in general detail, the project
to be financed or refinanced with the proceeds of the bonds.
   (b)   Specifications. The resolution authorizing the bonds may specify and
prescribe, or may authorize the Chair of the Authority or other designated
member of the Authority, by order, to specify and prescribe, any of the
following, as the Chair or the member considers appropriate, to effect the
financing or refinancing of the project:
      (1)   the actual principal amount of the bonds to be issued;
      (2)   the actual rate or rates of interest the bonds are to bear;
      (3)   the manner in which and the terms on which the bonds are to be
sold, that may be at public sale or private negotiated sale at a price at,
above, or below par;
      (4)   the time or times that the bonds may be executed, issued, and
delivered;
      (5)   the form and tenor of the bonds and the denominations in which the
bonds may be issued and the manner in which the bonds are to be executed;
      (6)   the manner in which and the times and places that the principal of
and interest on the bonds are to be paid;
      (7)   the provisions under which any or all of the bonds may be called
for redemption prior to their stated maturity dates;
      (8)   the terms and provisions of any trust indenture, assignment,
mortgage, deed of trust, guaranty, security instrument, general or standby
letter of credit, revolving credit facility, repurchase agreement, escrow
agreement, or other instrument executed and delivered in connection with the
issuance and sale of the bonds, the securing of the bonds, the marketing or
remarketing of the bonds, or the accomplishment of the purpose or purposes of
the financing or refinancing, and where applicable, the manner of execution of
the instrument on behalf of the Authority;
      (9)   the establishment of any debt service reserve fund, depreciation
fund, bond fund, or other similar fund with respect to the bonds;
      (10)   the terms and provision of any covenant of the Authority with
regard to rates, fees, rents, or charges of the Authority;
      (11)   the terms and provisions of any bond insurance, letter of credit,
or other credit enhancement of the bonds;
      (12)   any limitations on the issuance of additional bonds;
      (13)   in the case of the issuance of refunding bonds, the plan of
refinancing;
      (14)   the identity of any trustee, paying agent, registrar, or escrow
agent in connection with the issuance, sale, and delivery of the bonds;
      (15)   the identity of any investment banker, underwriter, placement
agent or other broker to be employed by or on behalf of the Authority in
connection with the issuance, sale, and delivery of the bonds and the form of
any preliminary and final official statement issued in connection with any
public offering of the bonds or any offering memorandum or other official
information or document prepared in connection with any private placement of
the bonds; the date, time and place when any purchase agreement or proposal
shall be submitted for the bonds, the terms or provisions of the agreement or
proposal, and any other matters as the underwriters, investment bankers, or
other placement agents employed in connection with the issuance of the bonds
may request; and
      (16)   any other provision consistent with this title and other
applicable law as determined by the Authority to be necessary or desirable to
effect the financing or refinancing of the project.
   (c)   Compliance with law. The authorizing resolution and the bonds
authorized by the resolution shall fully comply with the requirements of this
title.
   (d)   Issuance. The bonds may be issued without an election referendum or
any other proceedings or the occurrence of any events.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-212) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-213. Security; application of proceeds.
   (a)   Generally. The Authority may secure any bond by a trust indenture by
and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, that may be any trust
company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside this
State.
   (b)   Proceeds and trust funds. All bond proceeds are trust funds for the
purposes for which the bonds are authorized.
   (c)   Lien on proceeds. There is a lien on bond proceeds in favor of the
purchasers or holders of the bonds or any trustee appointed with respect to any
bonds until the moneys are applied to the purposes for which the bonds are
authorized.
   (d)   Depository of proceeds. Any bank or trust company having the powers of
a trust company within or outside this State may act as a depository of the
proceeds of the bonds or revenues received from projects.
   (e)   Use of proceeds. In the case of bonds issued to finance a project,
bond proceeds shall be used to pay the cost of the project for which the bond
is issued, including:
      (1)   the cost of all land, property rights, easements, and franchises
necessary for the construction and establishment of a project;
      (2)   the cost of all labor, materials, machinery and equipment,
financing charges, interest before and during construction and for one year
after completion of construction, and the funding of reserves;
      (3)   the cost of engineering, architectural, and legal services, plans,
specifications, surveys, estimates of cost and of revenues, other expenses
necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of
construction, and administrative expenses; and
      (4)   other expenses necessary or incident to the financing authorized in
this title, including bond issuance costs, bond insurance premiums, letter of
credit, or other financing expenses and the construction and establishment of a
project, including purchase, remodeling, reconstruction, and placing in
operation of any existing facility acquired by the Authority as a project.
   (f)   Application and investment of proceeds. In the case of bonds issued to
refund outstanding bonds, bond proceeds may be applied to the funding of
reserves and shall otherwise be applied and invested in the same manner as
prescribed in Local Government Article, § 19-207, of the State Code for the
application and investment of proceeds of refunding bonds issued under Local
Government Article, § 19-207, of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-213) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-214. Remedies.
   The resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds, any order executed
pursuant to the resolution, or the trust indenture may contain provisions for
protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be
reasonable and proper, including:
      (1)   covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to
the construction, acquisition, improvement, installation, maintenance,
operating, repair, and insurance of any project, and the custody, safeguarding,
and application of all proceeds;
      (2)   provisions that a project shall be constructed and paid for under
the supervision and approval of consulting engineers employed or designated by
the Authority and satisfactory to the trustee or, if none, the original
purchasers of the bonds; and
      (3)   provisions setting forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders
and of the trustee and restricting the individual right of action of
bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures
of corporations.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-214) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-215. Revenues.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “net income” means total revenues less
amounts required for:
      (1)   operating and maintaining projects;
      (2)   paying principal and interest on bonds;
      (3)   maintaining the funds as established in §
3-22-212 pledged and charged with payment of interest on and the principal of
the bonds, administrative charges by the depository of the fund paying
principal and interest, and any premium on the bonds retired by call or
purchase; and
      (4)   fulfilling the terms and provisions of any agreements made with the
purchasers or holders of any bonds.
   (b)   Remaining balance. The Authority may place the remaining balance of
its net income in a fund pledged and charged with financing projects.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-215) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-216. Contracts for construction, services, and the like.
   (a)   Adoption of rules and regulations. The Authority may make rules and
regulations for the submission of bids and the construction, equipping,
furnishing, and improvement of any project or portion of a project.
   (b)   Competitive bidding. If any project, any portion of a project, or any
improvement of a project is constructed, equipped, or furnished under a
contract and the estimated cost exceeds $25,000, the Authority shall award the
contract on the basis of a competitive bidding process, except for emergency
purchases, professional services, and contracts involving material and
equipment of a non- competitive nature as may be defined and governed by the
regulations adopted by the Authority.
   (c)   Non-discrimination. All construction contracts shall contain
provisions obligating the contractor not to discriminate in any manner against
any employee or applicant for employment because of race, creed, color, or
national origin and obligating the contractor to include a similar clause in
all subcontracts except subcontracts for standard commercial supplies for raw
materials. In addition, the contractor and subcontractor shall agree to post in
conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment,
notices setting forth the provisions of the non-discrimination clause.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-216) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-217. Deposit and audit of funds; publication of financial statement;
inspection of records.
   (a)   Payment to Chief Financial Officer. Unless otherwise provided in the
resolution authorizing any issuance of bonds under this title, or unless
otherwise provided by the indenture of trust that secures the bonds, all moneys
received by the Authority from whatever source derived shall be paid to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Authority.
   (b)   Deposit of funds. The Chief Financial Officer shall deposit all moneys
in one or more banks or trust companies in one or more special accounts. Funds
on deposit to a special account shall be invested at all times in accordance
with the requirements applicable to the County for the investment of public
funds. The moneys in the accounts shall be paid out on the warrant or other
order of the Chair of the Authority or of another person authorized by the
Authority to execute warrants or orders.
   (c)   Annual audited financial statements. Each year the Authority shall
publish audited financial statements prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. A copy of the audit shall be delivered to the
County Executive, the County Council, and to any other persons named to receive
the audit in the resolution that authorized the issuance of the bonds or in the
trust indenture that secures them.
   (d)   Publication of financial statement. A concise financial statement of
the Authority shall be published annually in a newspaper of general circulation
in the County.
   (e)   Examination of books, accounts, and records. The County Attorney,
Controller, or County Auditor may examine the books, accounts, and records of
the Authority.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-217) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-218. Tax exemption; assessments.
   (a)   Declaration of public purpose. It is hereby found, determined, and
declared that the establishment of any project under the provisions of this
title is in all respects for the benefit of the inhabitants of the County and
is a public purpose and that the County, the State, and the Authority will be
performing an essential governmental function in the exercise of the powers
conferred by this title.
   (b)   Tax exemption. The Authority may not be required to pay any taxes or
assessments on any facility or part of a facility, activities in the operation
of any facility, any revenues from operation of any facility or project, or the
bonds of the Authority or the interest on them.
   (c)   Retail sales or other taxes. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as exempting the Authority from collecting retail sales or other
taxes as required by federal or State law.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-218) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-22-219. Constituted Authority.
   It is the intent of the County Council that the Airport Authority is a
Constituted Authority within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code, as
amended, and the relevant regulations, rulings, and procedures and that the
powers of the Authority shall be construed to give effect to this intent.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 12-219) (Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 99-98; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 23. VETERANS AFFAIRS COMMISSION
Section
   
3-23-101.   Established.
   
3-23-102.   Purpose.
   
3-23-103.   Composition.
   
3-23-104.   Term of members.
   
3-23-105.   Chair.
   
3-23-106.   Meetings and quorum.
   
3-23-107.   Rules and regulations.
   
3-23-108.   Compensation.
   
3-23-109.   Powers and duties.
   
3-23-110.   Reports.
§ 3-23-101. Established.
   There is a Veterans Affairs Commission to be known as the “Anne Arundel
County Veterans Affairs Commission”.
(Bill No. 26-06; Bill No. 97-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-23-102. Purpose.
   The purpose of the Commission is to advocate and help to enhance the quality
of life for veterans of military service and their families who live or work
within Anne Arundel County by advising the County Executive and the County
Council on the coordination and development of government policies, programs,
services, and the allocation of resources for veterans and their families.
(Bill No. 97-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-23-103. Composition.
   (a)   Voting members. The Commission consists of 13 voting members appointed
by the County Executive, each of whom has separated from the military service
under honorable conditions. The Commission shall endeavor to be a diverse body
of members from all branches of the military. Of the 13 members:
      (1)   two shall be qualified veterans, pursuant to the guidelines of the
United States Department of Veterans Affairs;
      (2)   one shall be an owner or operator of a local business or an
employee of a local business, selected in consultation with the Anne Arundel
County Chamber of Commerce;
      (3)   one shall be an educator or educational administrator selected in
consultation with the Anne Arundel Community College;
      (4)   nine shall be selected by the voting members of the Commission from
any of the following organizations and in consultation with that organization:
         (i)   the Veterans of Foreign Wars;
         (ii)   the American Legion;
         (iii)   AMVETS;
         (iv)   Disabled American Veterans;
         (v)   Military Order of the Purple Heart;
         (vi)   Fleet Reserve Association;
         (vii)   Vietnam Veterans of America;
         (viii)   Korean War Veterans Association;
         (ix)   a women’s veterans organization;
         (x)   Military Officers Association of America;
         (xi)   National Association of County Veterans Service Officers;
         (xii)   Non-Commissioned Officers Association of America;
         (xiii)   Reserve Officers Association;
         (xiv)   Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America;
         (xv)   Student Veterans of America;
         (xvi)   Wounded Warrior Project;
         (xvii)   Paralyzed Veterans of America; and
         (xviii)   other similar organizations that support veterans and their
families.
   (b)   Non-voting members. The Commission shall include four non-voting
members who shall be members of the community appointed by the County Executive
based on the recommendation of the voting members.
   (c)   Residency. Each member of the Commission shall be a resident of Anne
Arundel County.
(Bill No. 26-06; Bill No. 3-07; Bill No. 97-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-23-104. Term of members.
   (a)   Generally. The initial terms of newly appointed voting members shall
be staggered so that four members shall serve initial terms of one year, four
members shall serve initial terms of two years, and five members shall serve
initial terms of three years. Non-voting members, and, after the expiration of
the initial terms, voting members shall serve three year terms. A member whose
term has expired holds over until a successor is appointed. A member may serve
up to three consecutive full terms, and, after a one-year lapse in service, a
member is eligible to be reappointed.
   (b)   Removal for cause. A member of the Commission may be removed by the
County Executive for cause, including absence from 25% or more of the scheduled
meetings and hearings of the Commission during any 12-month period.
   (c)   Vacancies. The County Executive shall fill a vacancy for the remainder
of an unexpired term of a member.
(Bill No. 26-06; Bill No. 97-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-23-105. Chair.
   The Chair shall be appointed by the County Executive from among the voting
members of the Commission.
(Bill No. 26-06; Bill No. 97-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-23-106. Meetings and quorum.
   (a)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair, or at
the request of a majority of the voting members, as frequently as required to
perform its duties, but no less than six times a year. All meetings shall
comply with the Maryland Open Meetings Act and this Code.
   (b)   Quorum. A quorum consists of a majority of the voting members. An
affirmative vote of a majority of those voting members present at any meeting
at which there is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of the
Commission.
(Bill No. 26-06; Bill No. 25-08; Bill No. 97-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-23-107. Rules and regulations.
   The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern procedures for
its meetings.
(Bill No. 26-06; Bill No. 97-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-23-108. Compensation.
   Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Bill No. 26-06; Bill No. 97-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-23-109. Powers and duties.
   Among its powers and duties, the Commission may:
      (1)   establish a forum for all veterans of the County;
      (2)   maintain coordinated communication with County and local
governments, businesses, and veterans of the County;
      (3)   provide assistance, guidance, and information to the business and
academic communities of the County and various levels of government to ensure
adequate consideration of veterans in employment, education, training and
public programs; and
      (4)   review County, State, and federal legislation that may impact
veterans and their families and make recommendations regarding the legislation:
         (i)   to the County Executive and County Council; and
         (ii)   with the approval of the County Executive, to the State and
federal legislatures and executive branches;
      (5)   advise the County Executive on the coordination of services among
all public and private agencies, departments, and organizations which provide
services and programs to veterans and their families; and
      (6)   identify and recommend to the County Executive sources of private
and public financial assistance available to expand or improve services and
programs for veterans and their families.
(Bill No. 26-06; Bill No. 97-20; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-23-110. Reports.
   On or before January 31 of each year, the Commission shall submit a report
to the County Executive and the County Council setting forth its
accomplishments for the preceding year and its goals for the forthcoming year.
(Bill No. 26-06; Bill No. 97-20; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 24. VIDEO LOTTERY FACILITY LOCAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
Section
   
3-24-101.   Established.
   
3-24-102.   Appointment.
   
3-24-103.   Powers and duties.
§ 3-24-101. ESTABLISHED.
   There is a Video Lottery Facility Local Development Council for Anne Arundel
County established pursuant to the State Government Article, § 9-1A-31, of the
State Code.
(Bill No. 83-09; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-24-102. APPOINTMENT.
   (a)   Composition. The members of the Council shall be appointed in
accordance with the State Government Article, § 9-1A-31, of the State Code,
except that the seven residents of communities in immediate proximity to the
facility and the four representatives of businesses or institutions located in
immediate proximity to the facility shall be chosen from a list of such
residents presented to the County Executive by the County Council.
   (b)   Time of appointment. The members of the Video Lottery Facility Local
Development Council for Anne Arundel County shall be appointed within 30 days
after issuance of a video lottery facility license in Anne Arundel County by
the Video Lottery Facility Location Commission.
(Bill No. 83-09; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-24-103. POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Council shall have the powers and duties set forth in the State
Government Article, § 9-1A-31, of the State Code.
(Bill No. 83-09; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 25. WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
3-25-101.   Definitions.
   
3-25-102.   Anne Arundel County Workforce Development Project.
   
3-25-103.   Workforce development agreement.
§ 3-25-101. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Agreement” means the workforce development agreement.
      (2)   “Anne Arundel County Workforce Development Project” means the
program to promote workforce development in the County.
      (3)   “Anne Arundel Workforce Development Corporation” means a nonprofit,
nonstock corporation that:
         (i)   is organized and operated under the laws of the State of
Maryland;
         (ii)   is headquartered in Anne Arundel County, Maryland;
         (iii)   meets the requirements for tax exempt status under 26 U.S.C. §
501;
         (iv)   performs the functions previously performed by the Business and
Workforce Development Center of Anne Arundel County, Inc.;
         (v)   has as its predominant corporate purpose the administration,
implementation, and management of the Anne Arundel County Workforce Development
Project; and
         (vi)   provides, by its Charter or bylaws, for a board of directors
consisting of at least seven and not more than nine members; a majority of the
members of its board of directors to be appointed by and subject to removal by
the County Executive; the remaining members of the board of directors to be
appointed by the board of directors; the Chair of the board of directors to be
chosen by a majority of the board of directors; and a majority of the
Corporation’s board of directors to choose a chief executive officer, who will
be employed by and compensated by the Corporation.
      (4)   “Corporation” means the Anne Arundel Workforce Development
Corporation.
      (5)   “Workforce development program” means a publicly funded program
that advances the welfare of individuals through the provision of employment
training and other services designed to provide the skills and knowledge to
participate and compete in the employment environment.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 13-101) (Bill No. 52-01; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-25-102. Anne Arundel County Workforce Development Project.
   There is an Anne Arundel County Workforce Development Project that is
administered by the Anne Arundel Workforce Development Corporation pursuant to
a workforce development agreement. The project is funded through grants from
workforce development programs and as otherwise provided in the workforce
development agreement.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 13-102) (Bill No. 52-01; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-25-103. Workforce development agreement.
   (a)   Agreement authorized. The County Executive may enter into a workforce
development agreement with the Corporation to provide and administer the Anne
Arundel County Workforce Development Project.
   (b)   Required provisions. The agreement shall require:
      (1)   the Corporation to administer, implement, and manage, on behalf of
the County, those publicly funded workforce development programs, including
those funded by grants from the United States, grants from the State, and funds
from the County, in accordance with the County’s annual budget and pursuant to
the agreement;
      (2)   the Corporation to perform, on behalf of the County, all matters
necessary to maintain eligibility for the receipt of funds under the workforce
development programs designated in the agreement, except those matters that by
law must be performed by the County;
      (3)   the revenue and receipts from transactions funded in whole or in
part through workforce development programs to be received, held, expended, and
accounted for in accordance with all applicable federal, State, and County
requirements;
      (4)   that the Corporation may not obligate the County, except as
required by law under federal, State, or County workforce development programs
administered by the Corporation on behalf of the County or as expressly
authorized in the agreement;
      (5)   the Corporation to submit to the County financial statements of a
type and frequency acceptable to the Controller, as specified in the agreement;
      (6)   in the event of dissolution, bankruptcy, or receivership of the
Corporation or failure of the Corporation to meet its material obligations
under the agreement, the Corporation to assign back to the County all
assignable rights, benefits, entitlements, and obligations under the workforce
development programs;
      (7)   the Corporation to submit annually audited financial statements
prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles to the
County, in conformity with all federal, State, and County program requirements,
and an annual report to the County Executive and the County Council concerning
its activities;
      (8)   the Corporation to authorize the Controller and the County Auditor
to audit, individually or together, all corporate records;
      (9)   the Corporation to submit to the Chief Administrative Officer by
January 1 of each year a proposed budget for the following fiscal year, July 1
through June 30, including health care premiums and payments for the
Corporation’s employees as required to maintain health care benefits available
from the County;
      (10)   the Corporation to treat all requests for information from members
of the public as requests made under the Maryland Public Information Act,
whether or not the Corporation is governed by the Act, and to respond to all
requests for information in the manner required by the Act;
      (11)   the Corporation to maintain in force and effect policies and
procedures prohibiting conflicts of interest in the activities of the
Corporation and restrictions on interested director transactions;
      (12)   (i)   the Corporation to purchase and maintain while the agreement
is in effect:
            1.   comprehensive general liability insurance with a minimum limit
of coverage for property damage of $250,000 per occurrence and a minimum limit
of coverage for bodily injury, including death, of $500,000 per occurrence;
            2.   directors and officers liability insurance with a minimum
limit of $1,000,000 of coverage;
            3.   insurance in compliance with the Workers’ Compensation laws of
the State; and
            4.   if the Corporation has or takes title to any vehicle,
comprehensive automobile liability insurance with a minimum property damage
limit of $250,000 per occurrence and a minimum liability limit of $250,000 per
person and $500,000 per occurrence;
         (ii)   the Corporation to provide the County with a certificate
evidencing the coverage;
         (iii)   as to all policies other than the directors and officers
liability policy, the Corporation to name the County, its agents, officers, and
employees as additional insureds and to provide the County with at least 30
days’ written notice prior to any cancellation, intention not to renew, or
material change in coverage; and
         (iv)   as to directors and officers liability insurance, the
Corporation to provide the County with a certificate naming the County, its
officers, agents, and employees as additional insureds if such coverage is
available to the Corporation at a reasonable cost; and
      (13)   to the extent permitted by applicable law and grant agreements,
the Corporation to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the County, its
officers, agents, and employees from any and all loss, damages, liabilities,
claims, and costs arising out of or resulting from any act or omission made by
the Corporation, its directors, officers, agents, employees, and Contractors in
performance of this agreement, the indemnity being limited to the extent of the
Corporation’s assets, including insurance.
   (c)   Assignment of rights, benefits, entitlements, and obligations. The
agreement may assign to the Corporation, except as otherwise prohibited by law
or contractual obligation, any or all of the County’s rights, benefits,
entitlements, and obligations under workforce development programs; provide for
the Corporation to lease, at a nominal rate, office space in a County-owned
building; and contain other provisions not inconsistent with those required by
this section or any other law. The agreement may not pledge or authorize the
Corporation to pledge the full faith or credit of the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 13-103) (Bill No. 52-01; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 26. YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL
Section
   
3-26-101.   Established.
   
3-26-102.   Purpose.
   
3-26-103.   Composition.
   
3-26-104.   Term of members.
   
3-26-105.   Chair.
   
3-26-106.   Meetings; quorum.
   
3-26-107.   Duties.
§ 3-26-101. Established.
   There is a Youth Advisory Council to be known as the “Anne Arundel County
Youth Advisory Council”.
(Bill No. 77-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-26-102. Purpose.
   The purpose of the Youth Advisory Council is to recognize youth voices and
to provide feedback and recommendations regarding County policies that affect
youth.
(Bill No. 77-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-26-103. Composition.
   (a)   Eligibility. Youth Advisory Council members shall be between the ages
of 14 years and 22 years and shall represent a broad array of backgrounds,
including race, gender identity, national origin, sexual orientation,
socioeconomic status, physical ability, mental ability, immigration status,
educational status, and language ability.
   (b)   Number and type of members.
      (1)   The Youth Advisory Council shall consist of up to 19 voting members
who reside in the County and are appointed by the County Executive as follows:
         (i)   at least 11 students from public high schools in the County
representing all councilmanic districts;
         (ii)   up to two students who are home schooled in the County;
         (iii)   up to two students who attend private school in the County;
         (iv)   up to four members who are not students; and
         (v)   up to two members who are currently enrolled in a higher
education institution in the County or a neighboring county.
      (2)   The Council may include the following non-voting ex officio
members:
         (i)   the student member of the Board of Education;
         (ii)   a member of the Chesapeake Regional Association of Student
Councils representing the Anne Arundel County Board of Education;
         (iii)   the student member of the Human Relations Commission; or
         (iv)   a County Executive intern.
(Bill No. 77-22; Bill No. 94-24; Bill No. 23-25)
§ 3-26-104. Term of members.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   Each voting member shall serve a term of one year.
      (2)   Voting members shall serve a maximum of two consecutive
terms.Voting members shall serve a maximum of two consecutive terms.
      (3)   All members serve at the pleasure of the County Executive.
   (b)   Removal. A voting member shall be deemed removed if the member misses
more than one-half of the meetings held during a twelve-month period.
(Bill No. 77-22; Bill No. 94-24; Bill No. 23-25)
§ 3-26-105. Chair.
   The Youth Advisory Council shall appoint one voting member as Chair. A Chair
shall serve for six months and may be reappointed.
(Bill No. 77-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-26-106. Meetings; quorum.
   (a)   Meetings. The Youth Advisory Council shall meet as frequently as
required to perform its duties, but no less than one time per month during the
school year. All meetings shall comport to the Maryland Open Meetings Act and
this Code.
   (b)   Quorum. A quorum consists of a majority of the voting members. An
affirmative vote of a majority of the voting members present at any meeting at
which there is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of the Youth
Advisory Council.
(Bill No. 77-22; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 3-26-107. Duties.
   The Youth Advisory Council shall:
      (1)   identify and discuss issues youth are facing in the County and
create strategies that address these issues;
      (2)   advise the County Executive on policy matters impacting youth and
strengthen opportunities for youth to engage in civic matters;
      (3)   advocate to the County Executive on youth issues;
      (4)   provide outreach and community feedback to the County Executive on
policies affecting youth; and
      (5)   submit an annual report of its activities and recommendations to
the County Executive by July 15.
(Bill No. 77-22; Bill No. 94-24)
TITLE 27. ANIMAL WELFARE COUNCIL
Section
   
3-27-101.   Established.
   
3-27-102.   Purpose.
   
3-27-103.   Composition.
   
3-27-104.   Term of members.
   
3-27-105.   Chair.
   
3-27-106.   Meetings; quorum.
   
3-27-107.   Duties.
§ 3-27-101. Established.
   There is an Animal Welfare Council to be known as the “Anne Arundel County
Animal Welfare Council”.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 3-27-102. Purpose.
   The purpose of the Animal Welfare Council is to consider matters for the
promotion of the humane treatment of animals in Anne Arundel County and to
provide advice to the County Executive and County agencies on such matters.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 3-27-103. Composition.
   The Council shall consist of up to 16 members appointed by and serving at
the pleasure of the County Executive.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 3-27-104. Term of members.
   (a)   Term. Each member shall be appointed for a term of two years and shall
not serve more than four consecutive terms.
   (b)   Removal. A member shall be deemed removed if the member misses more
than one-half of the meetings held during a twelve-month period.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 3-27-105. Chair.
   The County Executive shall appoint one member as Chair.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 3-27-106. Meetings; quorum.
   (a)   Meetings. The Animal Welfare Council shall meet as frequently as
required to perform its duties, but no less than one time per quarter. All
meetings shall comport to the Maryland Open Meetings Act and this Code.
   (b)   Quorum. A majority of the members of the Animal Welfare Council shall
constitute a quorum. An affirmative vote of a majority of the members present
at any meeting at which there is a quorum shall be sufficient for any action of
the Council.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 3-27-107. Duties.
   (a)   Report. The Animal Welfare Council shall submit a report by December
31 of each year to the County Executive that sets forth the status of plans and
progress related to its purpose, as well as goals and priorities for the next
year.
   (b)   Meeting. The Animal Welfare Council shall meet annually with the
County Executive or the designee of the County Executive.
(Bill No. 25-25)
ARTICLE 4. FINANCE, TAXATION, AND BUDGET
   Title
      
1.   REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES
      
2.   REAL PROPERTY TAXES
      
3.   PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX CREDITS AND EXEMPTIONS
      
3A.   TRANSFER AND RECORDATION TAXES
      
4.   INCOME TAX
      
5.   ADMISSIONS AND AMUSEMENT TAX
      
6.   TAXES ON SERVICES AND COMMODITIES
      
7.   SPECIAL COMMUNITY BENEFIT DISTRICTS, SHORE EROSION CONTROL DISTRICTS, AND
WATERWAYS IMPROVEMENTS DISTRICTS
      
8.   SPECIAL TAXING DISTRICTS
      
9.   TAX INCREMENT FINANCING DISTRICTS
      
10.   BONDS, TAX ANTICIPATION NOTES, AND INTERIM NOTES
      
11.   BUDGET
      
12.   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
      
APPENDIX – TAX ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS MAP
TITLE 1. REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES
Section
   
4-1-101.   Scope.
   
4-1-102.   Date of levy.
   
4-1-103.   Interest rate on overdue taxes.
   
4-1-104.   Payment.
   
4-1-105.   Tax sales.
§ 4-1-101. Scope.
   This title applies to real and personal property taxes.
§ 4-1-102. Date of levy.
   The County Council shall levy property taxes on or before June 30 each year.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-101) (Bill No. 38-13)
State Code reference – Tax-Property Article, §§ 6-202, 6-302.
§ 4-1-103. Interest rate on overdue taxes.
   All overdue property taxes shall accrue interest at the rate of 0.5% per
month, or fraction of a month, and a penalty of 0.5% per month, or fraction of
a month, from the time that the taxes become overdue until they are paid. The
Controller shall waive the interest and penalty upon making a determination
that a late payment is a result of a County error. The Controller may waive the
interest and penalty upon making a determination that an event or issue beyond
a property owner’s control has resulted in billing or payment delays for
multiple property owners, such as a state of emergency or United States Postal
Service delivery delay.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-102) (Bill No. 69-16; Bill No. 115-21)
State Code reference – Tax-Property Article, § 14-603(b)(5)(i).
§ 4-1-104. Payment.
   (a)   Semiannual. On owner-occupied residential property, a property owner
may pay State and County property taxes, and any other tax or charge billed on
the property tax bill, on a semiannual payment schedule and shall pay a service
charge on the second installment payment, calculated in accordance with the
provisions of the Tax-Property Article, § 10-204.3, of the State Code.
   (b)   Advance. A property owner may make advance payment of County property
tax in accordance with the provisions of the Tax-Property Article, § 10-205, of
the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 1-102.1, 1-102.2) (Bill No. 58-98)
§ 4-1-105. Tax sales.
   (a)   Power of County to hold. If property taxes and any other taxes or
charges billed on the property tax bill are not paid on or before January 31of
the taxable year for which they were levied, and remain unpaid on the following
April 1, the Controller shall proceed under State law to sell on a day in May
or June set by the Controller the real property on which the delinquent taxes
or charges are due.
   (b)   Redemption rate of interest. The annual interest rate for redemption
of property sold at tax sale is 18%.
   (c)   Acquisition of property by County. The County may acquire property for
public purposes at tax sales the same as if it were a natural person.
Departments interested in acquiring property to be auctioned at tax sales shall
notify the Purchasing Agent. Subject to the budget limitations of the
interested department, the Purchasing Agent shall bid on the property for the
interested department.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 6-101, 6-102, 6-103) (Bill No. 50-96; Bill No. 17-00;
Bill No. 51-03; Bill No. 97-12)
   State Code reference – Tax-Property Article, §§ 14-808(a), 14-820(b)(2).
TITLE 2. REAL PROPERTY TAXES
Section
Subtitle 1. General Provisions
   
4-2-101.   Scope.
   
4-2-102.   Assessment districts.
Subtitle 2. Exemptions, Refunds, Deferrals, and Supplements
   
4-2-201.   Exemptions.
   
4-2-202.   Refunds to eligible blind individuals and disabled veterans.
   
4-2-203.   Deferral for elderly or disabled homeowners.
   
4-2-204.   Supplement to Homeowners Property Tax Credit Program.
Subtitle 3. Credits
   
4-2-301.   9-1-1 specialist property tax credit.
   
4-2-302.   Agricultural land.
   
4-2-303.   Airport Noise Zone.
   
4-2-304.   Anne Arundel Community College at Arundel Mills.
   
4-2-305.   Arundel Habitat for Humanity, Inc.
   
4-2-306.   Brownfields sites.
   
4-2-307.   Commercial revitalization area program.
   
4-2-308.   Conservation land.
   
4-2-309.   Disabled or fallen law enforcement officers and rescue workers.
   
4-2-310.   Geothermal energy.
   
4-2-311.   High performance buildings.
   
4-2-312.   Historic preservation tax credit.
   
4-2-313.   Public Safety Officer property tax credit.
   
4-2-314.   Religious organizations.
   
4-2-315.   Solar energy.
   
4-2-316.   Stormwater management and erosion control.
   
4-2-317.   Disabled veterans and their surviving spouses.
   
4-2-318.   Retired veterans.
   
4-2-319.   Village Commons Community Center, Inc.
Subtitle 4. Clean Energy Loan Program
   
4-2-401.   Clean Energy Loan Program.
   
4-2-402.   Real property tax surcharge.
   
4-2-403.   Financing.
SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 4-2-101. Scope.
   This title applies to real property taxes.
§ 4-2-102. Assessment districts.
   (a)   Creation. The County is divided into eight assessment districts. The
boundaries of the districts are as shown on the official map adopted by the
County Council entitled "Tax Assessment Districts, 2005".
   (b)   Effect. The creation of the districts does not affect the boundaries
of the City of Annapolis, any rights held or applied for under the prior
boundaries of election districts, or the term "election district" as used in
reference to liquor license laws applicable to the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 1-201, 1-210)
Editor's note – A small-scale representation of the official map adopted by
Bill No. 82-05 is included as an
appendix to this article.
SUBTITLE 2. EXEMPTIONS, REFUNDS, DEFERRALS, AND SUPPLEMENTS
§ 4-2-201. Exemptions.
   (a)   Aircraft landing areas. An improved aircraft landing area, including
an approach zone and taxiway, may not be assessed to the owner of the real
property on which it is located if the landing area is located on privately
owned land, used by the public, and licensed under the Transportation Article,
Title 5, of the State Code.
   (b)   Community associations. Real property is exempt from County taxation
if an application for an exemption is made to the Controller on forms supplied
by the Office of Finance, and the Controller determines that:
      (1)   title to the property is held by a nonprofit community civic
association or corporation;
      (2)   the property is dedicated by appropriate record plat or deed
restrictions to the use of the lot owners within the community; and
      (3)   use of the property is not contingent on payment of dues, fees, or
other compensation to the association or corporation, except that use may be
contingent on assessments exacted by the association or corporation solely for
the improvement or maintenance of the roads, property, or other facilities of
the community.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 1-103, 1-104) (Bill No. 93-88; Bill No. 4-98; Bill No.
23-04)
State Code reference – Tax-Property Article, §§ 7-303, 8-302, 9-303.
§ 4-2-202. Refunds to eligible blind individuals and disabled veterans.
   (a)   Generally. The Controller shall make a refund of County property taxes
to a blind individual who receives an exemption under the Tax-Property Article,
§ 7-207, of the State Code, and to a disabled veteran or a surviving spouse who
receives an exemption under the Tax-Property Article, § 7-208, of the State
Code.
   (b)   Which taxes refunded. The taxes refunded shall be those taxes paid in
the taxable years in which an exemption was authorized by law but not granted.
A refund may not be made for a year or portion of a year that is more than five
years preceding the date of application for the refund.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-106) (Bill. No. 27-99; Bill No. 17-00)
§ 4-2-203. Deferral for elderly or disabled homeowners.
   (a)   Creation. There is a 50-year deferral of County real property taxes on
residential real property for eligible homeowners.
   (b)   Eligibility. A homeowner is eligible for a payment deferral if the
owner or at least one of the owners:
      (1)   has resided in the dwelling as a principal residence for a period
of at least five consecutive years;
      (2)   meets one of the following three conditions: is at least 62 years
of age; has been found permanently and totally disabled and has qualified for
benefits under the Social Security Act, the Railroad Retirement Act, any
federal act for members of the United States Armed Forces, or any federal
retirement system; or has been found permanently and totally disabled by a
County Health Officer or the Baltimore City Commissioner of Health; and
      (3)   meets the income eligibility requirements under subsection (c).
   (c)   Ceiling on gross income. Homeowners are eligible if their combined
gross income, as defined in the Tax-Property Article, § 9-104, of the State
Code, does not exceed $55,000 per year.
   (d)   Amount deferred. The amount of real property eligible for a payment
deferral shall be no more than the minimum lot size required by the zoning
district in which the property is found, except that the amount of eligible
property may not be less than the dwelling and curtilage, as determined by the
Supervisor of Assessments for Anne Arundel County. The amount of tax that may
be deferred may not exceed the increase in the County property tax from the
date the homeowner elects to defer the payment of the tax.
   (e)   Time for payment and interest rate. The total amount of County
property tax deferred shall be due and payable at the end of the 50-year
duration of the deferral, when the eligible owner dies, or immediately on
transfer of ownership of the property for which the property tax has been
deferred. No interest shall accrue on the amount deferred if paid when due.
Thereafter, interest and penalties shall accrue on the unpaid balance at the
rates described in §
4-1-103.
   (f)   Notice. Notice regarding tax deferrals under this section shall
include notice to any mortgagee or beneficiary under a deed of trust of the
deferral and of the amount of tax to be deferred and notice on the annual
property tax bill of the cumulative amount of the deferral and all related
interest.
   (g)   When election must be made. The election to defer taxes must be made
before June 1 of a taxable year in order to receive deferral of the taxes
beginning in the succeeding taxable year.
   (h)   Taxes not deferred are due and payable. All County real property taxes
not deferred are due and payable and subject to the same interest rates as all
other County property taxes.
   (i)   Lien for deferred taxes and interest. A lien shall attach to the
property in the amount of all deferred taxes and interest and shall remain
attached until the deferred taxes and interest are paid.
   (j)   Agreement. Tax deferrals for eligible homeowners are authorized by
written agreement. The agreement shall reflect the terms and conditions of the
deferral, including notice of the lien. The agreement shall be recorded in the
land records of Anne Arundel County.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-107) (Bill No. 77-90; Bill No. 55-09; Bill No. 68-09;
Bill No. 48-12; Bill No. 85-15; Bill No. 22-16; Bill No. 69-16)
§ 4-2-204. Supplement to Homeowners Property Tax Credit Program.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Combined income" has the meaning stated in the Tax-Property
Article, § 9-104(a), of the State Code.
      (2)   "Dwelling" has the meaning stated in the Tax-Property Article, § 9-
104(a), of the State Code.
      (3)   "Homeowner" has the meaning stated in the Tax-Property Article, §
9-104(a), of the State Code.
      (4)   "Homeowners Property Tax Credit Program" means the program
established under the Tax-Property Article, § 9-104, of the State Code.
      (5)   "Total real property tax" means the product of the sum of all
property tax rates on real property, including special district tax rates, for
the taxable year on a dwelling, multiplied by the lesser of $350,000 or the
assessed value of the dwelling reduced by the amount of any assessment on which
a property tax credit is granted under the Tax-Property Article, § 9-105, of
the State Code.
   (b)   Creation. There is a local supplement to the Homeowners Property Tax
Credit Program for dwellings in the County as authorized by the Tax-Property
Article, § 9-215, of the State Code.
   (c)   Calculation. Unless eligible for enhancement under subsection (d), the
local supplement to the Homeowners Property Tax Credit Program is the
difference between the amount of the property tax credit as calculated under
the Tax-Property Article, § 9-104(g), of the State Code and the amount of the
property tax credit as calculated by determining the total real property tax on
a dwelling, less the following percentage of the combined income of the
homeowner:
      (1)   0% of the 1st $4,000 of combined income;
      (2)   0% of the 2nd $4,000 of combined income;
      (3)   0% of the 3rd $4,000 of combined income;
      (4)   3% of the 4th $4,000 of combined income;
      (5)   7% of the 5th $4,000 of combined income; and
      (6)   9% of combined income over $20,000.
   (d)   Eligibility for enhanced local supplement. There is an enhanced local
supplement if a homeowner, as of the end of the calendar year preceding the
taxable year for which the enhanced local supplement is sought:
      (1)   is at least 70 years of age; and
      (2)   has resided in the dwelling for more than ten years.
   (e)   Calculation of enhanced local supplement. If the eligibility criteria
described in subsection (d) are met, the local supplement to the Homeowners
Property Tax Credit Program is 130% of the amount calculated in subsection (c),
but shall not exceed the amount of the real property tax imposed on the
dwelling.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § s1-108) (Bill No. 47-92; Bill No. 36-99; Bill No. 38-02;
Bill No. 41-06; Bill No. 8-07)
SUBTITLE 3. CREDITS
§ 4-2-301. 9-1-1 specialist property tax credit.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Dwelling" has the meaning set forth in § 9-105 of the Tax-Property
Article of the State Code.
      (2)   "9-1-1 specialist" has the meaning described in § 9-262 of the Tax-
Property Article of the State Code.
   (b)   Creation. There is a tax credit from County real property taxes levied
on a dwelling owned by an eligible 9-1-1 specialist.
   (c)   Eligibility. A 9-1-1 specialist is eligible for a County property tax
credit under this section if:
      (1)   the 9-1-1 specialist has completed at least one year of full-time
employment with Anne Arundel County as a 9-1-1 specialist and is employed full-
time by Anne Arundel County as a 9-1-1 specialist;
      (2)   the 9-1-1 specialist is eligible for the credit authorized by § 9-
105 of the Tax-Property Article of the State Code for the dwelling for which
the credit is sought; and
      (3)   the credit is not combined with other optional property tax credits
as permitted under Title 9, Subtitle 2 of the Tax-Property Article of the State
Code or this title.
   (d)   Calculation. The tax credit provided in this section shall be
calculated and credited based on the total County tax due on a dwelling based
on the real property assessment made by the County Supervisor of Assessments,
not to exceed the lesser of $2,500 or the total County tax due on the dwelling.
   (e)   Duration. The tax credit shall be available to a 9-1-1 specialist
eligible under subsection (c) for a period of one taxable year and may be
renewed upon application of the 9-1-1 specialist for four additional taxable
years, for a maximum total of five taxable years.
   (f)   Time for filing of application. An application for, or for a renewal
of, the tax credit created by this section shall be filed on or before April 1
immediately before the taxable year for which the tax credit is sought. If the
application or renewal is filed after April 1, the credit shall be disallowed
that year but shall be treated as an application or renewal for a tax credit
for the following taxable year.
   (g)   Form of application. An application for, or for the renewal of, the 9-
1-1 specialist tax credit shall be made on a form provided by the Controller's
office.
   (h)   Termination of credit.
      (1)   The tax credit created by this section shall terminate on the
sooner of the 9-1-1 specialist:
         (i)   receiving the tax credit for five taxable years;
         (ii)   no longer being employed as a 9-1-1 specialist with the County
for a reason other than a service related disability; or
         (iii)   no longer residing in or owning the dwelling for which the tax
credit was granted.
      (2)   Upon termination of the tax credit as a result of a 9-1-
1 specialist being terminated for a cause listed in § 808(b) through (e) of the
Charter, the homeowner shall be liable for:
         (i)   all property taxes that the homeowner would have been liable for
for the taxable year of the termination as if the tax credit had not been
granted under this section; and
         (ii)   all interest and penalties on those taxes computed in the
manner provided under §
4-1-103.
      (3)   Upon termination of the tax credit for any reason other than the 9-
1-1 specialist being terminated from employment for a cause listed in § 808(b)
through (e) of the Charter, the tax credit will be applied only to the portion
of the taxable year for which the 9-1-1 specialist was eligible for the tax
credit, and the homeowner shall be liable for all remaining property taxes.
(Bill No. 17-20)
§ 4-2-302. Agricultural land.
   (a)   Creation. There is a 10-year tax credit from County real property
taxes levied on agricultural land and woodland if the property is included in
an agricultural preservation district as provided in the Agriculture Article, §
2-509, of the State Code, or a County agricultural district as provided in §§
17-10-201 et seq. of this Code and the landowner has agreed to remain in the
district for at least 10 years.
   (b)   Time for filing application. An application for the tax credit created
by this section shall be filed on or before October 1 of the first taxable year
for which the 10-year tax credit is sought. If the application is filed after
October 1, the credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be treated as an
application for a tax credit for the next succeeding taxable year.
   (c)   Form of application. An application for the tax credit shall be
submitted to the Controller on forms that the Office of Finance requires; be
accompanied by proof that the landowner has entered into a binding agreement
with the State or County to retain the landowner's property in an agricultural
preservation district or a County agricultural district for 10 years commencing
with the year in which application is made; and be under oath, containing a
declaration preceding the signature of the applicant to the effect that it is
made under the penalties of perjury provided by the Tax-Property Article, § 1-
201, of the State Code.
   (d)   Review by Planning and Zoning. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall
review each application for a tax credit and certify that the property
qualifies for the credit.
   (e)   Calculation. The tax credit shall be calculated and credited based on
the total taxable assessment on land that is subject to an agricultural use
assessment and up to $250,000 of the total taxable assessment on all buildings
on the property.
   (f)   Reapplication. At the end of the 10-year period, if the landowner
elects to remain in the district for an additional 10 years and enters into a
binding agreement with the State or County, the landowner may reapply for the
tax credit.
   (g)   Termination. If a landowner terminates a property as an agricultural
preservation district or a County agricultural district before the expiration
of any 10-year period without the approval of the State or County, the
landowner shall be liable for all property taxes that any owner of the property
would have been liable for if the property tax credit had not been granted
under this section and interest and penalties on those taxes computed as
provided under §
4-1-103. The granting of an easement to the County or Maryland Agricultural
Land Preservation Foundation does not terminate the tax credit.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-104.1) (Bill No. 49-89; Bill No. 46-90; Bill No. 54-90;
Bill No. 50-01; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 69-16; Bill No. 17-20)
§ 4-2-303. Airport Noise Zone.
   (a)   Creation. There is a credit from County real property taxes levied on
property within the Baltimore-Washington International Airport Noise Zone if
the property is owner-occupied, residential property that is located entirely
or in part within the 75 LDN Noise Contour as established by the Airport Noise
Zone surrounding the Baltimore-Washington International Airport that has been
most recently adopted by the Maryland Aviation Administration as of the first
day of the taxable year.
   (b)   Time for filing application. Application for the tax credit created by
this section shall be filed on or before October 1 immediately before each
taxable year for which the tax credit is sought. If the application is filed
after October 1, the credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be treated
as an application for a tax credit for the next succeeding taxable year.
   (c)   Form of application. An application for the tax credit shall be
submitted to the Controller on forms that the Office of Finance requires;
include a statement that the property is owner- occupied and used solely for
residential purposes; and be under oath, containing a declaration preceding the
signature of the applicant to the effect that it is made under the penalties of
perjury provided by the Tax-Property Article, § 1-201, of the State Code.
   (d)   Review by Planning and Zoning. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall
review each application for a tax credit and certify that the property
qualifies for the credit.
   (e)   Calculation. The tax credit shall be calculated and credited based on
50% of the tax due on County real property based on the real property
assessment made by the County Supervisor of Assessments up to $212,500.
   (f)   Termination. If a landowner terminates the residential use or the
owner-occupied status of the property during a year for which a credit was
granted, the landowner shall be liable for all property taxes that the owner
would have been liable for if the property tax credit had not been granted
under this section and all interest and penalties on those taxes computed in
the manner provided under § 4-1-103.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-104.2) (Bill No. 76-90; Bill No. 50-01; Bill No. 69-16;
Bill No. 17-20)
§ 4-2-304. Anne Arundel Community College at Arundel Mills.
   (a)   Creation. There is a tax credit from County real property taxes levied
on property leased by Anne Arundel Community College at Arundel Mills.
   (b)   Time for filing application. An application for the tax credit created
by this section shall be filed on or before October 1 prior to the tax year for
which the credit is first sought. If the application is filed after October 1,
the credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be treated as an application
for the tax credit for the next succeeding year.
   (c)   Form of application. An application for the tax credit shall be
submitted to the Controller on a form that the Office of Finance requires; be
accompanied by a current certificate of good standing for the applicant from
the State Department of Assessments and Taxation; and include any additional
information the Controller believes necessary to determine whether the tax
credit should be granted.
   (d)   Grant of application. The Controller shall grant the credit if the
application meets the requirements of this section.
   (e)   Duration of credit. The tax credit shall be effective so long as the
property meets the requirements of this section, and shall terminate when the
property no longer meets the conditions of this section. Anne Arundel Community
College shall notify the Office of Finance immediately upon termination of any
lease for property receiving a tax credit under this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-104.8) (Bill No. 45-04; Bill No. 22-16; Bill No. 17-20)
§ 4-2-305. Arundel Habitat for Humanity, Inc.
   (a)   Creation. There is a tax credit from County real property taxes levied
on property that is:
      (1)   owned by Arundel Habitat for Humanity, Inc. with the intention of
relinquishing ownership in the immediate future; used exclusively for the
purpose of rehabilitation and transfer to a private owner; and is not occupied
by administrative or warehouse buildings owned by Habitat for Humanity; and
      (2)   owned by Arundel Habitat for Humanity, Inc. and located at 8101
Fort Smallwood Road, Baltimore, Maryland, or 8104 Parkway Drive, Baltimore,
Maryland.
   (b)   Time for filing application. An application for the tax credit created
by this section shall be filed on or before October 1 prior to the tax year for
which the credit is sought. If the application is filed after October 1, the
credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be treated as an application for
the tax credit for the next succeeding year.
   (c)   Form of application. An application for the tax credit shall be
submitted to the Controller on a form that the Office of Finance requires; be
accompanied by a current certificate of good standing for the applicant from
the State Department of Assessments and Taxation; and include any additional
information the Controller believes necessary to determine whether the tax
credit should be granted.
   (d)   Grant of application. The credit shall be granted by the Controller if
the application meets the requirements of this section.
(Bill No. 48-10; Bill No. 17-20)
§ 4-2-306. Brownfields sites.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated:
      (1)   “Brownfields site” has the meaning stated in the Economic
Development Article, § 5-301(i), of the State Code.
      (2)   “Corrective action plan” is a plan submitted to and approved by the
State pursuant to the Environment Article, Title 4, of the State Code.
      (3)   “Qualified brownfields site” has the meaning stated in the Economic
Development Article, § 5-301(r), of the State Code.
      (4)   "Voluntary cleanup program" is the program created by the
Environment Article, Title 7, Subtitle 5, of the State Code.
   (b)   Creation. There is a brownfields tax credit from County real property
taxes levied on qualified brownfields sites as authorized by the Tax-Property
Article, § 9-229 of the State Code.
   (c)   Effective date. The brownfields tax credit shall be effective for each
of the five taxable years following the issuance of the notice of revaluation
by the State Department of Assessments and Taxation for the qualified
brownfields site, after completion of a voluntary cleanup program or a
corrective action plan for a qualified brownfields site.
   (d)   Form of application.  An application for a brownfields tax credit
shall be made to the Controller on a form provided by the Controller;
demonstrate that the brownfields site meets the requirements of this section;
and include any additional information the Controller believes to be necessary
to determine if the taxpayer is eligible to receive the brownfields tax credit.
   (e)   Calculation. The brownfields tax credit shall be an amount equal to
50% of the property tax attributable to the increase in the assessment of the
qualified brownfields site, including improvements added to the site during the
credit period, over the assessment of the qualified brownfields site before a
voluntary cleanup program or a corrective action plan.
   (f)   County contribution. Pursuant to Tax-Property Article, § 9-229(c)(2),
of the State Code, for each year of the credit period, the County shall
contribute to the Maryland Economic Development Assistance Fund established
under the Economic Development Article, § 5-310, of the State Code, an amount
equal to 30% of the property tax attributable to the increase in the assessment
of the qualified brownfields site, including improvements to the site during
the credit period, over the assessment of the qualified brownfields site before
a voluntary cleanup program or a corrective action plan.
   (g)   Additional tax credit. A qualified brownfields site located within the
OTC-C Zoning District shall be eligible for an additional tax credit in an
amount equal to an additional 20% of the remaining property tax attributable to
the increase in assessment of the qualified brownfields site, including
improvements added during the credit period, over the assessment of the
qualified brownfields site before a voluntary cleanup program or corrective
action plan.
(Bill No. 40-07; Bill No. 48-10; Bill No. 72-10; Bill No. 17-20; Bill No. 84-
23)
§ 4-2-307. Commercial revitalization area program.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated:
      (1)   "Commercial revitalization area" means an area designated on a map
adopted by ordinance of the County Council that is eligible to have qualified
properties in the area receive revitalization credits and includes the Glen
Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area as shown on the map adopted by the
County Council in Bill No. 64-20.
      (2)   "Qualified improvements" means physical improvements that are made
to a qualified property, including new construction, rehabilitation,
redevelopment, or improvements made after demolition of pre-existing
improvements; are constructed in accordance with a building permit issued by
the County; and have a full cash value of at least $100,000 in the year the
improvements are substantially completed, as reflected in the records of the
State Department of Assessments and Taxation.
      (3)   "Qualified property" means a property located totally or partially
within a commercial revitalization area, but the term does not include:
         (i)   property that is used primarily for a public utility company; or
         (ii)   property located in a tax increment development district other
than property located in the Odenton Town Center; or
         (iii)   property that qualifies for the real property tax credit for
enterprise zones under the Tax-Property Article, § 9-103, of the State Code.
      (4)   "Revitalization credit" means the tax attributable to the
incremental increase in the real property tax assessment of property that is
solely the result of the completion of qualified improvements.
   (b)   Eligibility. A qualified property is eligible to receive a
revitalization credit each year for a period of five years against the
taxpayer's real property tax if:
      (1)   the revitalization credit is not combined with other tax credits,
payments in lieu of taxes, allowances, or payment alternatives that may be
applicable to the qualified improvements;
      (2)   the value of the qualified improvements to which the revitalization
credit applies does not exceed the full cash value of the improvements, as
determined in the year in which they are substantially completed;
      (3)   the calculation of the revitalization credit does not exceed the
property tax increase attributable to the increase in the assessment of the
real property over the assessment before the real property is rehabilitated;
      (4)   the Office of Planning and Zoning certifies that the property is a
qualified property and located within a commercial revitalization area; and
      (5)   the taxpayer applies for the credit within 120 days after the
issuance of the notice of assessment by the State Department of Assessments and
Taxation.
   (c)   Extended eligibility. A qualified property that meets the requirements
of subsection (b) is eligible to receive a revitalization credit each year
against the taxpayer's real property tax for an additional five years if the
project is funded by at least $10,000,000 of private funds.
   (d)   Effective date. The revitalization credit shall be effective for the
taxable year following the issuance of the notice of assessment by the State
Department of Assessments and Taxation for the qualified improvements.
   (e)   Form of application. An application for a revitalization credit shall
be made to the Controller on a form provided by the Controller; demonstrate
that the qualified improvements meet the requirements of this section; and
include any additional information the Controller believes to be necessary to
determine if the taxpayer is eligible to receive the credit.
   (f)   Grant. The Controller shall grant the credit if the application meets
the requirements of this section and the taxpayer is current on all taxes owed
to the County.
   (g)   Applicability. Any subdivision or development on a property that was a
qualified property on or before May 25, 2017 shall be subject to the law
related to the tax credit as it existed before May 25, 2017 if, on or before
May 25, 2017, a final plan or site development plan application has been filed
with the Office of Planning and Zoning.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-111) (Bill No. 97-01; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 48-10;
Bill No. 46-12; Bill No. 95-12; Bill No. 75-14; Bill No. 10-17; Bill No. 17-20;
Bill No. 64-20; Bill No. 84-23)
   Editor's note – The provisions of this section are in effect for 20 years
from April 21, 2002, after which time the section is repealed and of no further
force and effect other than for applications submitted prior to the date of
repeal. (The commercial revitalization district program established by Bill No.
97-01 was originally set to expire after five years on April 21, 2007. Bill No.
94-06 extended the termination of the program to April 20, 2012; Bill No. 4-12
extended it to April 20, 2017; Bill No. 6-17 extended it to April 20, 2022; and
Bill No. 117-21 extended it to 30 years.)
§ 4-2-308. Conservation land.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Conservation land" means real property that is:
         (i)   subject to a perpetual conservation easement donated to a land
trust on or after July 1, 1991; or
         (ii)   acquired by a land trust on or after July 1, 1991; owned in fee
by that land trust; and subject to a letter of intent, agreement, or option
agreement for the resale of the property to a government agency.
      (2)   "Land trust" means a qualified conservation organization as defined
in the Natural Resources Article, § 3-2A-01, of the State Code.
   (b)   Creation. There is a tax credit from County real property taxes levied
on conservation land that is used to assist in the preservation of a natural
area, for the environmental education of the public, generally to promote
conservation, or for the maintenance of a natural area for public use or a
sanctuary for wildlife.
   (c)   Time for filing application. An application for the tax credit created
by this section shall be filed on or before June 1 immediately before the first
taxable year for which the tax credit is sought. An application for
continuation of the tax credit shall be filed on or before June 1 immediately
before the taxable year for which continuation of the tax credit is sought. If
the application is filed after June 1, the credit shall be disallowed that year
but shall be treated as an application for a tax credit for the next succeeding
taxable year.
   (d)   Form of application. An application for the tax credit or for
continuation of the tax credit shall be submitted to the Controller on forms
that the Office of Finance requires; be accompanied by proof that the property
meets the definition of "conservation land" and other requirements set forth in
this section; and be under oath, containing a declaration preceding the
signature of the applicant to the effect that it is made under the penalties of
perjury provided for by the Tax-Property Article, § 1-201, of the State Code.
   (e)   Review by Planning and Zoning. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall
review each initial application for a tax credit and certify that the property
qualifies for the credit. The Office of Planning and Zoning may review any
application for continuation of the tax credit to verify that the property
qualifies for a continuation of the tax credit.
   (f)   Calculation. The tax credit shall be calculated and credited based on
the total taxable assessment on conservation land, not including improvements.
   (g)   Duration and termination. The tax credit shall be granted for a period
of five taxable years after an application for the tax credit or for
continuation of the tax credit is approved, so long as the property meets the
definition of "conservation land" and meets the other requirements of this
section. If the perpetual conservation easement on the real property is
terminated, the property no longer meets the definition of "conservation land",
or if the land trust sells the real property to a person other than a
government agency, the property owner shall be liable for all property taxes
that the property owner should have been liable for if the property tax credit
had not been granted under this section and all interest and penalties on those
taxes computed as provided under §
4-1-103.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-104.3) (Bill No. 52-94; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 20-00;
Bill No. 66-03; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 48-10; Bill No. 22-16; Bill No. 69-16;
Bill No. 17-20)
§ 4-2-309. Disabled or fallen law enforcement officers and rescue workers.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Correctional officer" has the meaning described in the
Correctional Services Article, § 8-201(e) of the State Code. For employees of
the Anne Arundel County Department of Detention Facilities, "correctional
officer" means a uniformed officer in the rank of detention captain or below.
      (2)   "Disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker" means an
individual who has been found to be permanently and totally disabled by an
administrative body or court of competent jurisdiction authorized to make such
a determination and who is:
         (i)   a law enforcement officer or correction officer whose disability
arises out of and in the course of employment;
         (ii)   a career employee of a fire, rescue, or emergency medical
services entity whose disability arises out of and in the course of employment;
or
         (iii)   a member of a volunteer fire company or volunteer rescue squad
whose disability meets the criteria for eligibility for benefits under the
Public Safety Article, § 7-202(a) of the State Code.
      (3)   "Disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker" or "fallen law
enforcement officer or rescue worker" does not include an individual whose
disability or death is the result of the individual's own willful misconduct or
abuse of alcohol or drugs, or the result of an occupational disease which did
not result from an accidental injury within the meaning of those terms under
the Maryland Workers' Compensation Act.
      (4)   "Dwelling" means real property that is the legal residence of a
disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker or a surviving spouse and
occupied by not more than two families, and the term includes the lot or
curtilage and structures necessary to use the real property as a residence.
      (5)   "Fallen law enforcement officer or rescue worker" means:
         (i)   a law enforcement officer or correctional officer whose death
arises out of and in the course of employment;
         (ii)   a career employee of a fire, rescue, or emergency medical
services entity whose death arises out of and in the course of employment; or
         (iii)   a member of a volunteer fire company or volunteer rescue squad
whose death meets the criteria for eligibility for benefits under the Public
Safety Article, § 7-203(a), of the State Code.
      (6)   "Fire, rescue, or emergency medical services entity" has the
meaning described in the Public Safety Article, § 7-101(b), of the State Code.
      (7)   “Law enforcement officer” means:
         (i)    a “law enforcement officer” described in the § 1-101(c) of the
Public Safety Article of the State Code; or
         (ii)   a sworn law enforcement officer of the United States government
who is authorized by their agency to carry a firearm and has statutory power of
arrest and apprehension.
      (8)   “Rescue worker” means a career employee of a fire, rescue, or
emergency medical services entity or a member of a volunteer fire company or
volunteer rescue squad.
      (9)   “Surviving spouse” means the surviving spouse of a fallen law
enforcement officer or rescue worker.
   (b)   Creation. There is a tax credit from County real property taxes levied
on a dwelling owned by a disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker or a
surviving spouse pursuant to § 9-210 of the Tax-Property Article of the State
Code, if:
      (1)   the dwelling was owned by the disabled law enforcement officer or
rescue worker at the time the law enforcement officer or rescue worker was
adjudged to be permanently and totally disabled or by the fallen law
enforcement officer or rescue worker, either individually or jointly with the
surviving spouse, at the time of the fallen enforcement officer’s or rescue
worker’s death;
      (2)   (i)   the disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker, or the
fallen law enforcement officer or rescue worker or the surviving spouse, was
domiciled in the State as of or any time within the number of years required
under § 9-210 of the Tax-Property Article of the State Code before:
            1.    the date the law enforcement officer or rescue worker was
adjudged to be permanently and totally disabled; or
            2.   the date of the fallen law enforcement officer’s or rescue
worker’s death; and
         (ii)   the dwelling was acquired by the disabled law enforcement
officer or rescue worker or the surviving spouse within the number of years
required under § 9-210 of the Tax- Property Article of the State Code before
the date the law enforcement officer or rescue worker was adjudged to be
permanently and totally disabled or the date of the fallen law enforcement
officer’s or rescue worker’s death; or
      (3)   the dwelling was acquired after the disabled law enforcement
officer or rescue worker or the surviving spouse qualified for a credit for a
former dwelling under subsections (b)(1) or (b)(2) to the extent of the
previous credit.
   (c)   Calculation. The tax credit provided in this section shall be
calculated and credited based on 100% of the total tax due on a dwelling based
on the real property assessment made by the County Supervisor of Assessments
and shall cease upon a determination that the law enforcement officer or rescue
worker no longer is permanently and totally disabled by an administrative body
or court of competent jurisdiction authorized to make such a determination or
upon the remarriage of a surviving spouse.
   (d)   Form of application. An application for, or for the renewal of, the
credit created under this section shall be made on a form provided by the
Controller’s office and shall include verification that the applicant is
eligible for the credit.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-104.6) (Bill No. 81-03: Bill No. 35-09; Bill No. 48-10;
Bill No. 17-20; Bill No. 89-23)
§ 4-2-310. Geothermal energy.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "geothermal energy device" means a
heating or cooling device that is installed using ground loop technology.
   (b)   Creation. There is a one-time tax credit from County real property
taxes levied on residential dwellings that use geothermal energy devices
installed on or after January 1, 2009.
   (c)   Qualifying devices. Any device that uses geothermal energy to heat or
cool the dwelling shall be eligible for the credit.
   (d)   Time for filing application. Application for the tax credit created by
this section shall be filed on or before June 1 immediately before the taxable
year for which the tax credit is sought. If the application is filed after June
1, the credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be treated as an
application for a tax credit for the next succeeding taxable year. An
application may be filed only once for the duration of the tax credit.
   (e)   Credit against taxes levied on dwellings. The tax credit shall be
credited from the taxes levied on the dwelling and may not be credited from the
taxes levied on the land. The total tax credit allowed under this section shall
be the lesser of:
      (1)   fifty percent (50%) of the cost of materials and installation or
construction of the geothermal energy device, less the amount of federal and
State grants or State geothermal energy tax credits; or
      (2)   $2,500.
   (f)   Form of application. An application for the tax credit shall be
submitted to the Controller on forms that the Office of Finance requires; be
accompanied by documented receipts of the purchase of materials or supplies and
the actual installation cost; and be under oath, containing a declaration
preceding the signature of the applicant to the effect that it is made under
the penalties of perjury provided for by the Tax-Property Article, § 1-201, of
the State Code.
(Bill No. 17-10; Bill No. 48-10; Bill No. 17-20)
§ 4-2-311. High performance buildings.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section “high performance building” means a
building or buildings on real property that meets or exceeds a Silver rating of
the U.S. Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
(LEED) Green Building Rating System for homes or a Silver rating of the
International Code Council’s 700 National Green Building Standard (NGBS).
   (b)   Creation. There is a tax credit from County real property taxes on
high performance buildings as authorized by § 9-242 of the Tax-Property Article
of the State Code.
   (c)   Eligibility and duration. A qualified high performance building is
eligible for the credit for each year for a period of five taxable years
beginning in the year in which the application is approved, provided the credit
is not combined with other optional property tax credits as permitted under
Title 9 of the Tax-Property Article of the State Code or this title, and the
property meets the requirements of this section.
   (d)   Time for filing of application. Application for the tax credit created
by this section shall be filed on or before June 1 immediately before the
taxable year for which the tax credit is first sought. If the application is
filed after June 1, the credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be
treated as an application for a tax credit for the next succeeding taxable
year.
   (e)   Credit against taxes levied on residential high performance buildings;
calculation. The tax credit shall be credited from the taxes levied on a high
performance building assessed as residential by the Maryland Department of
Assessments and Taxation, and may not be credited from the taxes levied on the
land. The total tax credit allowed under this subsection shall be a percentage
of the total County property tax assessed based on the rating of the high
performance building as follows:
      (1)   for buildings rated LEED Silver or NGBS Silver - 40%, not to exceed
$1,000 for each individual certified building;
      (2)   for buildings rated LEED Gold or NGBS Gold - 60%, not to exceed
$2,000 for each individual certified building; and
      (3)   for buildings rated LEED Platinum or NGBS Emerald - 80%, not to
exceed $3,000 for each individual certified building.
   (f)   Credits against taxes levied on commercial high performance buildings;
calculation. The tax credit shall be credited from the taxes levied on a high
performance building assessed as commercial by the Maryland Department of
Assessments and Taxation, and may not be credited from the taxes levied on the
land. The total tax credit allowed under this subsection shall be a percentage
of the total County property tax assessed based on the rating of the high
performance building as follows:
      (1)   for buildings rated LEED Silver or NGBS Silver - 40%, not to exceed
$20,000 for each individual certified building;
      (2)   for buildings rated LEED Gold or NGBS Gold - 60%, not to exceed
$40,000 for each individual certified building; and
      (3)   for buildings rated LEED Platinum or NGBS Emerald - 80%, not to
exceed $60,000 for each individual certified building.
   (g)   Form of application. An application for a high performance building
credit shall be made to the Controller on a form provided by the Controller’s
Office and shall include documentation demonstrating the building was built to
achieve a standard listed in subsections (e) or (f); a statement made under the
penalties of perjury as stated in § 1-201 of the Tax-Property Article of the
State Code that the building and systems are regularly maintained to comply
with the applicable standard; a statement acknowledging officers and employees
of the County may enter onto the site of the improvements for the purpose of
making inspection in furtherance of this section; and any additional
information the Controller believes to be necessary to determine if the
taxpayer is eligible to receive the credit.
(Bill No. 78-10; Bill No. 3-12; Bill No. 16-13; Bill No. 22-16; Bill No. 17-20;
Bill No. 54-23)
§ 4-2-312. Historic preservation tax credit.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Historically valuable structure" means a structure receiving
certification from the Office of Planning and Zoning as an Anne Arundel County
historic landmark or a contributing resource to a historic district that is
certified as an Anne Arundel County historic landmark. "Historically valuable
structure" does not include structures located in the City of Annapolis.
      (2)   "Qualified expense" means work completed in compliance with United
States Department of Interior standards for the treatment of historic
properties pursuant to 36 C.F.R. 68.3.
      (3)   "Anne Arundel County historic landmark" means a structure or
historic district that is at least 65 years old; has a particularly high level
of historical significance and integrity; is representative of the County's
history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture; and possess
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling or
association; and
         (i)   is associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of County history;
         (ii)   is associated with the life of a significant person;
         (iii)   embodies distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or
method of construction; represents the work of a master; possess high artistic
values; or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components
may lack individual distinction;
         (iv)   has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in
history or prehistory; or
         (v)   is a property previously listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or has been determined eligible by the State Historic
Preservation Office for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
   (b)   Creation. There is a historic preservation tax credit from County real
property taxes on historically valuable structures, as authorized by § 9-204 of
the Tax-Property Article of the State Code.
   (c)   Eligibility and duration.
      (1)   The owner of a historically valuable structure is eligible for the
historic preservation tax credit and may apply for the credit for each year for
a period of up to five years, provided the credit is not combined with other
optional property tax credits as permitted under Title 9 of the Tax-Property
Article of the State Code or this title. If the tax credit for any one year
exceeds the amount of the County real property bill for that year, the balance
may be carried forward until depleted for up to five years. To be eligible for
the tax credit, a perpetual preservation easement on the historically valuable
structure must be granted to the County. The credit runs with the property and
is fully transferrable to a new owner for the duration of the credit.
      (2)   Qualified expenses shall be incurred on or after July 1, 2014 and
within two tax years prior to the date of application for the credit.
   (d)   Time for filing of application. An application for the tax credit
created by this section shall be filed on or before April 1 immediately before
the taxable year for which the tax credit is sought. If the application is
filed after April 1, the credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be
treated as an application for a tax credit for the next succeeding taxable
year.
   (e)   Calculation.
      (1)   The tax credit shall be:
         (i)   25% of the property owner's qualified expenses for preservation,
restoration and rehabilitation of historically valuable residential structures,
including interior improvements required for life safety and ADA-required
improvements;
         (ii)   25% of the property owner's qualified expenses for
preservation, restoration, or rehabilitation of historically valuable
structures that are income-producing, including expenses for life safety and
ADA-required improvements; and
         (iii)   5% of the property owner's qualified expenses for the
construction of architecturally-compatible new structures as infill within a
historic district that is an Anne Arundel County historic landmark.
      (2)   The total tax credit may not exceed $50,000 over the five year
period established in subsection (c).
   (f)   Review by Planning and Zoning. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall
review each application for the tax credit and certify that the property
qualifies as a historically valuable structure and that the renovation or
construction expenses submitted for the credit are qualified. The Office of
Planning and Zoning may consult with experts as necessary to ensure the
property meets applicable criteria and standards for historic significance and
integrity before qualifying the structure for the credit. A determination
regarding a qualification of a property or of renovation or construction
expenses by the Office of Planning and Zoning is not subject to appeal.
   (g)   Form of application. An application for a historic preservation tax
credit shall be made to the Controller on a form provided by the Controller's
Office and shall include documentation reviewed by the Office of Planning and
Zoning with certification of eligibility of the structure and any additional
information the Controller believes to be necessary to determine if the
structure qualifies for the credit.
   (h)   Termination. The tax credit shall terminate if the property is altered
by the owner and no longer complies with the standards by which it became
eligible for the credit as a historically valuable structure, or if the owner
fails to comply with the terms of the perpetual easement. The property owner
shall be required to refund the entire amount of the tax credit, including
interest and penalties computed in the manner provided under §
4-1-103 and from the date the credit was first granted to the County if a tax
credit is terminated under this section. Upon full repayment of the tax credit,
including any interest and penalties, the easement granted under subsection (c)
(1) shall be released by the County. Any amounts not paid in full within thirty
days of termination of the credit shall be collected pursuant to §
1-8-101 of this Code.
(Bill No. 118-15; Bill No. 69-16; Bill No. 17-20)
§ 4-2-313. Public Safety Officer property tax credit.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   “Dwelling” has the meaning set forth in § 9-105 of the Tax-Property
Article of the State Code.
      (2)   “Public Safety Officer” means:
         (i)   a Firefighter, an Emergency Medical Technician, a Detention
Officer, a Police Officer, or a Deputy Sheriff;
         (ii)   a volunteer who serves as a member of a County volunteer fire
company or the Anne Arundel Alarmers Association of Anne Arundel County, Inc.;
or
         (iii)   a person who is entitled to receive benefits under §
12-1-304 of this Code as a result of volunteer service with an active County
volunteer fire company or the Anne Arundel Alarmers Association of Anne Arundel
County, Inc.
   (b)   Creation. There is a tax credit from County real property taxes levied
on a dwelling owned by an eligible Public Safety Officer.
   (c)   Eligibility. A Public Safety Officer is eligible for a County property
tax credit under this section if:
      (1)   (i)   the Public Safety Officer has completed at least one year of
full time employment with Anne Arundel County as a Public Safety Officer and is
employed full time by or retired from Anne Arundel County as a Public Safety
Officer;
         (ii)   the Public Safety Officer is an Anne Arundel County volunteer
who serves as a member of a County volunteer fire company or the Anne Arundel
Alarmers Association of Anne Arundel County, Inc. and has earned at least 50
service points under §
12-1-305 of this Code for the preceding calendar year; or
         (iii)   the Public Safety Officer is a person entitled to receive
benefits under §
12-1-304 of this Code as a result of volunteer service with an active County
volunteer fire company or the Anne Arundel Alarmers Association of Anne Arundel
County, Inc.
      (2)   the Public Safety Officer is eligible for the credit authorized by
§ 9-105 of the Tax-Property Article of the State Code for the dwelling for
which the credit is sought; and
      (3)   the credit is not combined with other optional property tax credits
as permitted under Title 9 of the Tax-Property Article of the State Code or
this title.
   (d)   Calculation. The tax credit provided in this section shall be
calculated and credited based on the total County tax due on a dwelling based
on the real property assessment made by the County Supervisor of Assessments,
not to exceed the lesser of:
      (1)   the total County tax due on the dwelling; or
      (2)   (i)   for the taxable year beginning on July 1, 2024, $3,000; and
         (ii)   for a taxable year beginning on or after July 1, 2025, $3,500.
   (e)   Duration. The tax credit shall be available to a Public Safety Officer
eligible under subsection (c) for a period of one taxable year and may be
renewed upon application of the Public Safety Officer for nine additional
taxable years, for a maximum total of ten taxable years.
   (f)   Time for filing of application. An application for, or for a renewal
of, the tax credit created by this section shall be filed on or before April 1
immediately before the taxable year for which the tax credit is sought. If the
application or renewal is filed after April 1, the credit shall be disallowed
that year but shall be treated as an application or renewal for a tax credit
for the following taxable year.
   (g)   Form of application. An application for, or for the renewal of, the
Public Safety Officer tax credit shall be made on a form provided by the
Controller’s office and shall include verification that the applicant is a
retired Public Safety Officer or employed as a Public Safety Officer.
   (h)   Termination of credit.
      (1)   The tax credit created by this section shall terminate on the
sooner of the Public Safety Officer:
         (i)   receiving the tax credit for ten taxable years;
         (ii)   no longer being employed as a Public Safety Officer with the
County for a reason other than retirement, a service related disability, or no
longer meeting the eligibility requirement in subsection (c)(1) for volunteer
members; or
         (iii)   no longer residing in or owning the dwelling for which the tax
credit was granted.
      (2)   Upon termination of the tax credit as a result of a Public Safety
Officer being terminated for a cause listed in §
808(b) through (e) of the Charter, the homeowner shall be liable for:
         (i)   all property taxes that the homeowner would have been liable for
the taxable year of the termination as if the tax credit had not been granted
under this section; and
         (ii)   all interest and penalties on those taxes computed in the
manner provided under §
4-1-103.
      (3)   Upon termination of the tax credit for any reason other than the
Public Safety Officer being terminated from employment for a cause listed in §
808(b) through (e) of the Charter, the tax credit will be applied only to the
portion of the taxable year for which the Public Safety Officer was eligible
for the tax credit, and the homeowner shall be liable for all remaining
property taxes.
(Bill No. 81-17; Bill No. 17-20; Bill No. 18-20; Bill No. 51-20; Bill No. 86-
21; Bill No. 91-23)
§ 4-2-314. Religious organizations.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "religious group or organization" means a
religious organization that is certified under § 501(c)(3) or (d) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
   (b)   Creation. There is a tax credit from County real property taxes levied
against a property located in a commercial zoning district for that portion of
the property that is leased, occupied, and used by a religious group or
organization exclusively for public religious worship, educational purposes, or
office space necessary to support or maintain public religious worship or
educational purposes, and for which the religious group or organization is
contractually liable. The credit does not apply to property that is leased,
occupied, or used for the purpose of making a profit or when the religious
group or organization no longer occupies the property.
   (c)   Time for filing application. Application for the tax credit created by
this section shall be filed on or before April 1 prior to the tax year for
which the credit is sought. If the application is filed after April 1, the
credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be treated as an application for
a tax credit for the next succeeding taxable year.
   (d)   Form of application. An application for the tax credit shall be
submitted to the Controller on forms that the Office of Finance requires; be
signed by both the property owner and the religious group or organization; be
accompanied by a copy of the executed lease between the owner and the lessee
and any other supporting documentation required by the Office of Finance; and
be under oath, containing a declaration preceding the signature of the
applicant to the effect that it is made under the penalties of perjury provided
by the Tax-Property Article, § 1-201, of the State Code.
   (e)   Duties of Office of Finance. The Office of Finance shall:
      (1)   forward the application to the Supervisor of Assessments for Anne
Arundel County, who will determine if the religious group or organization is
exempt under the Tax-Property Article, § 7-204, of the State Code; if the
property is located in a commercial zoning district; and the amount of assessed
value attributable to the portion of the property used by the religious group
or organization;
      (2)   review each application for a tax credit after receiving a
determination by the Supervisor of Assessments; and
      (3)   determine if the property qualifies for the tax credit.
   (f)   Calculation. The tax credit shall be calculated and credited based on
100% of the total taxable assessment levied against that portion of a property
used by the religious group or organization under the provisions of this
section. The amount of the tax credit may not exceed the amount of the tax for
which the religious group or organization is otherwise contractually liable.
   (g)   Lessor. The lessor of property eligible for a tax credit under this
section shall reduce by the amount of the tax credit the amount of taxes for
which the religious group or organization is contractually liable under the
lease agreement.
   (h)   Termination. Entitlement to the tax credit shall terminate when the
religious group or organization no longer occupies the property or when the use
of the property no longer meets the conditions of this section. On termination
of the tax credit, the Controller shall issue a bill for the additional tax due
that equals the amount of the tax credit divided by the percentage of the tax
year during which the property was not eligible for the credit. The amount of
any unearned tax credit shall be paid in full within 30 days after the bill is
issued and, if the bill remains unpaid after 30 days, it shall be treated as
other County real property taxes and shall be levied, collected, and enforced
in the same manner as County real property taxes and shall have the same
priority rights, bear the same interest and penalties, and constitute a lien on
the real property so assessed.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-104.5) (Bill No. 81-97; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 17-10; Bill No. 48-10; Bill No. 118-15; Bill No. 81-17; Bill No. 17-
20)
§ 4-2-315. Solar energy.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “solar energy equipment” means
collectors, photovoltaic arrays, solar panels, storage tanks, and all other
hardware that is necessary and used as a part of the operating mechanism that
collects, stores, generates or distributes energy by using the rays of the sun.
   (b)   Creation. There is a one-time tax credit from County real property
taxes levied on residential dwellings that use solar energy devices installed
on or after January 1, 2007.
   (c)   Qualifying devices. Any device that uses solar energy to heat or cool
the dwelling, to generate electricity to be used in the dwelling or to provide
hot water for use in the dwelling.
   (d)   Time for filing application. Application for the tax credit created by
this section shall be filed on or before June 1 immediately before the taxable
year for which the tax credit is sought. If the application is filed after June
1, the credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be treated as an
application for a tax credit for the next succeeding taxable year. An
application may be filed only once for the duration of the tax credit.
   (e)   Credit against taxes levied on dwellings. The tax credit shall be
credited from the taxes levied on the dwelling and may not be credited from the
taxes levied on the land. The total tax credit allowed under this section shall
be the lesser of:
      (1)   fifty percent (50%) of the cost of materials and installation or
construction of the solar energy equipment, less the amount of federal and
State grants or State solar energy tax credits; or
      (2)   $2,500.
   (f)   Form of application. An application for the tax credit shall be
submitted to the Controller on forms that the Office of Finance requires; be
under oath, containing a declaration preceding the signature of the applicant
to the effect that it is made under the penalties of perjury provided for by
the Tax-Property Article, § 1-201, of the State Code; and be accompanied by
documented receipts of the purchase of materials or supplies and the actual
installation cost.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-105) (Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 81-08; Bill No. 17-10;
Bill No. 48-10; Bill No. 84-12; Bill No. 118-15; Bill No. 66-16; Bill No. 81-
17; Bill No. 17-20)
State Code reference – Tax-Property Article, § 9-203.
§ 4-2-316. Stormwater management and erosion control.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated:
      (1)   “Stormwater management practices” means practices recognized by the
Department of Public Works for the permanent reduction and change of drainage
patterns of stormwater runoff from structures and other impervious surfaces,
including, but not limited to, living roofs, sidewalk infiltration planters,
permeable pavers, bioretention installations, cisterns and other permanent
diversion and infiltration methods. The Department of Public Works shall
provide a list, updated annually, of the stormwater management practices that
qualify for the credit.
      (2)   “Qualified improvements” means physical improvements made to a
residential or commercial property for stormwater management that have been
approved by the Department of Public Works.
      (3)   “Qualified property” means a new or existing commercial or
residential property on which qualified improvements are installed to reduce
stormwater runoff from the property.
   (b)   Creation. There is a credit from County real property taxes levied on
residential and commercial property and any improvements thereon that install
or implement permanent stormwater management practices.
   (c)   Calculation. The tax credit shall be 10% of the cost of materials and
installation for making qualified improvements, this credit not to exceed a
total of $10,000 over the five-year life of the credit.
   (d)   Eligibility and duration. A qualified property is eligible to receive
a stormwater management credit for each year for a period of five taxable years
against the taxpayer’s real property tax if:
      (1)   the credit is not combined with other tax credits;
      (2)   the Department of Public Works certifies that the property is a
qualified property;
      (3)   the taxpayer applies for the tax credit within 45 days after
improvements are completed; and
      (4)   the qualified improvements are not completed pursuant to a
requirement in any State or local law.
   (e)   Effective date. The credit shall be effective beginning in the taxable
year following approval of the tax credit and for the four succeeding taxable
years, so long as the property meets the requirements of this section.
   (f)   Form of application. An application for a stormwater management credit
shall be made to the Controller on a form provided by the Controller’s Office;
demonstrate that the qualified improvements meet the requirements of this
section; provide a statement under oath under the penalties of perjury as
stated in § 1-201 of the Tax-Property Article of the State Code, that the
improvements are in working condition and regularly maintained; include
acknowledgement that failure to maintain said improvements shall also entitle
the County to pursue a refund of the credit plus a penalty equal to 200% of the
credit; that a condition of receiving the credit shall be that officers and
employees of the County or the administration may enter onto the site of the
improvements for the purpose of making inspection in furtherance of this
section; and include any additional information the Controller believes to be
necessary to determine if the taxpayer is eligible to receive the credit.
   (g)   Grant. The Controller shall grant the credit if the application meets
the requirements of this section and the taxpayer is current on all taxes owed
to the County.
(Bill No. 85-07; Bill No. 17-10; Bill No. 48-10; Bill No. 118-15; Bill No. 22-
16; Bill No. 66-16; Bill No. 65-17; Bill No. 81-17; Bill No. 47-19; Bill No.
17-20)
§ 4-2-317. Disabled veterans and their surviving spouses.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   “Disabled veteran” has the meaning stated in § 9-265 of the Tax-
Property Article of the State Code.
      (2)   “Dwelling house” has the meaning stated in § 9-265 of the Tax-
Property Article of the State Code.
      (3)   “Surviving spouse” means the spouse of a deceased disabled veteran
who has not remarried since the death of the veteran.
   (b)   Creation. There is a tax credit from County real property taxes levied
on a dwelling house owned by an eligible disabled veteran or by an eligible
surviving spouse of the disabled veteran.
   (c)   Eligibility. A disabled veteran or the disabled veteran’s surviving
spouse is eligible for a property tax credit under this section if:
      (1)   the dwelling house is owned by the disabled veteran or the disabled
veteran’s surviving spouse;
      (2)   the federal adjusted gross income for the disabled veteran or the
disabled veteran’s surviving spouse for the immediately preceding taxable year
does not exceed $100,000;
      (3)   for a surviving spouse, the disabled veteran qualified for and
received a tax credit under this section at the time of death; and
      (4)   the application requirements of this section are met.
   (d)   Calculation.
      (1)   The tax credit for a disabled veteran shall be calculated and
credited as provided in § 9-265 of the Tax-Property Article of the State Code.
      (2)   The tax credit for a surviving spouse shall be calculated and
credited based on the calculation under § 9-265 of the Tax-Property Article of
the State Code for the disabled veteran prior to the disabled veteran’s death.
   (e)   Duration.
      (1)   For a disabled veteran, the tax credit shall be available for each
taxable year that a disabled veteran is eligible under subsection (c).
      (2)   For a surviving spouse, the tax credit shall be available until the
surviving spouse remarries.
   (f)   Time for filing of application or renewal. An application for, or
renewal of, the tax credit shall be filed on or before April 1 immediately
before the taxable year for which the tax credit is sought. If the application
or renewal is filed after April 1, the credit shall be disallowed that year but
shall be treated as an application or renewal for a tax credit for the
following taxable year.
   (g)   Form of application. An application for, or for the renewal of, the
tax credit shall be made on a form provided by the Controller’s Office, with
certification of eligibility of the disabled veteran or surviving spouse and
any additional information the Controller believes to be necessary to determine
qualification for the credit.
   (h)   Termination of credit. The tax credit shall terminate for the upcoming
taxable year if:
      (1)   the disabled veteran or the surviving spouse no longer occupies the
dwelling as a primary residence; or
      (2)   the surviving spouse remarries.
(Bill No. 105-20; Bill No. 50-23)
§ 4-2-318. Retired veterans.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated:
      (1)   “Dwelling” has the meaning set forth in § 9-105 of the Tax-Property
Article of the State Code.
      (2)   “Retired veteran” has the meaning set forth in § 9-258(a)(3)(ii) of
the Tax-Property Article of the State Code.
   (b)   Creation. There is a tax credit from County real property taxes levied
on a dwelling owned by an eligible retired veteran.
   (c)   Eligibility. A retired veteran may apply for a County property tax
credit for the following tax year for their principal residence provided the
dwelling has an assessed value of $800,000 or less and the credit is not
combined with other optional property tax credits as permitted under Title 9 of
the Tax-Property Article of the State Code or this title.
   (d)   Calculation; duration. The tax credit provided in this section shall
be 15% of the County property tax imposed on up to $500,000 of the assessed
value of the dwelling after any mandatory property tax credits, supplements and
deferrals are applied to the County tax bill . The tax credit may be applied to
the County property tax on the dwelling for a total of 50 years.
   (e)   Time for filing of application. An application for the tax credit
created by this section shall be filed on or before April 1 immediately before
the taxable year for which the tax credit is sought. If the application is
filed after April 1, the credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be
treated as an application for a tax credit for the next succeeding taxable
year.
   (f)   Form of application. An application for the tax credit, or renewal of
the tax credit, shall be made to the Controller on a form provided by the
Controller’s Office with certification of eligibility of the retired veteran
and any additional information the Controller believes to be necessary to
determine qualification for the credit.
   (g)   Termination of credit. The tax credit shall terminate for the upcoming
year if the retired veteran no longer occupies the dwelling as their principal
residence.
(Bill No. 76-18; Bill No. 17-20; Bill No. 50-23; Bill No. 82-24)
§ 4-2-319. Village Commons Community Center, Inc.
   (a)   Creation. There is a tax credit from County real property taxes levied
on property owned by the Village Commons Community Center, Inc.
   (b)   Time for filing application. An application for the tax credit created
by this section shall be filed on or before October 1 prior to the tax year for
which the credit is sought. If the application is filed after October 1, the
credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be treated as an application for
the tax credit for the next succeeding year.
   (c)   Form of application. An application for the tax credit shall be
submitted to the Controller on a form that the Office of Finance requires; be
accompanied by a current certificate of good standing for the applicant from
the State Department of Assessments and Taxation; and include any additional
information the Controller believes necessary to determine whether the tax
credit should be granted.
   (d)   Grant of credit. The Controller shall grant the credit if the
application meets the requirements of this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-104.7) (Bill No. 45-04; Bill No. 17-10; Bill No. 48-10;
Bill No. 118-15; Bill No. 66-16; Bill No. 81-17; Bill No. 76-18; Bill No. 17-
20)
SUBTITLE 4. CLEAN ENERGY LOAN PROGRAM
§ 4-2-401. Clean Energy Loan Program.
   (a)   Definitions. In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings
indicated:
      (1)   "Clean Energy Financing Agreement" means an agreement between a
property owner and a Clean Energy Lender providing for the terms and conditions
of a Clean Energy Loan.
      (2)   "Clean Energy Lender" means a private lender providing a Clean
Energy Loan.
      (3)   "Clean Energy Loan" means any loan made by a private lender to a
property owner under the Clean Energy Program.
      (4)   "Clean Energy Loan Program Administrator" means any person or
entity selected by the County to manage the Clean Energy Loan Program.
      (5)   "Clean Energy Loan Obligation" means all indebtedness and
obligations of a property owner to a Clean Energy Lender under a Clean Energy
Financing Agreement.
      (6)   "Commercial property" has the meaning stated in the Local
Government Article, § 1-1101, of the State Code.
      (7)   "Property owner" means an owner of commercial property as defined
in this subsection.
   (b)   Program. There is a Clean Energy Loan Program to finance energy
efficiency projects and renewable energy projects, as provided in the Local
Government Article, §§1-1101 et seq., of the State Code.
   (c)   Rules and regulations. The Controller may adopt rules and regulations
to administer the Clean Energy Loan Program consistent with this subtitle.
   (d)   Program Administrator. The County Executive may enter into an
agreement with a private entity to administer the Clean Energy Loan Program.
   (e)   Scope. Commercial property owners are eligible to participate in the
Clean Energy Loan Program for loans greater than $25,000 for a term of up to 20
years.
   (f)   Eligibility. In order to be eligible for a Clean Energy Loan, the
property owner shall:
      (1)   have a 100% ownership interest in the property located in Anne
Arundel County for which improvements are proposed;
      (2)   obtain an energy audit approved under program guidelines
demonstrating that the savings projected to be obtained from the improvements
over the life of the Clean Energy Loan equal or exceed the principal and
aggregate interest to be paid over the term of the loan;
      (3)   demonstrate that the most recent property tax bill has been paid
for the property;
      (4)   provide a copy of written notice to all current holders of a
mortgage or deed of trust who have a priority recorded lien on the property and
written proof of express consent to the loan as a priority lien by all current
holders of a mortgage or deed of trust on the property; and
      (5)   establish that the owner of the commercial property is able to
repay the loan based on criteria and methods set forth in §§ 12-127, 12-311,
12-409.1, 12-925, and 12-1029 of the Commercial Law Article of the State Code.
   (g)   Qualifying improvements. The following improvements, either new or
replacement, qualify as energy efficiency or renewable energy projects under
the Clean Energy Loan Program:
      (1)   solar energy equipment;
      (2)   geothermal energy devices;
      (3)   wind energy systems;
      (4)   water conservation devices not required by law; and
      (5)   any construction, renovation or retrofitting of commercial property
to reduce energy consumption, including, high efficiency lighting and building
systems, heating ventilation air conditioning (HVAC) upgrades, high efficiency
boilers and furnaces, high efficiency hot water heating systems, combustion and
burner upgrades, fuel switching, heat recovery and steam traps, building shell
or envelope improvements, fenestration improvements, building energy management
systems, and process equipment upgrades.
   (h)   Qualifying costs. A Clean Energy Loan may be used to pay for all costs
incurred by a property owner in connection with the qualifying improvements,
including the cost of the energy audit; the design, installation, and
construction of the qualifying improvements; energy savings or performance
guaranty or insurance; and closing costs of the Clean Energy Loan.
(Bill No. 68-14; Bill No. 80-19)
§ 4-2-402. Real property tax surcharge.
   (a)   Repayment of Loans.  A property owner participating in the Clean
Energy Loan Program shall repay the loan through a surcharge on their real
property tax bill.
   (b)   Calculation. The surcharge for a Clean Energy Loan shall include the
Clean Energy Loan Obligation and any administrative costs incurred by the
County which shall be the actual expenses incurred to administer the program.
   (c)   Agreement. The property owner shall execute an agreement with the
County and the Clean Energy Lender that will be recorded in land records, at
the expense of the owner, which shall include:
      (1)   the date the Clean Energy Loan was made to the property owner and
the property became subject to the surcharge;
      (2)   the term of the Clean Energy Loan and over which the surcharge will
apply to the property;
      (3)   the Clean Energy Loan Obligation and estimated County
administrative costs for the first year;
      (4)   the annual principal and interest amount for each year of the term
of the loan, including any partial year prorated amounts;
      (5)   prepayment requirements and any prepayment premium that may apply
to a prepayable Clean Energy Loan;
      (6)   agreement by the property owner to repay all Clean Energy Loan
Obligations and the County's administrative costs through a surcharge included
on the owner's real property tax bill due and payable on the same date as the
real property tax bill;
      (7)   acknowledgement by the property owner that an unpaid Clean Energy
Loan surcharge constitutes a first lien on the property that has priority over
prior or subsequent liens in favor of private parties and that the surcharge
will continue as a lien on the property from the date it becomes payable until
the unpaid surcharge and interest and penalties on the surcharge are paid in
full, regardless of a change in ownership of the property, whether voluntary or
involuntary;
      (8)   acknowledgement by the property owner and the lender that the
County has no liability for the Clean Energy Obligation or any costs associated
with the collection of amounts due under the Clean Energy Financing Agreement;
and
      (9)   acknowledgement by the property owner that an overdue surcharge
shall be collected pursuant to §
4-1-105.
   (d)   Default. In the event of default on the Clean Energy Loan surcharge,
the lien will be collected pursuant to §
4-1-105. The County shall not incur any liability to the Clean Energy Lender or
others in the event of default.
   (e)   Payment to Clean Energy Lender. The County shall have no ownership of
the surcharges collected except for administrative costs provided under this
subtitle. The Controller shall pay all surcharge payments in any calendar month
to the applicable Clean Energy Lender or the Program Administrator within 30
days after the end of the month in which such amounts are collected. The County
shall have no obligation to make payments to any Clean Energy Lender with
respect to any Clean Energy Loan Obligation other than that portion of
surcharge actually collected from a property owner for the repayment of a Clean
Energy Loan. Payments received from a property owner shall be credited first to
all County taxes, assessments, and charges.
(Bill No. 68-14)
§ 4-2-403. Financing.
   Clean Energy Loans may be provided by any private lender and a Clean Energy
Financing Agreement may contain any terms agreed to by the Clean Energy Lender
and the property owner, as permitted by law, for the financing of Clean Energy
Loans. The County may not finance or fund any loan under the program, shall
serve only as a program sponsor to facilitate loan repayment by including the
surcharge on the annual County real property tax bill for the property, and
shall incur no liability for the loan.
(Bill No. 68-14)
TITLE 3. PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX CREDITS AND EXEMPTIONS
Section
   
4-3-101.   Credit – Foreign trade zones.
   
4-3-102.   Exemption – Research and development.
   
4-3-103.   Partial exemption – Machinery or equipment used to generate
electricity, steam, or hot or chilled water for sale.
   
4-3-104.   Reduction in assessment – Qualified data center.
§ 4-3-101. Credit – Foreign trade zones.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "foreign trade zone" means a foreign
trade zone or subzone established under federal law.
   (b)   Scope. This section does not apply to operating personal property of a
public utility.
   (c)   Creation. There is a tax credit against County personal property taxes
levied on personal property that is located in a foreign trade zone within the
County.
   (d)   Time for filing application. Application for the tax credit created by
this section shall be filed on or before June 1 immediately before the first
taxable year for which the tax credit is sought. If the application is filed
after June 1, the credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be treated as
an application for a tax credit for the next succeeding taxable year.
   (e)   Form of application. An application for the tax credit shall be
submitted to the Controller on forms that the Office of Finance requires; be
under oath, containing a declaration preceding the signature of the applicant
to the effect that it is made under the penalties of perjury provided for by
the Tax-Property Article, § 1-201, of the State Code; and be accompanied by
proof that the personal property satisfies the requirements of this section.
   (f)   Calculation. The tax credit shall be calculated and credited based on
the total personal property tax levied by the County on personal property
satisfying the requirements of this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-110) (Bill No. 87-01)
   Editor's note – The provisions of this section became effective starting
with the tax year that began July 1, 2002 and on June 30, 2022 shall be
considered abrogated and of no further force and effect. (Bill No. 87-01
provided that the personal property tax credit created under this section ended
on June 30, 2007. Bill No. 38-07 extended the termination of the personal
property tax credit to June 30, 2012; Bill No. 19-12 extended it to June 30,
2017; and Bill No. 1-17 extended it to June 30, 2022; and Bill No. 56-22
extended it to June 30, 2027.)
§ 4-3-102. Exemption – Research and development.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "research and development" means basic
and applied research in the sciences and engineering and the design,
development, and governmentally-required pre-market testing of prototypes,
products, and processes, but the term does not include market research,
research in the social sciences or psychology or other non-technical
activities, routine product testing, sales services, technical and non-
technical services, or research and development of a public utility.
   (b)   Authority. This section is pursuant to the Tax-Property Article, § 7-
237, of the State Code, that authorizes a county to grant an exemption under
that section from the County property tax imposed on certain research and
development property.
   (c)   Scope of personal property included. All machinery, equipment,
materials, and supplies that are consumed in or used primarily in research and
development are subject to an exemption from the County's personal property
tax. The exemption applies to eligible personal property acquired or
transferred into the County after December 31, 1994.
   (d)   Calculation. The exemption granted under this section is equal to the
balance of the assessment of the property.
   (e)   Filing with State Department of Assessments and Taxation. Applications
for tax exemption shall be filed with the State Department of Assessments and
Taxation under regulations adopted by that Department.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 1-109) (Bill No. 89-96)
§ 4-3-103. Partial exemption – Machinery or equipment used to generate
electricity, steam, or hot or chilled water for sale.
   (a)   Creation. There is a partial exemption from County property taxes
levied on personal property that is machinery or equipment used to generate
electricity or steam for sale or to generate hot or chilled water for sale that
is used to heat or cool a building under the Tax-Property Article, § 7-237, of
the State Code. That partial exemption is subject to modification by the County
in accordance with the Tax-Property Article, § 7-514, of the State Code.
   (b)   Calculation. Personal property that is subject to the exemption
described in subsection (a) shall be subject to the County property tax on:
      (1)   65% of its value for the taxable year beginning July 1, 2008;
      (2)   60% of its value for the taxable year beginning July 1, 2009; and
      (3)   55% of its value for the taxable year beginning July 1, 2010.
   (c)   Expiration of County authority. Upon expiration of the authority of
the County under the Tax-Property Article, § 7-514, of the State Code, to
modify the partial exemption described in subsection (a), the percent of the
assessment of any personal property that is subject to the exemption shall
revert to the percent set forth in the Tax-Property Article, § 7-237, of the
State Code.
   (d)   Payment in lieu of taxes.
      (1)   In accordance with the Tax-Property Article, § 7-514, of the State
Code, the County Executive may negotiate an agreement for a payment in lieu of
County real and personal property tax with the owner of a facility for the
generation of electricity that is located in or locates in the County.
      (2)   The negotiated agreement for payment in lieu of County real and
personal property tax shall not be final unless approved by resolution of the
County Council.
(Bill No. 19-08)
§ 4-3-104. Reduction in assessment – Qualified data center.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   In this section, “qualified data center”, “qualified data center
personal property”, and “qualified position” have the meanings stated in § 11-
239 of the Tax-General Article of the State Code.
      (2)   “Qualified data center" includes centers in multiple locations in
Anne Arundel County owned and operated by the same person or entity.
   (b)   Creation. Pursuant to § 7-248 of the Tax-Property Article of the State
Code, assessments of qualified data center personal property used in a
qualified data center subject to County property tax may be reduced as set
forth in subsection (c).
   (c)   Eligibility; duration; amount of reduction in assessment. Qualified
data center personal property used in a qualified data center with at least $10
million of total investment in the qualified data center and that created a
total of at least 10 qualified positions may qualify for a 15-year reduction in
assessment for purposes of County personal property taxes as follows:
      (1)   a 100% reduction in assessment for the first five taxable years;
and
      (2)   a 50% reduction in assessment for years 6 through 15.
   (d)   Application or renewal.
      (1)   The Office of Finance and the Anne Arundel County Economic
Development Corporation shall develop an application form and establish
procedures to administer the personal property tax assessment reduction under
this section. At a minimum, the application form shall require:
         (i)   the qualified data center to provide a copy of the personal
property tax return filed with the State Department of Assessments and
Taxation; and
         (ii)   certification from the qualified data center as to the amount
of the investment and the number of qualified positions.
      (2)   An application for, or renewal of, the reduction in assessment
shall be filed no later than April 15 immediately before the taxable year for
which the reduction in assessment is sought. If the application or renewal is
filed after April 15, the reduction in assessment shall be disallowed for the
tax year being applied for but shall be treated as an application or renewal
for reduction in assessment for the following taxable year.
      (3)   The submitted application shall be reviewed and approved or
rejected by the Office of Finance and the Anne Arundel County Economic
Development Corporation.
   (e)   Term.
      (1)   The term of the reduction in assessment begins in the tax year for
which the application is first approved.
      (2)   The term of the reduction in assessment does not restart with
additional investment in qualified data center personal property or the
addition of qualified positions.
   (f)   Termination. The reduction of assessment terminates upon the earlier
of the following:
      (1)   the required investment is no longer met;
      (2)   the required number of qualified positions is no longer met; or
      (3)   the qualified data center is no longer doing business in the
County.
   (g)   Annual Report.
      (1)   By September 1 of each year, the Anne Arundel Economic Development
Corporation shall report to the County Executive and the County Council on the
implementation of the personal property assessment reduction under this
section.
      (2)   The report shall include, for each qualified data center receiving
a reduction in assessment during the previous fiscal year:
         (i)   the name of the recipient;
         (ii)   the number of qualified positions created and currently
occupied as a result of the activity that qualified the recipient for the
reduction in assessment; and
         (iii)   the amount of the reduction of the County’s personal property
tax resulting from the reduction of assessment.
(Bill No. 13-22)
TITLE 3A. TRANSFER AND RECORDATION TAXES
Section
   
4-3A-101.   Real property transfer tax – Levied.
   
4-3A-102.   Transfer tax.
   
4-3A-103.   Recordation tax.
§ 4-3A-101. Real property transfer tax – Levied.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Consideration" means everything of value included in the actual
price of real property conveyed, including: cash; bonds; stock; documents
evidencing monetary value; choses in action; property, either real or personal;
payment by way of fees, labor, or services; instruments of credit, including
notes, notes secured by deeds of trust or mortgages; and assumption of
liability for debt incurred by another, but not for current property taxes, or
County or municipal charges.
      (2)   "Estate" means every kind of interest in real property including
fee simple estate, leasehold estate, limited estate, and legal and equitable
interests in real property.
      (3)   "Mortgage" includes a deed of trust made to secure the repayment of
indebtedness.
   (b)   Exemptions. In addition to the exemptions provided by State law, the
tax levied by this section does not apply to:
      (1)   a transfer by or to the United States, the State, any political
subdivision of the State, or any agency or instrumentality of the United
States, the State, or a political subdivision;
      (2)   a transfer by lease for a term of not more than seven years that is
not perpetually renewable;
      (3)   a transfer by mortgage, conditional sales contract, land
installment contract, or other device, the purpose of which is to afford a
security in real property rather than convey title to the property, except that
the amount of the secured debt may be calculated as part of the consideration
for a transfer by other instrument, such as a deed, where the security
instrument secures part of the consideration;
      (4)   a transfer by bona fide gift or without consideration;
      (5)   a transfer under the last will and testament of a decedent or to
the heirs or next of kin of a decedent under the laws of descent and
distribution; or
      (6)   a transfer of property partly within and partly without the County,
to the extent of the property that is outside the County.
   (c)   Amount of tax.
      (1)   Except as provided in paragraph (2), a tax is levied on each
transfer recorded among the land records in the County at a rate of one percent
of the consideration paid or to be paid for the transfer.
      (2)   (i)   A tax is levied on each transfer recorded among the land
records in the County for which the total consideration is $1,000,000 or more
at a rate of one and one-half percent of the consideration paid or to be paid
for the transfer.
         (ii)   A transfer of an interest in real property that provides
affordable housing for moderate- or low-income households in the County,
including in the City of Annapolis, is not subject to the tax rate levied under
subparagraph (i).
   (d)   Collection by Controller. The Controller shall collect the tax from
the person offering the instrument for record. Payment of the tax shall be
evidenced by the affixing to or stamping on the instrument offered for
recordation a legend stating that the tax has been paid and the amount of
payment. An instrument so executed shall be prima facie evidence that the tax
has been paid.
   (e)   Who is responsible for payment; sanctions for failure to pay. The tax
levied by this section together with interest and penalties is from the time
due and payable jointly and severally the debt of the legal and equitable
transferor and transferee of the property. If a written instrument intending to
effect a transfer subject to the tax levied by this section is recorded without
the tax having been paid, the Controller shall assess the person liable for the
payment for the amount of the tax due, plus interest at the rate of one percent
for each month, or fractional part of a month, from the date when the written
instrument was received for recordation, plus a civil penalty of 10% of the tax
due. All taxes, interest, and penalties shall be paid to the Controller.
   (f)   Certain leases. Whenever a lease required by law to be recorded
evidences a transfer on which a tax would be levied by this section if the
lease were offered for record and recorded, but the lease has not been
recorded, an attornment agreement, memorandum of lease, assignment of lease, or
other instrument giving or intended to give actual or constructive notice of
the unrecorded lease, whether or not actually giving constructive notice in
point of law, may not be received for recording until the original lease has
been exhibited to the Controller and a tax paid in the same amount as would be
payable on recording of the lease, together with whatever tax may be payable on
the other instrument under this section. The tax applicable to a lease in
accordance with this subsection is chargeable to the lessee. If it is required
to be advanced by the party offering for record the other instrument referred
to in this subsection due to the failure or refusal of the lessee to pay the
amount due to the Controller on demand by that party, the amount due plus
interest from the date of payment shall be recoverable by that party from the
lessee in an action at law.
   (g)   Ground rents. The consideration for a perpetually renewable ground
rent is the sum of the capitalization at six percent of annual ground rent and
the actual consideration, other than the capitalization of the ground rent,
paid or to be paid.
   (h)   Lease for a term of years. The consideration for a lease for a term of
years that is not perpetually renewable is the sum of the capitalization at 10%
of the average annual rental over the entire term of the lease, including any
renewable term, and the actual consideration other than rent paid or to be
paid. If the average annual rental cannot be determined, the consideration
shall be the greater of: (1) the capitalization at 10% of the sum of the
minimum average annual rental ascertainable from the terms of the lease and 5%
of the minimum average rental, plus the actual consideration other than rent
paid or to be paid; or (2) the assessed value of the property covered by the
lease multiplied by one and one-half.
   (i)   Property as consideration. If all or part of the consideration for a
transfer consists of other property, real or personal, the consideration
represented by the other property is the value of the property, determined as
follows:
      (1)   the consideration represented by a full interest in property is the
true, full value of the property;
      (2)   the consideration represented by a life estate is the value of the
life estate as determined in accordance with the regulations for federal estate
tax adopted by the Internal Revenue Service; or
      (3)   the consideration represented by a remainder or reversion after one
or more life estates is the value remaining after determining the value of the
whole and deducting from the whole the value of the preceding estates.
   (j)   Powers of Clerk. To carry out and enforce this section and to collect
the tax levied by this section, with the concurrence of the Controller, the
Clerk may:
      (1)   adopt rules and regulations consistent with this section to carry
out and enforce this section, to collect fully the tax levied by this section,
or to define or define further or construe this section;
      (2)   compromise disputed claims in connection with the tax imposed by
this section;
      (3)   for good and sufficient cause, abate or remit interest and
penalties; and
      (4)   rebate and refund any taxes erroneously or improperly paid.
   (k)   Prohibition. A person may not:
      (1)   willfully obtain, or attempt to obtain the recording of a
conveyance effecting a transfer taxable under this section without first having
paid the tax;
      (2)   knowingly make a false statement as to the amount or value of
consideration;
      (3)   willfully affix or attempt to affix to any document a forged or
counterfeit legend indicating that the tax levied by this section has been
paid;
      (4)   willfully violate any of the provisions of this section or the
rules or regulations, adopted under this section; or
      (5)   willfully participate or aid in any manner in the evasion of the
tax imposed by this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 7-101) (Bill No. 29-12; Bill No. 40-23)
   State Code reference – Local Government Article, §§ 10-313 and 10-314; Tax-
Property Article, §§ 13-401 et seq.
§ 4-3A-102. Transfer tax.
   (a)   Tax authorized. The County Council of Anne Arundel County may impose a
tax on every written instrument conveying title to real property or a leasehold
interest in real property, offered for record and recorded among the land
records in Anne Arundel County subject to the same conditions and procedures as
the State Transfer Tax imposed under the Tax-Property Article, Title 13,
Subtitle 2, of the State Code.
   (b)   Amount of tax.
      (1)   Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the maximum
rate of the tax imposed under this section shall not exceed 1% of the actual
consideration paid or to be paid for the conveyance of title.
      (2)   (i)   Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph,
the governing body of Anne Arundel County may, by resolution, increase the rate
of the tax imposed under this section on a written instrument conveying title
to real property or a leasehold interest in real property if the actual
consideration paid or to be paid for the conveyance of title is $1,000,000 or
more.
         (ii)   A written instrument conveying title to real property or a
leasehold interest in real property that provides affordable housing for
moderate- or low-income individuals in the County, including the City of
Annapolis, is not subject to any increase in the tax rate imposed under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.
   (c)   Use of revenue.
      (1)   Revenue derived from the tax rate imposed under subsection (b)(1)
of this section shall be expended as provided by the County budget.
      (2)   Revenue derived from the tax rate in excess of 1% of the actual
consideration paid or to be paid for the conveyance of title imposed under
subsection (b)(2) of this section shall be distributed to the special fund
established under §
4-11-122 of this Code.
   (d)   Exemption. The condition in the Tax-Property Article, § 13-209, of the
State Code, relating to the use of transfer tax funds for funding of projects
under “Program Open Space” do not apply to revenues derived from the County
tax.
   (e)   Collection by Controller. The tax shall be collected by the
Controller.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 7-101.2) (Bill No. 29-12)
Editor's note – This section was transferred to the Public Local Laws of
Maryland (Article 2 - Anne Arundel County) by 1985 Md. Laws, Ch. 8, § 10. This
section formerly appeared as Article 81, § 278B, of the State Code. With the
revision of the tax laws through the Tax-Property Article of the State Code,
various local provisions were transferred to the public local laws for the
appropriate county. This section was added as § 17-711A to the 1967 County
Code, and then recodified as Article 6, § 7-101.2 in the 1985 County Code.
Editor’s note – This section was amended by 2021 Md. Laws, Ch. 10, § 1.
§ 4-3A-103. Recordation tax.
   (a)   Rate. The rate of tax applicable to instruments recorded with the
Clerk of the Circuit Court for the County is as follows:
      (1)   on instruments conveying title to property, for each $500 or
fractional part of $500 of the actual consideration paid or to be paid, $3.50;
and
      (2)   on instruments securing a debt for each $500 of the principal
amount of the debt secured, $3.50.
   (b)   Imposition. The recordation tax is imposed on all instruments of
writing that secure repayment of debt created by the sale of bonds authorized
under Economic Development Article, Title 12, Subtitle 1, of the State Code.
   (c)   Collection. The tax on instruments recorded with the Clerk of the
Circuit Court shall be collected by the Controller prior to recordation.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 7-102, 7-103) (Bill No. 14-95; Bill No. 35-07; Bill No.
29-12)
State Code reference – Tax-Property Article, § 12-103.
TITLE 4. INCOME TAX
Section
   
4-4-101.   Income tax.
§ 4-4-101. Income tax.
   An annual income tax is levied on residents of the County at the following
rates:
      (1)   for an individual other than an individual described in paragraph
(2):
         (i)   2.70% of Maryland taxable income of $1 through $50,000;
         (ii)   2.94% of Maryland taxable income over $50,000 through $400,000;
and
         (iii)   3.20% of Maryland taxable income over $400,000; and
      (2)   for spouses filing a joint return or for a surviving spouse or head
of household as defined in § 2 of the Internal Revenue Code:
         (i)   2.70% of Maryland taxable income of $1 through $75,000;
         (ii)   2.94% of Maryland taxable income over $75,000 through $480,000;
and
         (iii)   3.20% of Maryland taxable income over $480,000.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 7-201) (Bill No. 50-11; Bill No. 62-15; Bill No. 44-19;
Bill No. 47-22; Bill No. 42-23; Bill No. 47-24)
State Code reference – Tax-General Article, § 10-106.
Editor’s note – Section 1 of Bill No. 44-19 increased the annual income tax
rate to 2.81%. Section 2 of Bill No. 44-19 provides that this increase shall
take effect on January 1, 2020.
TITLE 5. ADMISSIONS AND AMUSEMENT TAX
Section
   
4-5-101.   Levied.
§ 4-5-101. Levied.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, "agritourism," "farm
alcohol production facility," "farming," "principal use," and "stables or
riding clubs" have the definitions set forth in §
18-1-101 of this Code.
   (b)   Imposition. Pursuant to the authorization of the Tax-General Article,
§ 4-102(b)(1), of the State Code, a tax is imposed on the gross receipts
derived from any admissions and amusement charge as defined in the Tax-General
Article, § 4-101(b), of the State Code, at the rate of 10%, except as this rate
may be limited under the Tax-General Article, § 4-105(b), of the State Code,
and except that gross receipts derived from a charge for admission to any movie
theater shall be taxed at the rate of 7.5%.
   (c)   Additional tax. Pursuant to the authorization of the Tax-General
Article, § 4-102(b)(2), of the State Code, an additional tax is imposed on
reduced charges or free admissions as set forth in the Tax-General Article, §
4-105(f), of the State Code.
   (d)   Exemptions. In addition to the exemptions provided in the Tax-General
Article, § 4-103, of the State Code, the following are exempt from the
admissions and amusement tax:
      (1)   the gross receipts of a not-for-profit community association or
not-for-profit community theater group that, whether or not incorporated, is
organized and operated to promote the general welfare of the community it
serves if the net earnings of the association or group do not inure to the
benefit of any stockholder or member of the association or group and the gross
receipts inure exclusively to the benefit of the association or group and are
used exclusively for community or civic purposes;
      (2)   the gross receipts of a not-for-profit association or group that,
whether or not incorporated, is organized and operated primarily to sponsor,
support, or otherwise promote athletic activities if the net earnings of the
association or group do not inure to the benefit of any officer, stockholder,
or member of the association or group;
      (3)   the gross receipts derived from any admissions and amusement charge
for the use of athletic facilities as defined by the Office of the Comptroller
and included in Category 11 of the Comptroller's categorization of admissions
and amusement tax collections;
      (4)   the gross receipts derived from any admissions and amusement charge
for agritourism; and
      (5)   if the principal use on the property is farming, the gross receipts
derived from any admissions and amusement charge for a farm alcohol production
facility, and stables or riding clubs.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 7-301, 7-302) (Bill No. 9-92; Bill No. 12-07; Bill No.
46-17; Bill No. 47-17; Bill No. 68-17; Bill No. 43-19; Bill No. 68-20)
TITLE 6. TAXES ON SERVICES AND COMMODITIES
Section
   
4-6-101.   Definitions.
   
4-6-102.   Recordkeeping.
   
4-6-103.   Fuel tax.
   
4-6-104.   Gas, electricity, steam, and telephone tax.
   
4-6-105.   Use or occupancy tax.
   
4-6-106.   Parking lot and garage tax.
   
4-6-107.   Transportation network service assessment.
   
4-6-108.   Prohibitions.
§ 4-6-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Collecting authority" means the Controller for taxes generated
within the County and outside the City of Annapolis and, for taxes generated
within the City of Annapolis, the collector and treasurer of the City of
Annapolis.
      (2)   "Person" has the meaning stated in §
1-1-101 of this Code and, in addition, means a society, club, joint stock
company, corporation estate, assignee, referee, or any other person acting in a
fiduciary or representative capacity and any other group or combination of
individuals acting as a unit.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 7-401)
§ 4-6-102. Recordkeeping.
   (a)   Requirement. Each taxpayer shall keep complete and accurate records of
all payments and receipts for a taxable service or commodity and the tax
collected and all invoices and such other pertinent records and documents as
are necessary to determine the amount of tax due.
   (b)   Availability. Except as otherwise provided for owners or operators of
short-term residential rentals, records and other documents shall be available
at all times during normal business hours for inspection and examination by the
Controller, the collecting authority, or the duly authorized representative,
agent, or employee of the Controller or collecting authority.
   (c)   Failure to keep records. If a taxpayer fails to keep records from
which a tax imposed by this subtitle may be accurately computed, the Controller
or collecting authority may make use of a factor developed by surveying other
taxpayers of the same type or otherwise compute the amount of tax due. There is
a rebuttable presumption that the computation is correct.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 7-402) (Bill No. 88-19)
§ 4-6-103. Fuel tax.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Fuel" includes liquefied petroleum gas, anthracite coal,
bituminous coal, and all grades or classes of oils used as fuel.
      (2)   "Seller" means a person who sells fuel through an order placed
within the County and delivers fuel within the County in a vehicle owned or
controlled by that person or by a contract carrier.
      (3)   "User" means a person who purchases or acquires the fuels taxed
under this section for a purpose other than to resell the fuel either as is or
as a component part of a product produced for sale.
   (b)   Scope. The tax levied in this section does not apply to the sale, use,
or consumption of fuel:
      (1)   in a residential dwelling unit, except an apartment house hotel,
motel, trailer park, and any other multiple-dwelling place that is rented or
leased;
      (2)   to propel boats, railroad vehicles, aircraft, motor vehicles, or
mobile equipment used in construction, including cranes, derricks, and
bulldozers;
      (3)   by nonprofit hospitals, nonprofit religious, nonprofit charitable,
or nonprofit educational institutions or organizations for use in carrying on
the work of the hospital, institution, or organization;
      (4)   by the United States of America except instrumentalities or
agencies of the United States of America that are subject to the taxing power
of the County;
      (5)   by the State or any of its political subdivisions or any agencies
of the State or any of its political subdivisions;
      (6)   to any purchaser who is regularly engaged in the sale or
distribution of the fuel for resale by that purchaser or to any purchaser for
use or consumption beyond the boundaries of the County; or
      (7)   in the manufacture, generation, refining, or processing of
artificial or natural gas, electricity, steam, liquefied petroleum gas,
anthracite coal, bituminous coal, or the various grades or classes of oil, when
those fuels are manufactured, generated, refined, or processed for sale.
   (c)   Tax rate. A tax on the sale, use, or consumption within the County of
the following fuels is levied at the following rates: liquefied petroleum gas,
$0.015 per gallon; bituminous coal, $2 per ton; anthracite coal, $4 per ton;
and all grades or classes of oils used as fuel, including blends or compounds
of various grades or classes of oil, $0.02 per gallon.
   (d)   Seller. Each seller shall collect the tax levied by this section from
the purchaser, file a return, and remit the tax levied directly to the
Controller by the 25th day of the month after the month in which the fuel was
sold. The tax levied by this section is due and payable when the sale of the
fuel is made, regardless of when the purchase price is paid. A seller who fails
to collect or remit to the Controller the tax levied by this section is liable
for the tax. A seller may not hold out or advertise that the seller will absorb
the tax imposed by this section or make a refund of the tax. A seller has the
same right against the purchaser for the collection of the tax as exists for
the collection of the sales price of the fuel.
   (e)   User. A person who uses or consumes a fuel subject to the tax levied
by this section who has not paid the tax to a seller shall file a return and
remit the tax directly to the Controller by the 25th day of the month next
succeeding the month in which the fuel was used or consumed. A person who uses
fuels which are produced, mined, refined, or manufactured by the user is
responsible for the payment of the tax levied by this section to the same
extent as if the fuels had been purchased from a seller.
   (f)   Failure to pay tax when due. A taxpayer who fails to file a return or
remit the tax levied by this section within the time required shall be assessed
the amount of tax due, plus interest at the rate of 1% per month and a penalty
of 20% of the tax due.
   (g)   Refunds.
      (1)   If a taxpayer is unable to collect accounts receivable in
connection with which the tax levied by this section has already been remitted
by the taxpayer to the Controller, and the accounts have been charged off as
worthless during a taxable year, the taxpayer is entitled to a refund of the
amount of tax paid as to the worthless accounts if the refund is applied for
within three years after the date of payment of the tax.
      (2)   If a sale on which the tax has been paid is rescinded or canceled,
the seller shall refund to the purchaser the amount of tax paid. Whenever a
seller has refunded a tax paid by a purchaser, or whenever a taxpayer has
erroneously, illegally, or unconstitutionally paid the tax levied by this
section to the Controller, the Controller shall refund the tax if a refund is
applied for in writing within three years after the payment of the tax.
   (h)   Lien. The tax levied by this section, and interest and penalties on
the tax, are a lien on the property of the person liable to pay tax from and
after the time when notice has been given that the tax is due and payable as
provided in this section. Notice of the lien shall be filed by the Controller
with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the County in which the property is
located. The lien has the full force and effect of a lien of judgment. Unless
another date is specified by law, the lien arising at the date of nonpayment is
a lien of judgment until paid.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 7-407)
§ 4-6-104. Gas, electricity, steam, and telephone tax.
   (a)   Scope. The taxes levied by this section do not apply to:
      (1)   sales to or use by the United States of America except
instrumentalities or agencies of the United States of America that are subject
to the taxing power of the County;
      (2)   sales to or use by the State, its agencies, or political
subdivisions; or
      (3)   sales to or use by a nonprofit hospital or a nonprofit religious,
charitable, or educational institution or organization for use in carrying on
the work of the hospital, institution, or organization.
   (b)   Local exchange service.
      (1)   In this subsection, the following words have the meanings
indicated:
         (i)   "Combined gross income" means the combined gross income of all
homeowners and all individuals actually residing in the same dwelling, except
individuals whose contributions, reasonably apportionable towards the cost of
upkeep, maintenance, and repair of the dwelling, are in the form of fixed
rental charges.
         (ii)   "Gross income" includes total gross income from all sources,
including gifts, and whether or not included in the definitions of gross income
for federal or State income tax purposes, but the term does not include the
amount of old age, survivors, or disability benefits received under the Social
Security Act or under the Railroad Retirement Act.
         (iii)   "Homeowner" means each individual who actually resides in a
dwelling in which the individual has a legal interest, including a life estate,
whether as sole owner, joint tenant, tenant in common, or tenant by the
entireties.
      (2)   The tax levied by this subsection does not apply to an individual
who is at least 65 years old or to an individual who receives disability
benefits as a result of a finding of permanent and total disability under the
Social Security Act, Railroad Retirement Act, or any similar act adopted by the
federal government, or by any state, county, or municipal government, if the
combined gross income of the individual is not in excess of $8,000 for the
calendar year immediately preceding the fiscal year application.
      (3)   There is levied a tax on sales of local exchange service for the
transmission of local telecommunications originating within the limits of the
County. The rate of tax is 8% on the gross sales price for business and
residence local exchange telephone lines or trunks, centrex exchange access
lines, and local telecommunications messages. For all other sales of local
exchange service, there is no tax imposed.
   (c)   Gas, electricity, and steam.
      (1)   In this subsection, the following words have the meanings
indicated:
         (i)   "fiscal year" means the County's fiscal year;
         (ii)   "meter used in a manufacturing activity" means a device that
measures the delivery of gas or electricity and a majority of the gas or
electricity is used for manufacturing that is exempt under the Tax-General
Article, § 11-210(b), of the State Code, from a sales and use tax and for which
a completed current form ST-206 is on file with the public utility distributing
the gas or electricity;
         (iii)   "rate schedule" means a schedule defined by the Baltimore Gas
and Electric Company's tariff schedules.
      (2)   The taxes levied by this subsection do not apply to residential use
of artificial or natural gas and electricity.
      (3)   There is levied a tax on commercial and industrial use of
artificial or natural gas, electricity, and steam delivered in the County
through pipes, wires, or conduits, that is taxable to the consumer.
      (4)   The rate of tax on use of gas delivered by a local distribution
utility operating within the County is $0.008 per therm on gas delivered to a
meter used in a manufacturing activity that is on the rate schedule known as
Interruptible Schedule 37 and $0.020 per therm on all other deliveries. A
taxpayer for whom deliveries are made to a meter or meters used in a
manufacturing activity on a rate schedule other than Interruptible Schedule 37
and who utilizes more than 200,000 therms of gas in a fiscal year that is
billed under a separate utility account at a single service location may apply
to the Controller, on forms provided by the Controller, within 180 days of the
end of the fiscal year, for a rebate of taxes paid during the fiscal year that
exceed the product of the number of therms of gas delivered in the fiscal year
multiplied by a rate of $0.008 per therm.
      (5)   The rate of tax on use of electricity delivered by a local
distribution utility operating within the County is $0.0020 per kilowatt hour
on electricity delivered to a meter used in a manufacturing activity that is on
rate schedule P or GLP and $0.0025 per kilowatt hour on all other deliveries. A
taxpayer for whom deliveries are made to a meter or meters used in a
manufacturing activity on a rate schedule other than P or GLP and who utilizes
more than 3,000,000 kilowatt hours of electricity in a fiscal year that is
billed under a separate utility account at a single service location may apply
to the Controller, on forms provided by the Controller, within 180 days of the
end of the fiscal year, for a rebate of taxes paid during the fiscal year that
exceed the product of the number of kilowatt hours of electricity delivered in
the fiscal year multiplied by a rate of $0.0020 per kilowatt hour. A taxpayer
for whom deliveries are made to a meter or meters used in a manufacturing
activity that are billed under a separate utility account at a single service
location may apply to the Controller, on forms provided by the Controller,
within 180 days of the end of the fiscal year, for a rebate of taxes paid in
excess of $100,000 in a fiscal year.
      (6)   The rate of tax on use of steam is $160 on each 1,000,000 pounds of
steam sold.
   (d)   Collection.
      (1)   The tax shall be collected and remitted to the County by each
utility operating within the County selling or delivering within the County a
taxable service or commodity to a consumer except that, if the utility does not
bill the consumer for the taxable service or commodity, the tax shall be
collected and remitted by the person responsible for billing the consumer for
the taxable service or commodity.
      (2)   If a consumer receives a taxable utility service or commodity on
which the tax has not been collected as required in subsection (d)(1), the
consumer shall remit the tax to the County within 25 days of the succeeding
calendar month in which the utility service or commodity was received.
      (3)   Each utility or person responsible for collecting and remitting a
tax shall report and remit the tax under oath directly to the Controller on
forms supplied by the Controller not later than the 25th day of the second
succeeding calendar month.
   (e)   Inability to collect from consumer. If after a diligent effort a
utility or person responsible for collecting and remitting a tax is unable to
collect the tax from the consumer, the utility or other person shall make
available, on request, to the Controller, the name and address of the consumer,
the nature of the utility service or commodity sold, the amount paid for the
utility service or commodity, and the date on which paid. On receipt of the
information, the Controller shall take the necessary steps to collect the tax
from the consumer.
   (f)   Failure to file return or remit tax. A utility, a person responsible
for collecting and remitting a tax, or a consumer who fails to file a return or
remit the tax levied by this section within the required time limits shall be
assessed by the Controller the amount of tax due, plus interest at the rate of
1% each month and a penalty of 20% of the tax due.
   (g)   Rules and regulations; disputes. The Controller may adopt rules and
regulations necessary to ensure the collection of the taxes levied by this
section. In cases involving disputes, the Controller is the final
administrative authority.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 7-406) (Bill No. 106-87; Bill No. 12-95; Bill No. 1-99;
Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 27-02)
§ 4-6-105. Use or occupancy tax.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Additional rent" means the rent paid by an occupant to a
remarketer that is in excess of the net rent.
      (2)   "Collecting authority" means the County Controller except as
provided in subsection (k).
      (3)   "Net rent" means the rent received by an owner or operator from a
remarketer.
      (4)   "Occupant" means a person who uses or occupies a short-term rental.
      (5)   "Owner or operator" means a person who possesses or has an
ownership interest in a short-term rental or is engaged in the business of
operating short-term rentals.
      (6)   "Remarketer" means a person, other than the owner or operator of a
short-term rental, who has the right, access, ability, or authority, through an
internet transaction or any other means, to offer, reserve, book, arrange for,
remarket, distribute, broker, or resell short-term rentals subject to the tax
levied under this section, and the term includes a hosting platform. For
purposes of this definition, "hosting platform" means an internet-based entity
that, in exchange for rent, facilitates reservations and booking transactions
of short-term residential rentals.
      (7)   (i)   "Rent" means the consideration paid for the use or occupancy
of a short- term rental in the County.
         (ii)   "Rent" includes both the "net rent" and the "additional rent"
when the use or occupancy of a short-term rental is reserved, booked, brokered,
or otherwise arranged for by a remarketer and the full amount of the rent is
not paid by the occupant directly to the owner or operator.
         (iii)   "Rent" includes charges for services and booking fees that are
a condition of use or occupancy and any amount for which credit is allowed by
the owner or operator or remarketer to the occupant.
         (iv)   "Rent" does not include charges for optional services provided
by the owner or operator of a short-term rental to the occupant that are in
addition to the charge for use or occupancy and that are set forth separately
on the bill presented to the occupant.
      (8)   "Short-term rental" means a facility that offers sleeping
accommodations to the transient public for rent, including a hotel, motel, inn,
bed and breakfast home, bed and breakfast inn, rooming house, as defined in §
18-1-101 of this Code, and short-term residential rentals. For purposes of this
definition, "short-term residential rental" means the use or occupancy,
facilitated by a hosting platform in exchange for rent, of all or part of a
dwelling unit to provide accommodations to transient guests for no more than
120 consecutive days in a calendar year.
   (b)   Levy and amount of tax. There is an occupancy tax levied on the rent
paid for the use of a short-term rental in the County. The rate of the tax is
8% of the rent. The occupancy tax levied under this section shall be considered
the hotel tax referred to in § 20-603 of the Local Government Article of the
State Code.
   (c)   Calculation and collection; no remarketer. If the full amount of the
rent is paid by the occupant directly to the owner or operator of a short-term
rental, the owner or operator shall collect the tax from the occupant and remit
the tax to the collecting authority as provided in subsection (g).
   (d)   Calculation and collection; remarketer. If the use or occupancy of a
short-term rental is reserved, booked, or otherwise arranged for by a
remarketer and the full amount of the rent is not paid by the occupant directly
to the owner or operator, the remarketer shall:
      (1)   for a short-term rental other than a short-term residential rental,
collect the tax from the occupant based on the net rent and remit the tax to
the owner or operator who shall remit it to the collecting authority as
provided in subsection (g);
      (2)   collect the tax from the occupant based on the additional rent and
remit the tax to the collecting authority as provided in subsection (g); and
      (3)   for a short-term residential rental, collect the tax from the
occupant based on the net rent and remit the tax to the collecting authority as
provided in subsection (g), but the host shall remit the tax to the collecting
authority if the remarketer fails to do so.
   (e)   Exemptions. The tax does not apply to the rent paid for the use or
occupancy of a short- term rental that continues for 120 or more consecutive
days, provided that this exemption does not apply to a remarketer that offers,
reserves, books, arranges for, remarkets, distributes, brokers, or resells a
short-term rental for use or occupancy by others.
   (f)   Registration. An owner or operator or remarketer that offers,
reserves, books, arranges for, remarkets, distributes, brokers, or resells
short-term rentals subject to the tax levied under this section shall register
with the collecting authority on the form prescribed by the collecting
authority.
   (g)   Remittance and reports. The tax collected by an owner or operator or
remarketer shall be remitted to the collecting authority no later than the 25th
day of each month. Each month, regardless of whether the tax levied under this
section is collected, an owner or operator or remarketer shall file with the
collecting authority a fully completed return on forms prescribed by the
collecting authority that sets forth the amount of taxes collected during the
preceding period and such other information as the collecting authority may
require. At the discretion of the Controller, a short-term residential rental
owner or operator may be allowed to submit a return on a quarterly basis.
   (h)   Failure to remit or collect tax; failure to register.
      (1)   An owner or operator or remarketer that fails to collect, remit, or
file a fully completed return for the tax levied by this section within the
time prescribed shall be assessed the amount of tax due, interest at the rate
of 0.5% for each month or fraction of a month, and a penalty of 10% of the tax
due. The interest and penalty shall be collected as part of the tax.
      (2)   An owner or operator or remarketer that fails to register as
required by subsection (f) shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000 in
addition to any other amount owed under this subsection.
   (i)   Refunds. If a taxpayer has erroneously, illegally, or
unconstitutionally paid the tax levied by this section, the collecting
authority shall refund the tax if the refund is applied for in writing within
three years after payment of the tax, and if there is good and sufficient
grounds for the refund. The application shall be in the form approved by the
collecting authority, signed by both the taxpayer and the proper officer of the
owner or operator or remarketer, and submitted to the collecting authority.
   (j)   Sale or transfer of short-term rental. Not less than 10 days before
taking possession or control of a short-term rental that is subject to the tax
levied by this section, the purchaser, transferee, or assignee shall notify the
collecting authority by certified mail of the sale, transfer, conveyance, or
assignment. The notice shall set forth the name and mailing address of the
purchaser, transferee, or assignee, and the anticipated date of taking
possession or control. If notice to the collecting authority is not provided or
if the collecting authority informs the purchaser, transferee, or assignee that
a possible claim for taxes exists, the sums of money, property, or choses in
action, or other consideration in which the purchaser, transferee, or assignee
has an interest are subject to a first priority, right, and lien to the County,
or the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Annapolis, as appropriate, for the
tax. The purchaser, transferee, or assignee is liable to the extent of the
amount of the claim for unpaid taxes due under this section.
   (k)   Collecting authority. Except as otherwise provided by an agreement
executed in accordance with this subsection, the collecting authority for the
tax levied by this section is the County Controller. For the tax levied on the
occupancy of short-term rentals located in the City of Annapolis, the County
may enter into an agreement with the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
Annapolis delegating to the City of Annapolis the authority to act as
collecting authority.
(Bill No. 69-11; Bill No. 88-19; Bill No. 38-23)
§ 4-6-106. Parking lot and garage tax.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   “Motor vehicle” means any self-propelled vehicle.
      (2)   “Park” includes the parking, storing, housing, and keeping of a
motor vehicle.
      (3)   “Parking lot” means an outdoor area or space on which more than two
motor vehicles may be parked, stored, housed, or kept for a consideration.
      (4)   “Vehicle” means any device in, on, or by which any individual or
property is or might be transported or towed on a road.
   (b)   Scope. The tax levied by this section does not apply to parking lots
and garages in the City of Annapolis, to publicly owned metered parking spaces,
or to County-owned parking garages.
   (c)   Amount of tax. There is levied on the privilege of parking a motor
vehicle in a garage or on a parking lot in the County a tax of $1.00 for each
motor vehicle parked for each 24-hour period or fraction of a 24-hour period.
If a motor vehicle is parked in a garage or on a parking lot for which a charge
is made on a weekly or monthly basis, or on some basis other than a 24-hour
period, the amount of tax shall be computed by multiplying $1.00 by the total
number of days in the period of time for which the charge is made.
   (d)   Collection by owner or operator. Each owner or operator of a parking
lot or garage shall collect the tax levied by this section at the time of and
in addition to other charges made for the parking of the motor vehicle and
shall remit the tax not later than the 25th of each month to the Controller.
   (e)   Violation. A taxpayer who fails to file a return or remit the tax
levied by this section within the time prescribed shall be assessed the amount
of tax due, plus interest at the rate of 0.5% for each month and a penalty of
10% of the tax due.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 7-404) (Bill No. 8-86; Bill No. 11-99; Bill No. 48-17;
Bill No. 42-25)
§ 4-6-107. Transportation network service assessment.
   (a)   Assessment. As authorized by § 10-406 of the Public Utilities Article
of the State Code, there is a transportation network service assessment of
$0.25 for each trip originating in the County, except for those trips
originating in the City of Annapolis.
   (b)   Collection, remittance, accounting, use, and enforcement. The
collection, remittance, accounting, use, and enforcement of the assessment
shall be in accordance with § 10-406(g) and (h) of the Public Utilities Article
of the State Code.
(Bill No. 39-23)
§ 4-6-108. Prohibitions.
   A person may not willfully fail to collect a tax levied by this subtitle,
willfully fail to remit to the Controller or the collecting authority the tax
imposed when due, willfully fail to file a return required in connection with
the tax when due, willfully make any false statement or misleading omission in
any return, or willfully fail to keep complete and proper records as required
by law.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 7-408) (Bill No. 48-17; Bill No. 39-23)
   State Code reference – Local Government Article, §§ 10-313 and 10-314.
TITLE 7. SPECIAL COMMUNITY BENEFIT DISTRICTS, SHORE EROSION CONTROL DISTRICTS,
AND WATERWAYS IMPROVEMENTS DISTRICTS
Section
Subtitle 1. General Provisions
   
4-7-101.   Provisions relating to all districts.
   
4-7-102.   Expenditure.
   
4-7-103.   Budgets.
Subtitle 2. Special Community Benefit Districts
   
4-7-201.   General provisions.
   
4-7-202.   Procedure for establishment of a district.
   
4-7-203.   Amendment, modification, dissolution of district.
   
4-7-204.   Districts established.
   
4-7-205.   Rate of tax.
Subtitle 3. Shore Erosion Control Districts
   
4-7-301.   Procedure for establishment of district.
   
4-7-302.   Amendment, modification, dissolution of district.
   
4-7-303.   Districts established.
   
4-7-304.   Rate of tax.
   
4-7-305.   Emergency funds.
Subtitle 4. Waterways Improvement Districts
   
4-7-401.   Procedure for establishment of district.
   
4-7-402.   District council.
   
4-7-403.   Financing waterways improvement projects.
   
4-7-404.   Amendment or modification of district.
   
4-7-405.   Abolition of district; alternative.
   
4-7-406.   Districts established.
SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 4-7-101. Provisions relating to all districts.
   (a)   Definition. In this title, "owner" has the meaning stated in §
1-1-101 and, in addition, means each person in whose name an account with
respect to a parcel of real property stands in the records of the Supervisor of
Assessments for the County when a petition is submitted under this title.
   (b)   Signatures. A person is entitled to one signature for each tax account
with respect to a lot or parcel of real property within a district for which
that person is an owner. The signature of the co-owners is required to
constitute the signature of the owner of the property. An authorized officer of
a corporation or other business entity may sign on behalf of the entity.
   (c)   Advertising. The County Council shall give notice by public
advertisement of a proposed district at least once a week for four weeks in at
least one newspaper of general circulation in the County. Costs of advertising
to establish, amend, modify, or dissolve a district shall be borne by the
property owners in the district.
   (d)   Administration by civic or community association. Except as otherwise
provided for a particular district, the administration of the district shall be
conducted by a civic or community association that is an incorporated
association and that provides for membership for each property owner in the
district. If more than one association seeks to administer the same district,
the district shall be administered by the civic or community association that
presents to the Budget Officer a petition that is signed by a majority of the
property owners in the district and that supports administration of the
district by that association.
   (e)   Administrative charge. An administrative charge of 5% of the taxes
collected shall be withheld by the Controller from each district's disbursement
and shall be paid over to the general fund of the County. The administrative
charge shall not be less than $100 nor more than $2,000 for a district's fiscal
year.
   (f)   Bond. The Treasurer or other fiscal officer of each community
association administering a special community benefit district, a shore erosion
control district, or a waterway improvement district shall file with the
Controller a bond in an amount not less than the total amount of the funds
budgeted to be disbursed to the community association plus the balance held by
the community association. The bond shall be in a form approved by the
Controller conditioned on the faithful performance of duties by the Treasurer
or other fiscal officer.
   (g)   Special account. The Controller shall deposit the tax collections from
the districts in a special account and shall release the funds only as provided
in this title.
   (h)   Collection. A tax that is assessed and levied by the County Council in
an ordinance shall be collected as provided in § 1-9-101 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 2-101, 2-102, 2-103, 2-107, 2-108, 3-101, 3-102, 3-103,
3-106, 3-107, 3-108, 4-101, 4-102, 4-103, 4-107, 4-108) (Bill No. 17-88; Bill
No. 111-93; Bill No. 17-00)
§ 4-7-102. Expenditure.
   Moneys received from taxes collected in the districts shall be spent in the
district from which the taxes were collected for the purposes of the district
and for the purposes for which appropriations have been made in the budget
adopted by the County Council.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 2-105, 2-108, 3-105, 3-107, 4-108)
§ 4-7-103. Budgets.
   (a)   Preparation and submission by Association. Unless otherwise provided
by law, budget requests for a special community benefit district, shore erosion
district, or a waterway improvement district shall be prepared by the board of
directors of the civic or community association administering the expenditure
of the funds and be submitted to the property owners for their comments not
later than December 31 of each year or any other date approved by the Office of
the Budget, but in no event later than January 14. Final budget requests shall
be submitted to the Office of the Budget on or before January 31 of each year
and conform to the requirements of the Office of the Budget.
   (b)   Contents of Association's budget. Each budget request shall provide a
detailed listing of the purposes to which the funds are to be applied; for the
County's collection of the applicable administrative charge; for the
appropriation of the unencumbered or unexpended surplus of the district's
taxing district accounts; and the rate of the district tax.
   (c)   County budget. If the County has authorized the incurrence of
indebtedness for the purpose of implementation of a particular project, the
Office of the Budget shall include in the annual budget proposed for the
district the tax levy required to pay off the indebtedness incurred and shall
ensure timely repayments.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 3-106, 4-107, 8-106) (Bill No. 17-88; Bill No. 31-95;
Bill No. 12-02)
   State Code reference – For audit provisions, see Local Government Article,
§§ 16-305 through 16-308.
SUBTITLE 2. SPECIAL COMMUNITY BENEFIT DISTRICTS
§ 4-7-201. General provisions.
   (a)   Purchase of property. A purchase of real property by a special
community benefit district shall be authorized by a majority vote of the
property owners within the special community benefit district.
   (b)   Insect and pest control as purpose in each district. Each special
community benefit district listed in §
4-7-204 includes insect and pest control as a purpose in addition to any other
purpose.
   (c)   Special police officers. If a special community benefit district
includes a special police officer within its purpose, the officer is not an
agent, servant, or employee of the County unless acting directly under the
supervision of a regular full-time patrolman or officer of the Police
Department. If the purpose of a district includes security patrols or the
protection of community, private, or public property within a district by
special policies officers, such security or protection may be provided by
special police officers commissioned in accordance with the Public Safety
Article of the State Code, regular police officers on secondary employment, or
certified security guards employed by a security guard agency licensed by the
State of Maryland.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 2-102, 2-104.1; Art. 18, § 3-101) (Bill No. 77-13)
§ 4-7-202. Procedure for establishment of a district.
   (a)   By County Council. The County Council may establish special community
benefit districts for residential and non-residential areas in the County,
furnish and provide special privileges or benefits to persons or property in
the districts, and levy special taxes on property in the districts receiving
the special benefit to pay the costs of furnishing, providing, and maintaining
the special privileges or benefits.
   (b)   Petition. A district may not be established unless a petition is
signed by the owners of at least two-thirds of the properties in the proposed
district whose property will be affected by the creation of the district.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 2-103) (Bill No. 122-15; Bill No. 28-19)
§ 4-7-203. Amendment, modification, dissolution of district.
   (a)   Generally. The County Council, by ordinance, may amend, modify, or
dissolve an existing special community benefit district.
   (b)   Requirements. The County Council may amend or modify the purposes of
any district if it determines that an emergency exists and that immediate
action is required to permit a district to abate the emergency. Otherwise, an
existing district may not be amended, modified, or dissolved unless a petition
is signed by the owners of a majority of the properties in the existing
district whose property will be affected by the amendment, modification, or
dissolution of the district.
   (c)   Adding area to the district. Where a proposed amendment will have the
effect of adding a new area to an existing district, the petition shall be
signed by the owners of a majority of the properties in the new area as well as
by the owners of a majority of the properties in the existing district.
   (d)   Contracts and outstanding obligations. The County Council may not make
an amendment or modification to an existing district, or dissolve an existing
district if the effect of the amendment, modification, or dissolution is to
impair an outstanding obligation of the district or a contract to which the
district is a party or a beneficiary.
   (e)   Dissolution. An ordinance dissolving an existing special community
benefit district shall provide for an equitable division of assets belonging to
the district among the persons who own property in the district on the
effective date of the ordinance dissolving the district. Unencumbered and
unexpended funds remaining in the district account on the effective date of the
ordinance dissolving the district shall be distributed to the current property
owners of the district proportionately on the same basis as the special
community benefit tax was most recently collected.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 2-109) (Bill No. 9-90)
§ 4-7-204. Districts established.
   (a)   Generally. There are established within the County the following
special community benefit districts.
   (b)   Amberley Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The Amberley Special Community Benefit District consists of the
community of Amberley, the limits of which are set forth on the following plats
recorded among the land records of the County: Amberley (Plat 1, formerly
Hollywood Acres) recorded in Liber 22 at Folio No. 34, as Plat Number 1040;
Amberley (Plat 4, revision of lots 68-71, Block A, Plat No. 2) recorded in
Liber 29 at Folio No. 16 as Plat Number 1452; Amberley (Plat 2, formerly
Hollywood Acres) recorded in Liber 22, at Folio No. 36 as Plat Number 1041;
Amberley (Plat 3, formerly Hollywood Acres) recorded in Liber 22, at Folio No.
22, at Folio No. 38, as Plat Number 1042; and Amberley (Plat 5) near St.
Margarets recorded in Liber 40 at Folio No. 21, as Plat Number 2196.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of acquiring the
property lying easterly of, adjacent and contiguous to St. Margaret's Road and
Holly Drive as shown on a plat of a subdivision entitled "Plat 5 Amberley near
St. Margarets," that property also being lots 1 through 11, inclusive, as shown
on the aforesaid plat recorded among the land records of the County, in Liber
40, at Folio No. 21, the properties to be acquired and used as parkland for the
benefit of the residents and property owners in the district.
      (3)   The special community benefit taxes collected within the district
and related to the purpose set forth in paragraph (2) of this subsection shall
be used by the Amberley Community Association, Inc., or other body
administering the affairs of the district, to defray the costs incurred or
associated with the acquisition of the above-described property, including
repayment of the loan, interest, taxes, and assessments as applicable,
attorneys' fees, settlement costs, insurance, and maintenance expenses. On
repayment of the loan the special community benefit taxes related to the
purpose set forth in paragraph (2) of this subsection shall be reduced to the
amount required annually to defray the costs of taxes or assessments as
applicable, insurance, and maintenance expenses.
      (4)   The district is also established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving all community-owned property, other than community piers, and
providing for the administrative expenses incidental to carrying out this
purpose, including insurance costs and the repayment of any loans and interest
thereon.
   (c)   Annapolis Roads Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Annapolis Roads Special Community Benefit
District are the subdivision known as Annapolis Roads as shown on the plats of
Annapolis Roads recorded among the plat records of the County in Plat Book No.
6, Folio Nos. 2 and 31; Plat Book No. 18, Folio No. 32; Plat Book No. 22, Folio
No. 26; and Plat Book No. 23, Folio Nos. 10, 19, 21, 22, 23, and 33, and
recorded among the land records of the County in Liber LNP 1631, Folio No. 190;
Liber LNP 1645, Folio No. 221; Liber LNP 1693, Folio No. 373; and Liber LNP
1745, Folio No. 516, except for those lands within the limits of the City of
Annapolis.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of construction,
maintenance, improvement of, and snow removal from, non-County-owned roads,
streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, street or road signs and lights, bulkheads,
drainage ditches, and culverts; acquiring, improving, and maintaining community
real and personal property or any interest in real property necessary to
accomplish community-wide projects; providing special police protection;
providing recreational activities directly related to the community; and
funding the administrative expenses to carry out these purposes, including
mailing expenses, secretarial costs, insurance costs, audit fees, attorney's
fees, and the repayment of any loan.
      (3)   The Annapolis Roads Property Owners Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for the expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Annapolis Roads Special Community Benefit District.
   (d)   Arundel-on-the-Bay Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Arundel-on-the-Bay Special Community Benefit
District are set forth on the plat of Arundel-on-the-Bay recorded among the
land records of the County in Plat Book No. 9, Page 25.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of non-shore erosion
prevention and protection; construction, maintenance, and repair of non-County-
owned roads, paths, streets, signs, and streetlights; construction,
maintenance, and repair of drainage ditches and culverts; acquisition,
maintenance, and improvement of real property or any interest therein necessary
to accomplish community-wide projects; providing snow removal; providing
special police protection; the acquisition or lease of equipment necessary to
accomplish the foregoing purposes; maintenance of recreational areas and the
acquisition and maintenance of recreation equipment and facilities; and other
expenses necessary for the administration and implementation of these purposes.
   (e)   Avalon Shores Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Avalon Shores Special Community Benefit District
are those lands shown on the plats of Avalon Shores, Sections A and B, as
recorded in Plat Book 8, Folio 36 and Plat Book 10, Folio 4 of the Plat Records
of Anne Arundel County.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of constructing,
operating, maintaining, and improving community-owned properties, buildings,
easements, piers, and equipment; installing and maintaining lights on
community-owned properties; acquiring or leasing equipment and repaying loans
and interest to accomplish these activities; and providing for the
administrative expenses incidental to carrying out these activities, including
postage and mailing, auditing, insurance, and legal costs.
      (3)   The Avalon Shores Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Avalon Shores Civic Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (f)   Bay Highlands Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Bay Highlands Special Community Benefit District
are set forth on a plat recorded among the land records of the County on Plat
No. 523, Plat Book No. 9, Folio No. 49.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of construction and
maintenance of roads and storm drains; providing snow removal; maintenance of
street lighting; providing special police protection; and construction on and
maintenance and improvement of community property, including playground
facilities and equipment, piers for fishing and crabbing, and landscaping and
maintenance of public areas.
   (g)   Bay Ridge Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Bay Ridge Special Community Benefit District are
all those lands shown on the plats of Bay Ridge recorded among the plat records
of the County in Plat Book No. 3, Section 3, Folio No. 13; Plat Book No. 1,
Section 1, Folio No. 6; Plat Book No. 8, Section 3, Folio No. 28; Plat Book No.
9, Section 4, Folio No. 5; and Plat Book No. 28, Page 50.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of providing for the
salaries, expenses, and allowances for special police officers; acquisition,
maintenance, and improvement of real property or any interest in real property
necessary to accomplish community-wide projects; and providing for the
administrative expenses incidental to carrying out these activities, including
postage and mailing, insurance, legal costs, and the repayment of any loan.
      (3)   The Bay Ridge Civic Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Bay Ridge Special Community Benefit District.
   (h)   Bayside Beach Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Bayside Beach Special Community Benefit District
are those properties within Maryland State Real Property Tax District 3-080.
      (2)   The district is established for the purposes of maintaining and
improving all community real and personal property owned by the Improvement
Association of Bayside Beach, Inc., operating as Bayside Beach Improvement
Association; and paying the administrative expenses incidental to carrying out
this purpose, including insurance costs and the repayment of any loans and
interest thereon.
      (3)   The Improvement Association of Bayside Beach, Inc., operating as
Bayside Beach Improvement Association, a civic or community association that
meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the Bayside Beach Special
Community Benefit District in furtherance of the purposes of the district.
   (i)   Beverly Beach Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Beverly Beach Special Community Benefit District
are those lands shown on the five plats of Beverly Beach, which are identified
in the plat records of Anne Arundel County as Plats 323, 534, 625, 626 and 627.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintenance,
protection, and repair of the community facilities, including docks, bulkheads,
and the littoral currently leased from the County, and defraying the
administrative costs associated with completion of the foregoing purpose,
including repayment of any loan or interest and any necessary insurance costs.
      (3)   The Beverly Beach Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Beverly Beach Community Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (j)   Birchwood Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Birchwood Special Community Benefit District are
those lands shown on the plats of Fernbrook as recorded in the plat records of
the County in Plat No. 1289, recorded in Plat Book 25, Page 39; Plat No. 1449,
recorded in Plat Book 29, Page 21; Plat No. 1467, recorded in Plat Book 29,
Page 31; and Plat No. 1656, recorded in Plat Book 31, Page 81.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
mowing the grass on community-owned property, including the waterfront areas,
the pier and slip facilities, and the pavilion and covering administrative
costs associated with these purposes, including the purchase of office supplies
and the payment of insurance costs, utility costs, and administrative fees to
the County. The district may not expend special community benefit taxes for
bulkheading or dredging.
      (3)   The Birchwood Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Birchwood Improvement Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (k)   Bittersweet Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Bittersweet Special Community Benefit District
are those properties, excluding lots 7 and 8, shown on the plat entitled
Bittersweet, which plat is recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel
County in Plat Book 30, Page 2.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintenance and
improvement of real property or any interest in real property necessary to
accomplish community-wide projects; dredging to maintain access to the
community pier area; and providing for the administrative expenses incidental
to carrying out these activities, including postage and mailing, auditing,
insurance, legal costs, and the repayment of any loan.
      (3)   The Bittersweet Community Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for the expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Bittersweet Special Community Benefit District.
   (l)   Broadwater Creek Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Broadwater Creek Special Community Benefit
District are those properties that are identified by the following real
property tax account numbers and addresses:
Property Address Property Tax Account Number
Property Address            Property Tax Account Number
5652 Battee Dr              7000-9009-8788
5640 Battee Dr              7157-9000-2170
5650 Battee Dr              7000-0449-0000
5644 Battee Dr              7157-9005-8919
5648 Battee Dr              7157-0423-6400
5656 Battee Dr              7000-0330-4605
5660 Battee Dr              7157-9002-8176
5614 Battee Dr              7000-0327-0500
5610 Battee Dr              7000-0327-0505
5709 Blaine Rd              7000-0241-4200
5745 Blaine Rd              7158-0091-6925
5749 Blaine Rd              7158-0107-9450
5721 Blaine Rd              7158-0317-9475
5701 Blaine Rd              7000-0232-6800
5705 Blaine Rd              7000-9000-1227
5711 Blaine Rd              7158-0219-2600
5743 Blaine Rd              7000-0238-1405
5739 Blaine Rd              7000-0290-3650
5727 Blaine Rd              7000-0119-8425
5747 Blaine Rd              7158-0207-3750
5751 Blaine Rd              7158-0321-8480
5719 Blaine Rd              7158-0505-3015
5773 Blaine Rd              7000-0348-4601
5715 Blaine Rd              7158-0521-2000
5736 Blaine Rd              7000-0119-8428
5742 Broadwater Creek Rd    7000-0292-3200
5744 Broadwater Creek Rd    7000-0292-1800
5700 Broadwater Creek Rd    7000-0000-7020
5730 Broadwater Creek Rd    7000-9001-3011
5734 Broadwater Creek Rd    7000-9001-3014
5724 Broadwater Creek Rd    7000-0324-8800
5716-20 Broadwater Creed Rd 7000-0047-8800
5712 Broadwater Creek Rd    7000-0519-0160
5738 Broadwater Creek Rd    7000-0256-6225
5728 Broadwater Creek Rd    7000-0704-0200
5726 Broadwater Creek Rd    7000-0704-1600
836 Broadwater Rd           7000-0365-1200
1032 Broadwater Rd          7000-0391-4420
1030 Broadwater Rd          7000-0496-9200
1100 Cherry Blossom Pkwy    7157-0414-6150
1054 Diamond Dr             7797-9002-1490
5611 Gunner Run Rd          7752-9002-0436
5631 Gunner Run Rd          7752-9002-0426
5623 Gunner Run Rd          7752-9002-0430
5625 Gunner Run Rd          7752-9002-0429
5621 Gunner Run Rd          7752-9002-0431
5629 Gunner Run Rd          7752-9002-0427
5627 Gunner Run Rd          7752-9002-0428
5619 Gunner Run Rd          7752-9002-0432
1104 Harbor Way             7157-0700-0600
1100 Harbor Way             7157-9000-3250
5639 Gunner Run Rd          7752-9002-0425
1054 Rodgers Rd             7000-0000-1500
1070 Rodgers Rd             7000-0358-8167
1064 Rodgers Rd             7000-0358-8168
1077 Rodgers Rd             7000-0329-9820
1062 Rodgers Rd             7000-0330-4156
1056 Rodgers Rd             7000-0325-7800
1058 Rodgers Rd             7000-9005-0264
1087 Rodgers R              7000-9001-5236
1063 Rodgers R              7000-0414-6295
1067 Rodgers Rd             7000-0449-0430
1092 Rodgers Rd             7000-0346-3600
1086 Rodgers Rd             7000-0235-0608
1097 Rodgers Rd             7000-0346-7800
1061 Rodgers Rd             7000-0409-4850
1059 Rodgers Rd             7000-0411-8100
1079 Rodgers Rd             7000-0414-6300
1085 Rodgers Rd             7000-0231-0000
1055 Rodgers Rd             7000-0336-6675
5729 Shore Dr               7157-0077-0025
5701 Shore Dr               7157-0147-7000
5669 Shore Dr               7157-0104-4405
5667 Shore Dr               7157-0156-1250
5719 Shore Dr               7157-0331-2700
5721 Shore Dr               7157-0082-4300
5743 Shore Dr               7157-0283-7800
5703 Shore Dr               7157-0291-0600
5739 Shore Dr               7157-0240-5200
5705 Shore Dr               7157-0233-1700
5671 Shore Dr               7157-9000-3249
5642 Battee Dr              7157-9004-8856
5646 Battee Dr              7157-9006-2281
 
      (2)   The district is established for the purposes of maintaining any
work performed on the Broadwater Creek entrance channel by Anne Arundel County,
the State of Maryland, or the Army Corp of Engineers; maintaining work
performed on Broadwater Creek under Anne Arundel County Capital Project
Q498000, "Broadwater Creek Dredging"; and paying the administrative expenses
incidental to carrying out these purposes.
      (3)   Broadwater Creek Coalition, Inc., a civic or community association
that meets the criteria set forth in the Anne Arundel County Code, §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the special community
benefit district assessments in furtherance of the purposes of the Broadwater
Creek Special Community Benefit District.
   (m)   Cape Anne Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Cape Anne Special Community Benefit District are
the subdivision of Cape Anne as shown on the plats of Cape Anne recorded among
the land records of the County in Liber FSR 2, Page 12.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving community property; providing community recreation activities; and
paying the administrative expenses necessary to carry out these purposes,
including insurance.
      (3)   The Cape Anne Citizens Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall administer the expenditures of the special community benefit
assessments collected from the district.
   (n)   Cape St. Claire Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Cape St. Claire Special Community Benefit
District are all those lands shown on the plats of Cape St. Claire as recorded
in the land records of the County in Plat No. 1, Cape St. Claire, Plat No. 966,
Book 21, Folio 38; Plat No. 2, Cape St. Claire, Plat No. 967, Book 21, Folio
39; Plat No. 3, Cape St. Claire, Plat No. 974, Book 21, Folio 45; Plat No. 4,
Cape St. Claire, Plat No. 975, Book 21, Folio 47; Plat No. 5, Cape St. Claire,
Plat No. 978, Book 21, Folio 48; Plat No. 6, Cape St. Claire, Plat No. 981,
Book 22, Folio 1; Amended Addition to Section D, Plat No. 6, Cape St. Claire,
Plat No. 1081, Book 23, Folio 13; Amended Addition to Section BBB, Plat No. 6,
Cape St. Claire, Plat No. 1110, Book 23, Folio 25; Addition to Section BBB,
Plat No. 6, Cape St. Claire, Plat No. 1163, Book 24, Folio 6; Addition to Plats
6 and 7, Cape St. Claire, Plat No. 1164, Book 24, Folio 9; Plat No. 7, Cape St.
Claire, Plat No. 982, Book 22, Folio 2; Plat No. 8, Cape St. Claire, Plat No.
985, Book 22, Folio 5; Plat No. 9, Cape St. Claire, Plat No. 987, Book 22,
Folio 6; Plat No. 10, Cape St. Claire, Plat No. 988, Book 22, Folio 7; Plat No.
11, Cape St. Claire, Plat No. 1049, Book 22, Folio 42; Plat No. 12, Cape St.
Claire, Plat No. 1173, Book 24, Folio 15; Plat No. 13, Cape St. Claire, Plat
No. 1196, Book 24, Folio 25; Section 1, Cape St. Claire, Deep Creek
Subdivision, Plat No. 1013, Book 22, Folio 20; Section 2, Cape St. Claire, Deep
Creek Subdivision, Plat No. 1014, Book 22, Folio 21; Plat B, Persimmon Point,
Plat No. 817, Book 19, Folio 42; Plat B, Persimmon Point, resubdivision of Lots
119 to 127, inclusive, Plat No. 938, Book 21, Folio 22; Plate B, Persimmon
Point, resubdivision of Lots 1 to 6 and 23 to 26, inclusive, Plat No. 955, Book
21, Folio 32; Part of Plat C, Persimmon Point, Lots No. 300 to 321, Plat No.
939, Book 21, Folio 23; Revision Plat of Part of Plat C, Persimmon Point,
showing resubdivision of Lots 311 to 321, inclusive, Plat No. 973, Book 21,
Folio 43; That property known as 1108 River Bay Road, and more particularly
described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County in Liber
3542, Folio 468; That property known as 1110 River Bay Road, and more
particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County
in Liber 4096, Folio 823; That property known as 1112 River Bay Road, and more
particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County
in Liber 4603, Folio 656; That property known as 1114 River Bay Road, and more
particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County
in Liber 3970, Folio 691; and that property known as 1273 Swan Drive, and more
particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County
in Liber 2009, Folio 290.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintenance of
community property, including lawn care, trash removal, repair, lighting,
paving, and erosion prevention; special security for community property;
acquisition, improvement, and construction of real and personal community
property; and funding administrative expenses incidental to carrying out these
purposes, including mailing, secretarial, auditing, insurance, and legal costs.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
4-7-201(a), the district may acquire real property if approved in the budget
for the district by a majority vote of property owners present at a meeting to
adopt the budget, for which the board of the community association has duly
given notice and at which there is a quorum.
      (4)   The Cape St. Claire Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Cape St. Claire Improvement Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (o)   Capetowne Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Capetowne Special Benefits District are those
lands shown on Plat Numbers 4659 through 4662 at Plat Book 89, pages 34 through
37, as recorded in the land records of Anne Arundel County, Maryland.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of constructing,
maintaining, improving, and removing snow from non-County-owned roads, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, curbs, street or road signs and lights; acquiring,
improving, and maintaining community real property or any interest in real
property necessary to accomplish community-wide projects; providing
recreational activities directly related to the community; and funding the
administrative expenses to carry out these purposes, including mailing
expenses, secretarial costs, insurance costs, audit fees, attorney's fees, and
the repayment of any loan, including interest thereon.
      (3)   The Capetowne Homeowners Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the Capetowne Special
Community Benefit District in furtherance of the purposes of the district.
   (p)   Carrollton Manor Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Carrollton Manor Special Community Benefit
District are those lands shown on the plats of Carrollton Manor, Plat Number
491, as recorded in Plat Book 9, Folios 23 and 24, in the plat records of Anne
Arundel County.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of acquiring real
property; maintaining and improving community property, including the clubhouse
and community beach; providing security for the community areas; and covering
the expenses associated with the completion of the above purposes, including
repayment of any loan and any necessary insurance costs.
      (3)   The Carrollton Manor Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Carrollton Manor Improvement Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (q)   Cedarhurst-on-the-Bay Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the district are those lands shown on State
Department of Assessments and Taxation Map 69, Block 18 as Parcels 235, 236,
237, 559, 878, 879 and 880.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of acquiring,
maintaining, and improving real property or an interest in real property for
community projects, including but not limited to construction of community
piers, storage sheds, and a community association building; acquiring and
maintaining equipment and materials required to maintain and improve community
property, including but not limited to beaches, parks, playground areas,
parking lots, community-owned roads, and community piers; acquiring and
maintaining recreational equipment for use on or improvements to community
property; providing for special security protection to prevent rowdyism,
vandalism, and trespassing on community property; providing for community
recreation activities and benevolence; and paying the administrative expenses
necessary to accomplish these purposes, including but not limited to liability
insurance for community property, audit and bonding expenses, utility expenses,
postage, attorneys' fees, and the ability to borrow funds and pledge assets in
order to accomplish any of the purposes of the district.
      (3)   The Cedarhurst-on-the-Bay Special Community Benefit District shall
be administered by the Cedarhurst Citizens Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (r)   Chartwell Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Chartwell Special Community Benefit District are
set forth on the plats of the Chartwell, St. Andrews Hill, Chartwell-on-the
Severn, and St. Ives subdivisions, as recorded in the land records of the
County in Plat Book No. 31, Pages 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, and 63; Plat Book No. 35,
Page 33; Plat Book No. 36, Page 31; Plat Book No. 37, Page 18; Plat Book No.
38, Page 14; Plat Book No. 39, Page 1; Plat Book No. 41, Pages 11 and 40; Plat
Book No. 43, Page 25; Plat Book No. 46, Page 32; Plat Book No. 53, Page 23;
Plat Book No. 62, Page 3; Plat Book No. 68, Page 9; Plat Book No. 71, Page 38;
and Plat Book No. 84, Page 25.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintenance and
improvement of common areas; maintenance of recreational equipment and
facilities; operation of a community security program; and the administrative
expenses necessary to carry out these purposes.
      (3)   The Chartwell Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Chartwell Community Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (s)   Columbia Beach Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Columbia Beach Special Community Benefit District
are set forth on plats recorded among the land records of the County on Plat
No. 633, Plat Book No. 11, Folio No. 18; Plat No. 639, Plat Book No. 11, Folio
No. 24; and Plat No. 652, Plat Book No. 17, Folio No. 25.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of protecting the
shoreline and providing slips and parking places for boats; patrolling private
beach areas and private roads and preventing rowdyism, civil disturbance,
vandalism, and trespassing; providing jetties for the bathing area and nets to
protect bathers from jellyfish and nettles; providing lights for the private
areas; maintaining private roads, including scuffing, ditch cleaning, branch
removal, and snow removal; establishment and maintenance of a recreation area
for the private use of the property owners; providing funds to maintain a
community association building; and providing for the expenses necessary to
administer these services.
   (t)   Crofton Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Crofton Special Community Benefit District are
the areas known as:
         (i)   Crofton and Crofton Park and defined by a boundary starting at a
point at the southwest corner of the Chapman property, at which point the
property line meets Md. Rt. 3, thence southerly along the eastern boundary of
Rt. 3 to the northern edge of the Pigeon House property thence easterly and
thence southerly along such boundary to its junction with Md. Rt. 450, thence
easterly along Md. Rt. 450 for 3,089.86 feet thence northerly on a bearing
north 0 degrees 6 minutes 10 seconds east for 1,683 feet thence on a bearing
south 60 degrees 54 minutes 20 seconds east for 1,902.82 feet thence on a
bearing north 70 degrees 15 minutes 40 seconds east for 835 feet thence on a
bearing north 66 degrees 8 minutes 20 seconds west for 642.9 feet thence on a
bearing north 42 degrees 53 minutes 30 seconds west for 237.81 feet thence on a
bearing north 71 degrees 10 minutes 10 seconds for 3,016.46 feet to its
junction with Md. Rt. 424 thence northwesterly along Rt. 424 to the eastern
corner of the Sterling property following such property line southwesterly
thence northwesterly thence northeasterly until it again meets Rt. 424 thence
continuing northwesterly along Rt. 424 to its junction with Rt. 3 thence
southerly along Md. Rt. 3 to the north boundary of the Chapman property
following such property line easterly then southerly then westerly to the point
of beginning;
         (ii)   Crofton Orchards, defined by a boundary starting at an iron bar
there found at the end of the south 78 degrees 12 feet west 3030.3 feet line of
the conveyance of John A. Chaney and Benjamin F. Chaney, personal
representatives of the estate of Lula M. Chaney to John A. Chaney by deed dated
May 20, 1981, and recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel County,
Maryland, in Liber WGL 3411, page 33; thence leaving said beginning point, so
fixed and running reversely, with a part of said line with meridian referred to
Maryland Grid North as now surveyed: north 71 degrees 15 minutes 03 seconds
east 1584.18 feet to an iron pipe now set at the northwesternmost corner of
Mayfair Place point No. 1 as shown on courts of Crofton, Plat 2 Section 1,
recorded among the plat records of Anne Arundel County, Maryland, in Plat Book
64, page 32; thence leaving said point and running with the west side of
Mayfair Place as aforesaid, the following two courses and distances, viz: south
19 degrees 22 minutes 27 seconds east 228.27 feet to point No. 75; and south 25
degrees 37 minutes 34 seconds west 17.33 feet to point No. 77 on the west
outline of the aforesaid Plat 2, Section 1, Courts of Crofton, thence running
with and binding on part of said outline; south 18 degrees 44 minutes 57
seconds east 89.52 feet to point No. 78 on the west side of Mayfair Place the
following two courses and distances, viz: south 64 degrees 22 minutes 28
seconds east 11.64 feet to point No. 74; and south 19 degrees 22 minutes 27
seconds east 332.48 feet to point No. 5 in the north 79 degrees 55 minutes 40
seconds east 2370 feet line mentioned in the boundary line agreement between
Gustave Kinder, Jr., and Ida Kinder, his wife, and Lula M. Chaney, widow, dated
May 21, 1969, and recorded in Liber MSH 2269, Folio 396; thence leaving said
Mayfair Place and running reversely, with part of said line as shown on a
boundary survey plat by Dewberry, Nealon and Davis, Engineers and Surveyors
dated August 1975; south 71 degrees 23 minutes 47 seconds west 735.26 feet to
the outline of Stonegate Village as shown on a plat recorded among the plat
records of Anne Arundel County, Maryland, in Plat Book 58 at page 35; thence
leaving the aforesaid boundary line agreement and running with the outline of
Stonegate Village, as aforesaid, the following two courses and distances, viz:
north 23 degrees 18 minutes 18 seconds east 2.57 feet to a pipe found; and
south 72 degrees 42 minutes 09 seconds west 243.20 feet, to an iron pipe now
set, in the northernmost outline of Stonegate Village as aforesaid, thence
running with the binding on the property line according to a deed dated
December 5, 1974, and recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel County,
Maryland, in Liber 2723 at page 470 was granted and conveyed by Lula M. Chaney
to Mae Chaney Turner, trustee, the following two courses and distances, viz:
north 65 degrees 08 minutes 57 seconds west 616.23 feet to a pipe set; and
north 53 degrees 14 minutes 57 seconds west 285.40 feet to the place of
beginning, containing 19.99 acres of land, more or less as surveyed by McCrone,
Inc.; being a part of said conveyance by John A. Chaney and Benjamin F. Chaney,
personal representatives of the estate of Lula M. Chaney to John A. Chaney by
deed dated May 20, 1981, and recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel
County, Maryland, in Liber WGL 3411, Folio 33.
         (iii)   Greens of Crofton, defined by a boundary starting at an iron
pipe now set on the west side of Davidsonville Road, Maryland Route 424 (50
feet wide), said pipe marking the northeast corner of the Alton R. Kinder
property, deed recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel County,
Maryland, in Liber 2920, Folio 622, thence binding reversely on the fourth and
third lines of said deed description and referring the courses of this
description to the Maryland State Grid Meridian: south 71 degrees 23 minutes 47
seconds west 1579.02 feet; thence south 58 degrees 7 minutes 2 seconds east
455.92 feet, thence southerly establishing a new line of division ("line of
division") between the herein described parcel and the retained portion of the
Gustave and Ida Kinder, Jr. property described in deed recorded among the
aforesaid land records in Liber JHH 732, Folio 90; south 15 degrees, 26 minutes
51 seconds east 506.45 feet to intersect the northwest lot line of lot 11 of a
subdivision entitled Bright Seat (unrecorded) said lot 11 owned by Randall E.
and Alice F. Funk pursuant to deed recorded among the aforesaid land records in
Liber 3806, Folio 446, thence binding on part of said northwest lot line of lot
11 and binding on the fourth, fifth, sixth lines of deed described in Liber GTC
1163, Folio 534, being the same as the conveyance from Edward N.C. Bradley to
John T. Hardisty, deed recorded among the aforesaid land records in Liber 1768,
Folio 164; south 37 degrees 28 minutes 20 seconds west 299.17 feet; thence
south 25 degrees 24 minutes 20 seconds west 165.30 feet; thence south 57
degrees 46 minutes 41 seconds west 165.42 feet, to a pipe found, thence binding
on the east boundary lines of a subdivision entitled Stonegate Village recorded
among the plat records of Anne Arundel County, Maryland, in Plat Book 58, page
35; north 8 degrees 46 minutes 19 seconds west 198.43 feet to a pipe found;
thence north 9 degrees 24 minutes 3 seconds east 150.11 feet to a pipe found;
thence north 52 degrees 28 minutes 59 seconds west 77.44 feet; thence north 48
degrees 29 minutes 33 seconds west 127.95 feet to a pipe found; thence north 69
degrees 5 minutes 51 seconds west 115.90 feet; thence north 64 degrees 52
minutes 8 seconds west 114.89 feet; thence (13) north 54 degrees 15 minutes 24
seconds west 141.13 feet; thence north 23 degrees 19 minutes 4 seconds west
462.67 feet, thence binding on the line of agreement as set out in the boundary
line agreement, made May 21, 1969, between Gustave and Ida Kinder, Jr. and Lula
M. Chaney, said agreement being recorded among the aforesaid land records in
Liber 2269, Folio 396, said line also being the south boundary line of the John
A. Chaney property recorded in Liber 3411, Folio 33, also being the south
boundary line of a subdivision entitled Courts of Crofton recorded among the
aforesaid plat records in Plat Book 64, pages 32 and 34, also being the south
boundary line of the John A. and Elizabeth S. Chaney property, said property
being described in deed recorded among the aforesaid land records in Liber
3243, Folio 648; north 71 degrees 23 minutes 47 seconds east 2138.37 feet to
the west side of Davidsonville Road, thence binding on same; south 15 degrees
51 minutes 19 seconds east 50.06 feet to the point of beginning, containing
17.175 acres of land, more or less; being the same property which by deed dated
January 5, 1987, and recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel County in
Liber HES 4230, Folio 235 was granted and conveyed by Ida Kinder to Sulin
Enterprises, Ltd.
   And further defined by a boundary starting at an iron pipe now set on the
southwesternmost side of the state road from Bartgis Corner to Conway (known as
Maryland Route No. 424, 50 feet wide) described in the conveyance by Russell C.
Bartgis, et al., to the County Commissioners of Anne Arundel County by deed
dated November 20, 1940, and recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel
County in Liber JHH No. 228, Folio 32; and distant as measured along said side
of said road, south 15 degrees 31 minutes 18 seconds east 50.07 feet from the
intersection of the north 79 degrees 55 minutes 40 seconds east 2370 feet, more
or less, line shown on the plat of a survey of the line of agreement between
Gustave Kinder and Lula M. Chaney prepared by J.R. McCrone, Inc., and filed in
Case No. A-185 Law in the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County and described
in the boundary line agreement made May 21, 1969, between Gustave Kinder, Jr.,
and Ida Kinder, his wife, and Lula M. Chaney, widow, recorded among the land
records of Anne Arundel County in Liber MSH No. 2269, Folio 396, with said side
of the said state road; thence leaving said beginning point so fixed and
running with said side of Maryland Route No. 424 with meridian referred to Anne
Arundel County grid-south 15 degrees 31 minutes 18 seconds east 250.0 feet to
an iron pipe now set; thence leaving said road and running through part of the
conveyance by Edwards S. Barber and wife to Gustave Kinder, Jr., and wife by
deed dated December 31, 1952, and recorded among the land records of Anne
Arundel County in Liber JHH No. 732, Folio 90, south 66 degrees 51 minutes 35
seconds west 1280.19 feet to an iron pipe now set; and thence north 58 degrees
09 minutes 10 seconds west 455.0 feet to an iron pipe now set; thence running
parallel to and 50 feet easterly as measured at right angles from said line of
agreement north 71 degrees 23 minutes 39 seconds east 1579.33 feet to the place
of beginning, containing 10.002 acres, more or less; being the same property
which by deed dated January 5, 1987, and recorded among the land records of
Anne Arundel County in Liber HES No. 4230, Folio 252 was granted and conveyed
by Alton Robert Kinder to Sulin Enterprises, Ltd.
         (iv)   Crofton South, as identified on State Department of Assessments
and Taxation Map 42, Block 18 as Parcel 102; and
         (v)   the Willows of Crofton, as identified on State Department of
Assessments and Taxation Map 42, Block 24, as Parcel 75.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of providing special
police protection; maintenance of public areas including entranceways and
Crofton Parkway median strip; maintenance of recreation areas; maintenance of
gas lights on public lands; the acquisition, improvement, and maintenance of
community real and personal property approved by a majority vote of the general
membership of the Crofton Civic Association, necessary to support and
accomplish community-wide projects; provision of recreation programs and
recreation activities that are limited to non-athletic community events; such
other services as the Board of Directors of the Crofton Civic Association may
have approved in its annual budget request as adopted by the County Council;
and the expenses necessary to administer these services.
   (u)   Deale Beach Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Deale Beach Special Community Benefit District
are all properties within the Deale Beach Subdivision as shown on Plat No. 522
(dated 1935), recorded in the land records of Anne Arundel County in Liber 9,
Folio 50, and tax account number 7000-9010-9593 (5986 Fifth Street).
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose maintaining and
improving community property, including the community hall and piers; paying
the expenses associated with the community property; defraying the costs of
community-wide services; and providing for the administrative expenses
incidental to carrying out these purposes, including office expenses,
insurance, repayment of loans, and legal fees.
      (3)   The Deale Beach Citizens Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the Deale Beach Special
Community Benefit District in furtherance of the purposes of the district.
   (v)   Eden Wood Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Eden Wood Special Community Benefit District are
those lands identified as Parcels 141, 145, and 275 on State Department of
Assessments and Taxation Map 43.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving the community-owned road and paying the administrative costs
necessary to accomplish these purposes, including repayment of any loan and any
insurance costs.
      (3)   The Eden Wood Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Eden Wood Community Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (w)   Epping Forest Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Epping Forest Special Community Benefit District
are that portion of the subdivision known as Epping Forest as shown on the plat
recorded among the plat records of the County in Plat Book No. 1, pages 39 and
47 and Plat Book No. 2, page 3, and beginning for the same at a point where
Clements Path leads to Clements Bay and running thence down Clements Plat and
Clements Trail to Danseye Trail, thence along Danseye Trail to the intersection
of the dividing line between lots No. 18 and 19 of Block 75, and including all
those lands described in a deed dated September 18, 1972, recorded among the
land records of the County at Liber 2524, page 52; and continuing from Danseye
Trail at the intersection of the dividing line between lots No. 18 and 19 down
Danseye Trail to Holly Trail, thence down Holly Trail to Clements Trail to
Epping Way, thence up Epping Way to the intersection of the dividing line
between lots No. 4 and 5 in Block 70, thence along the dividing line between
lots No. 4 and 5 of Block 70 to the southeast corner of lot No. 5 in Block 70,
thence along the dividing line between lots No. 5 and 23 and 6 and 24 to the
intersection of the corners of lots No. 6, 7, 24, and 25; thence along the
dividing line between lots No. 24 and 25 to Ramshorn Trail, thence down
Ramshorn Trail to Chelmerford Trail to Salt Pan Bay; thence along the shoreline
of Salt Pan Bay, the Severn River, and Clements Bay to the point of the
beginning.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of construction,
maintenance, and repair of all non-County-owned roads, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, curbs, street or road signs, street or road lights, bulkheads,
drainage ditches, and culverts in the special community benefit district,
including paving and snow removal; acquisition, development, improvement, and
maintenance of community real and personalproperty; establishment and operation
of a community security program; maintenance and operation of community
facilities and public works, including boat ramps, parking lots, beaches,
parks, playgrounds, tennis courts, community-owned piers, and clubhouse, as
well as sponsorship of community recreational events and gatherings; and
providing for the administrative expenses necessary to accomplish these
purposes, including liability insurance covering community property and
community activities, audit and bonding expenses, postage, attorney's fees, and
the repayment of loans obtained to accomplish any of the purposes of the
special community benefit district.
      (3)   Epping Forest, Inc., a civic or community association that meets
the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for the expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Epping Forest Special Community Benefit District.
   (x)   Fair Haven Cliffs Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Fair Haven Cliffs Special Community Benefit
District are all those lands shown on the original plat of Fair Haven Cliffs
recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel County in Plat Book WMB, No. 1,
Folio 26, with the exception of a parcel three feet square at the extreme
southwest corner of lot Number 16 in Block A of the subdivision and conveyed
unto Lansdale G. Sasscer by deed recorded among the land records of Anne
Arundel County in Liber FSR 44, 237.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintenance, repair,
and general improvements to non-County-owned roads, streets, alleys, drainage
ditches, and culverts; maintenance and improvement of community property; and
payment of the administrative expenses to carry out these purposes, including
insurance, audit fees, attorney's fees, and the repayment of any loans.
      (3)   Fair Haven Cliffs, Inc., a civic or community association that
meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Fair Haven Cliffs Special Community Benefit District.
      (4)   In this subsection, "development" means breaking, grading, or
movement of ground under a State or County permit. Lots 1 to 19 of Block G,
lots 21 to 24 of Block G, and lots 1 to 18 of Block H, as shown on the plat of
Fair Haven Cliffs, are not subject to a special community benefit tax levy
until development is commenced on the lots, part of the lots, or on any
undeveloped rights-of- way adjacent to or subservient to the lots, including
Ridge Avenue, Park Place, and Valley Avenue.
   (y)    Felicity Cove Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Felicity Cove Special Community Benefit District
are those lands shown on Maryland Department of Planning Map 69, parcel 66,
updated to November 2003, and property tax account 7000-9004-1956.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of funding
improvements, repairs, and maintenance of community land and pier properties;
improvements, repairs, and maintenance of community roads; community benevolent
projects and recreation activities; and Felicity Cove Association, Inc.'s
operating and administrative expenses.
      (3)   The Felicity Cove Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for the expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Felicity Cove Special Community Benefit District.
   (z)   Franklin Manor Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Franklin Manor Special Community Benefit District
are all those lands shown on the original plat of Franklin Manor Beach recorded
among the land records of Anne Arundel County in Plat Book 15, Folio 4.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of the acquisition,
maintenance, and improvement of real property or any interest therein to
accomplish community projects, including but not limited to the construction of
community piers, storage sheds, and an association building; the acquisition
and maintenance of equipment necessary to maintain and improve community
property, including but not limited to beaches, parks, playground areas, boat
ramps, parking lots, community- owned roads, and community piers; the
acquisition and maintenance of recreational equipment; providing special police
protection for security and to prevent rowdyism, vandalism, and trespassing on
community-ownedproperty; and the administrative expenses necessary to
accomplish these purposes, including but not limited to liability insurance for
community property, audit and bonding expenses, utility expenses, postage,
attorneys' fees, and the repayment of loans obtained in order to accomplish any
of the purposes of the district.
      (3)   The Franklin Manor Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Franklin Manor Citizens' Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (aa)   Gibson Island Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Gibson Island Special Community Benefit District
are the subdivision known as Gibson Island as shown on the plats of Gibson
Island recorded among the plat records of the County in Plat Book No. 4, Folio
Nos. 45, 46, 47, 48, and 49; and Plat Book No. 10, Folio Nos. 10, 11, and 12.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of the construction,
maintenance, and repair of non-County-owned roads, streets, causeways, alleys,
sidewalks, street or road signs, street or road lights, drainage ditches, storm
drains, and culverts; shore erosion control, prevention, protection, and
repair; acquisition, improvement, maintenance, and construction of community
owned real and personal property; trash, recycling, and yard waste collection
and removal; community security; and the administrative expenses incidental to
carrying out these purposes, including repayment of any loan, interest thereon,
and any necessary insurance costs.
      (3)   The Gibson Island Corporation, a civic or community association
that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for the expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Gibson Island Special Community Benefit District.
   (bb)   Greenbriar II Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Greenbriar II Special Community Benefit District
are those lands shown on the plat entitled "Amended Re-subdivision of blocks A1
and C1, Greenbriar" as recorded in the plat records of Anne Arundel County in
Plat Book 159, Page 44.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintenance and
improvement of real property or any interest in real property necessary to
accomplish community-wide projects and common benefit of the properties in the
district and providing for the administrative expenses incidental to carrying
out these activities, including postage and mailing, auditing, insurance, and
legal costs.
      (3)   The Greenbriar II Homeowners Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for the expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Greenbriar II Special Community Benefit District.
   (cc)   Greenbriar Gardens Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Greenbriar Gardens Special Community Benefit
District are those lands shown on the plat entitled "Greenbriar Subdivision,"
Plat 2395, as recorded among the plat records of Anne Arundel County in Plat
Book 44, Folio 20.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintenance and
improvement of real property or any interest in real property necessary to
accomplish community-wide projects and providing for the administrative
expenses incidental to carrying out these activities, including postage and
mailing, auditing, insurance, and legal costs.
      (3)   The Greenbriar Gardens Citizen's Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for the expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Greenbriar Gardens Special Community Benefit District.
   (dd)   Herald Harbor Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Herald Harbor Special Community Benefit District
are the lands described in a deed dated July 1, 1924, recorded among the land
records of the County at Liber WNW No. 89, Folio No. 224, and in a deed dated
July 1, 1924, recorded at Liber WNW No. 89, Folio No. 230.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of construction,
maintenance, and repair of non-County-owned roads, streets, alleys, sidewalks,
street or road signs, street or road lights, drainage ditches, and culverts.
   (ee)   Heritage Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Heritage Special Community Benefit District are
those lands shown on Plat 1730, recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel
County in Plat Book 32, page 55, and those lands shown on Plat 1731, recorded
among the land records of Anne Arundel County in Plat Book 32, page 56.
      (2)   The purposes of the district are to maintain, improve, repair, and
replace community real and personal property, to operate the community's pool
facility, and to defray associated costs, including the acquisition and
repayment of any loans and interest on the loans, insurance costs, accounting
fees, legal expenses, and other administrative expenses.
      (3)   The Heritage Pool and Community Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the Heritage Special
Community Benefit District.
   (ff)   Hillsmere Estates Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Hillsmere Estates Special Community Benefit
District are the subdivision known as Hillsmere Estates as shown on the plats
of Hillsmere Estates recorded among the plat records of the County as "Section
1" in Plat Book No. 23, Folio No. 14; "Plat 1, Section 2" in Plat Book No. 23,
Folio No. 26; "Plat 2, Section 2" in Plat Book No. 23, Folio No. 47; "Plat 1,
Section 3" in Plat Book No. 25, Folio No. 7; "Plat 2, Section 3" in Plat Book
No. 25, Folio No. 8; and "Plat 1, Section 4" in Plat Book No. 31, Folio No. 23.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of construction,
maintenance, and repair of, and snow removal from, non-County-owned roads,
streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, street or road signs, street or road lights,
bulkheads, drainage ditches, and culverts; maintenance of community areas;
acquisition, development, improvement, and maintenance of community real and
personal property; establishment and operation of a community security program;
and covering the administrative expenses incidental to carrying out these
purposes, including postage and mailing, auditing, insurance, and legal costs.
   (gg)   Hollywood on the Severn Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Hollywood on the Severn Special Community Benefit
District are those lands shown on the plats of Hollywood on the Severn,
recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel County in Plat Book 24, Folio
48, Plat 1224; Plat Book 23, Folio 16, Plat 1094; and Plat Book 65, Page 11,
Plat 3436.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining,
acquiring, constructing, and improving community real and personal property,
including waterfront areas and pier; and providing for the administrative
expenses incidental to carrying out these purposes, including insurance costs
and the repayment of any loan and interest thereon.
      (3)   Hollywood-on-Severn Improvement Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the special community
benefit district assessments in furtherance of the purposes of the Hollywood on
the Severn Special Community Benefit District.
   (hh)   Homewood Community Association Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Homewood Community Association Special Community
Benefit District are those properties within Maryland State Real Property Tax
District 3-908.
      (2)   The district is established for the purposes of maintaining and
improving community property, including easements, road into the community
area, pier, boat ramp, riprap, drainage ditches and culverts, and the community
beach; and defraying the administrative costs associated with these purposes,
including postage and mailings, repayment of any loan and interest thereon,
auditing, insurance, County administrative charges, and legal costs.
      (3)   The Homewood Community Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the Homewood Community
Association Special Community Benefit District in furtherance of the purposes
of the district.
   (ii)   Idlewilde Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Idlewilde Special Community Benefit District are
those properties within Maryland State Real Property Tax District 7-465.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving community real and personal property; acquiring and maintaining
community personal property; providing community recreational activities; and
defraying the costs associated with these purposes, including repayment of any
loan, including interest thereon, administrative fees, and insurance costs.
      (3)   The Idlewilde Civic League, Inc., a civic or community association
that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the Idlewilde Special
Community Benefit District in furtherance of the purposes of the district.
   (jj)   Hunter’s Harbor Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Hunter’s Harbor Special Community Benefit
District are set forth on the plat of Hunter’s Harbor recorded among the land
records of the County in Plat Book No. 25, Page 19, Plat No. 1267.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of acquisition,
maintenance, and improvement of community beaches and recreation areas,
including piers, bulkheads, boat ramps, playgrounds, parking lots, and roads;
acquisition and maintenance of recreation equipment and facilities; acquisition
and maintenance of equipment necessary to maintain beaches and recreation areas
and improvements; establishing and operating a community security program; and
miscellaneous expenses such as liability insurance, repayment of loans and
interest used for financing major acquisitions and improvements, utility
expenses, and sanitary facilities.
      (3)   In this subsection, “development” means breaking, grading, or
movement of ground under a State or County permit. The following properties
will not be subject to a special community benefit tax levy until development
is commenced on the properties or any part of the properties: lot No. 7; lot
No. 17; lot No. 18; lot No. 20; lot No. 24; the southeast half of lot No. 45;
the northwest half of lot No. 45; lot No. 49; lot No. 50; lot No. 53; lot No.
60; a .031-acre portion of lot No. 68; a .405-acre portion of lot No. 68; lot
No. 79; lot No. 98; lot No. 118; and a 29-foot × 49.95-foot parcel of land
owned by Ellsworth Myer.
      (4)   The Hunter’s Harbor Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Hunter’s Harbor Improvement Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (kk)   Indian Hills Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Indian Hills Special Community Benefit District
are those lands shown on the plats of Winchester Estates as recorded in the
plat records of the County in Plat Book No. 33, Folios 57 and 58, and Plat Book
No. 42, Folio No. 42; those lands shown on the plats of Glen Eden as recorded
in the plat records of the County in Plat Book No. 187, Pages 29, 30, and 31,
Plats 9004, 9005 and 9006; and those lands shown on Department of Assessments
and Taxation Map 39, updated to September 30, 1999, as Parcel 75 and Parcel
150, Lot 2.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of the construction,
operation, maintenance, and repair of certain community-owned property and
improvements within the boundaries of the district, including resurfacing and
sealing of the existing tennis courts; installation of drainage pipe and
drainage systems; installation of a basketball court; renovation of the log
cabin by removing partitions, paneling walls, installing new windows, repairing
ceilings, repairing and carpeting floor, correcting water problem in the
basement, installing a new septic system, installing, replacing, and repairing
recreation equipment as necessary; and renovation and reconstruction of the
community pool and its related facilities, including all related equipment, and
the payment of the pool’s yearly operational and maintenance expenses.
      (3)   Special community benefit taxes collected for the district shall be
used to defray the costs of construction, including the repayment of any loans
and interest therefor, and the maintenance of facilities in accordance with a
budget of the Indian Hills Community Association, Inc.
   (ll)   Kensington Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Kensington Special Community Benefit District are
those lands shown on the plats of Benfield Manor, Plat Book 32, Folio 42, as
recorded in the Plat Records of Anne Arundel County, Maryland.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving community property; providing for insect and pest control; providing
necessary insurance coverages; and to defray the costs associated with
completion of this subsection.
      (3)   The Kensington Community Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the special community
benefit district assessments in furtherance of the purposes of the Kensington
Special Community Benefit District.
   (mm)   Landhaven Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Landhaven Special Community Benefit District are
those lands shown on the plats of Landhaven, Plat No. 1829, as recorded in the
plat records of Anne Arundel County at Plat Book 33, Folio 54.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of soil erosion control
on community- owned property; maintenance of community-owned property,
including grass cutting and snow removal; new playground equipment and sidewalk
construction on community-owned property; payment of front foot assessments on
community-owned property; and administrative costs associated with these
purposes, including insurance costs, office supplies, and administrative fees
to the County.
      (3)   The Landhaven Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Landhaven Community Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (nn)   Little Magothy River Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Little Magothy River Special Community Benefit
District are those lands shown in the consolidated property file of the State
Department Of Assessments and Taxation as:
Tax Account Number Street Address
Tax Account Number Street Address
3000-1300-2316     1305 Bay Head Road
3000-2069-5406     1306 Bay Head Road
3000-2603-8600     1310 Bay Head Road
3000-2069-5406     1312 Bay Head Road
3000-2074-2100     1316 Bay Head Road
3000-0168-2825     1320 Bay Head Road
3000-2934-4000     1326 Bay Head Road
3000-2830-9000     1327 Bay Head Road
3000-3252-1200     1348 Bay Head Road
3000-1013-7525     Harmony Lane
3000-2536-1425     1336 Harmony Lane
3000-2536-1400     1334 Harmony Lane
3000-3190-9700     1330 Harmony Lane
3000-3190-7800     1328 Harmony Lane
3000-0966-1400     1324 Harmony Lane
3000-0214-6203     1320 Harmony Lane
3000-0214-6201     1318 Harmony Lane
3000-1772-6800     1316 Harmony Lane
3000-1461-4678     1312 Harmony Lane
3000-9000-7648     1310 Harmony Lane
3000-9000-7647     1306 Harmony Lane
3000-2711-0350     1304 Harmony Lane
3000-0928-8640     1300 Harmony Lane
3000-0863-9463     1301 Harmony Lane
3000-2613-5200     1580 Bay Head Road
3000-2297-9600     1578 Bay Head Road
3000-2298-5200     1576 Bay Head Road
3000-9010-9207     1626 Bay Head Road
3000-9003-1248     1620 Bay Head Road
3000-9008-2607     1622 Bay Head Road
3920-9009-4448     Pintail Lane, 19 acres
3920-9009-4446     Snow Goose Lane, 3.74 acres
3165-1370-2660     985 Hillendale Drive
3165-1671-3406     987 Hillendale Drive
3165-2806-8608     989 Hillendale Drive
3165-2201-2900     991 Hillendale Drive
3165-0190-1800     993 Hillendale Drive
3165-0122-2750     995 Hillendale Drive
3165-2910-6800     997 Hillendale Drive
3165-2431-5250     999 Hillendale Drive
3165-2455-1615     1132 Long Point Terrance
3165-0716-0310     1130 Long Point Terrance
3165-0267-5355     1128 Long Point Terrance
3165-3319-3715     1126 Little Magothy View
3165-2953-3200     1122 Little Magothy View
3165-1366-2600     1120 Little Magothy View
3165-0872-2783     1118 Little Magothy View
3165-2180-8900     1116 Little Magothy View
3165-2180-9200     1114 Little Magothy View
3165-1576-8100     1112 Little Magothy View
3165-9001-6242     1110 Little Magothy View
3165-2160-7000     1108 Little Magothy View
3165-2136-1000     1106 Little Magothy View
3165-2745-8060     1104 Little Magothy View
3165-1218-0500     1102 Magothy Circle
3165-1436-2400     1100 Magothy Circle
3165-1436-2300     1098 Magothy Circle
3165-3327-4360     1096 Magothy Circle
3165-1058-1423     1094 Magothy Circle
3165-1489-7672     1092 Magothy Circle
3165-1534-5400     1090 Magothy Circle
3165-3393-6200     1088 Little Magothy View
3165-0370-7245     1084 Little Magothy View
3165-1691-4800     1080 Little Magothy View
3165-3172-8110     1078 Little Magothy View
3165-3172-8115     1076 Little Magothy View
3165-0114-2700     1074 Little Magothy View
3165-9021-0026     1072 Little Magothy View
3165-0876-6800     1070 Little Magothy View
3165-2726-3400     1066 Little Magothy View
3165-2596-3300     1064 Little Magothy View
3165-1883-2800     1233 Dietrich Way
3165-2617-0580     1231 Dietrich Way
3165-0807-1000     1229 Dietrich Way
3165-1974-7000     1227 Dietrich Way
3165-1206-3150     1225 Dietrich Way
3165-2825-2515     1223 Dietrich Way
3165-3253-3600     1221 Dietrich Way
3165-0994-3291     1062 Little Magothy View
3165-2547-9665     1060 Little Magothy View
3165-0672-2810     1058 Little Magothy View
3165-9001-6244     1290 Swan Drive
3165-0678-3400     1286 Swan Drive
3165-2986-5025     1284 Swan Drive
3165-2734-7225     1282 Swan Drive
3165-2481-0800     1280 Swan Drive
3165-0779-8000     1278 Swan Drive
3165-1272-0410     1276 Swan Drive
3165-1409-2110     1274 Swan Drive
3165-1524-3107     1272 Swan Drive
3165-2147-1225     1270 Swan Drive
3165-3394-6139     1268 Swan Drive
3165-2073-9800     1266 Swan Drive
3165-3143-0200     1262 Swan Drive
3165-0995-2657     1260 River Bay Road
3165-9010-2379     Swan Drive
3165-1783-6000     1256 River Bay Road
3165-1447-6400     1254 River Bay Road
3165-1873-9300     1252 River Bay Road
3165-1855-4200     1250 River Bay Road
3165-3412-2650     1248 River Bay Road
3165-0573-4808     1246 River Bay Road
3165-3242-3298     1242 River Bay Road
3165-0370-8200     1240 River Bay Road
 
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of providing for
maintenance of the work performed on the Little Magothy River entrance channel
under Wetlands License No. 01-1614 R, Anne Arundel County Department of Public
Works, State of Maryland Board of Public Works, Wetlands Administration, and
Department of the Army Permit CENAB-OP-R (AA DPW/Little Magothy River Dredging)
01-63542-1, or to maintain work performed in 2002 on the bulkhead protecting
the entrance channel to the Little Magothy River, which projects were completed
under Anne Arundel County Capital Project Number Q497800, Little Magothy River
dredging and paying the administrative expenses incidental to carrying out this
purpose.
      (3)   The Little Magothy River Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for the expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Little Magothy River Special Community Benefit District.
   (oo)   Loch Haven Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Loch Haven Special Community Benefit District are
those lands, lots, and parcels shown on the following plats recorded among the
Land Records of Anne Arundel County: Loch Haven Beach, recorded in Plat Book
19, Folio 19; Loch Haven Beach, Section 2, recorded in Plat Book 19, Folio 47;
Cape Loch Haven, recorded in Plat Book 22, Folio 15; Loch Haven Beach, Section
2, Revision, recorded in Plat Book 22, Folio 31; and Loch Haven Beach, Section
2, Revision, recorded in Plat Book 23, Folio 11.
      (2)   The purposes of the district are to maintain, construct, improve,
develop, acquire, replace, repair, and protect community-owned real property
and improvements, including dredging, erosion control, lighting, security
systems, security patrols, and utilities improvements; to provide for the
construction, dredging, and maintenance of the community pier, boat slips, boat
launch ramp, and other community-owned property; and to provide for the
administrative implementation and operating expenses incidental and necessary
to carrying out these purposes, such as insurance, legal fees, and taxes,
including the ability to borrow funds and pledge assets in order to accomplish
any of the purposes of the district and the repayment of any loan, including
the interest thereon.
      (3)   The Loch Haven Civic Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the special community
benefit district assessments in furtherance of the purposes of the Loch Haven
Special Community Benefit District.
   (pp)   Long Point on the Severn Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Long Point on the Severn Special Community
Benefit District are those properties shown on State Department of Assessments
and Taxation Map 38 and bounded on the west beginning with the land described
in deeds recorded among the land records of the County in Liber 3232, Folio 647
(Parcel 258) and Liber 1712, Folio 006 (Parcel 193) and extending eastward to
the termination of the Long Point peninsula on the Severn River as shown on
Plat Book 30, Folio 8. This includes those lands shown on the plats recorded
among the plat records of the County in Plat Book 6, Folio 42, and Plat Book
30, Folio 8.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of providing snow
removal from non- County-owned roads and streets and construction, maintenance,
and repair of non-County-owned roads, streets, alleys, drainage ditches,
culverts, and drainage facilities.
      (3)   The Long Point on the Severn Special Community Benefit District
shall be administered by the Long Point on the Severn Civic Association, Inc.,
a civic association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (qq)   Magothy Beach Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Magothy Beach Special Community Benefit District
are those lands shown on the plats of Magothy Beach in Plat Book 2, Folio 20
and Folio 46; Plat Book 4, Folio 11; and, Plat Book 14, Folio 41, as recorded
in the plat records of Anne Arundel County.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of improvement,
maintenance, and repair of real property, including recreational property and
privately owned streets and roads, intended for the common benefit of
properties in the district and providing for the administrative expenses
incidental to carrying out these activities.
      (3)   The Lower Magothy Community Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for the expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Magothy Beach Special Community Benefit District.
   (rr)   Magothy Forge Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Magothy Forge Special Community Benefit District
are all those lands shown on the plats of Magothy Forge recorded among the land
records of Anne Arundel County in Plat Book 24, at Page 1.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving the community beach area; paying the front foot assessment for
community-owned property; and paying the administrative expenses incidental to
carrying out these purposes, including liability insurance.
      (3)   The Magothy Forge Improvement Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the Magothy Forge Special
Community Benefit District in furtherance of the purposes of the district.
   (ss)   Manhattan Beach Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Manhattan Beach Special Community Benefit
District are those lands shown on the Department of Assessments and Taxation
Map 32 E as Parcels 415 and 416; that portion of Parcel 243 lying south of
Magothy Road; the plats of Manhattan Beach, Manhattan Manor, Manhattan Woods,
Oak Grove, Buckingham Estates, and Windrush Farm. Also included are those lands
shown on the Department of Assessments and Taxation Map 32 H as Parcels 31, 34,
38, and 45; and that portion of Parcel 148 lying north of Diving Creek Road and
Jones Station Road.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of improving and
maintaining any and all community property within the confines of the taxing
district, including but not limited to the beaches, clubhouse, ramps, wetlands,
and recreational areas; providing for operational expenses, insurance, and
other expenditures that would assist in improving and maintaining the community
property and funding any additional community capital projects as determined by
the community through the annual budget process.
      (3)   The Manhattan Beach Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Manhattan Beach Civic Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (tt)   Mason Beach Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Mason Beach Special Community Benefit District
are those properties located within Maryland State Real Property Tax District
7-516.
      (2)   The district is established for the purposes of improving and
maintaining any and all community real and personal property; and providing for
the administrative expenses necessary to accomplish these purposes, including
repayment of any loan, interest thereon, and any insurance costs.
      (3)   Mason’s Beach Citizens Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the criteria set forth in the Anne Arundel County Code,
§
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the special community
benefit district assessments in furtherance of the purposes of the Mason Beach
Special Community Benefit District.
   (uu)   Mayo Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Mayo Special Community Benefit District are all
those lands within the following metes and bounds: Beginning for the same at a
point on the shore of Larkington Cove where the division line between the
subdivisions of Loch Haven and Larkington intersects said shore; and running
from thence with said line, in a southerly direction to the line of the
VonAscheberg property; thence with the same, in a westerly and southerly
direction to where said line intersects Mayo State Road; thence crossing said
road and continuing with the line of the VonAscheberg property in a southerly
direction to the head of Bear Creek; thence with the waters of Bear Creek,
Whitemarsh Creek, Rhodes River, Chesapeake Bay, South River and Brewers Creek,
to the place of beginning, being within the first district of the County.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of mosquito control.
   (vv)   Mil-Bur Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Mil-Bur Special Community Benefit District are
set forth on the plats of Mil-Bur, Mil-Bur Addition, and the W.L. Cook
Subdivisions as recorded in the land records of Anne Arundel County in Plat
Book 32, Page 88-90; Plat Book 125, Page 20; and Plat Book 225, Page 50.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of acquiring,
maintaining, operating, and improving all community real and personal property
and facilities, and defraying the administrative costs necessary to accomplish
this purpose, including the repayment of any loan, interest thereon, and any
necessary insurance costs.
      (3)   The Mil-Bur Club, Inc., a civic or community association that meets
the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the special community
benefit district assessments in furtherance of the purposes of the Mil-Bur
Special Community Benefit District.
   (ww)   North Beach Park Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the North Beach Park Special Community Benefit
District are the subdivision known as North Beach Park as shown on the plats
recorded among the plat records of the County in Plat Book No. 2, Folio No. 13;
and Plat Book No. 2, Folio Nos. 36 and 37.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of mosquito control;
payment of the salary, expenses, and allowances for a special police officer;
and maintenance and improvement of community-owned property.
      (3)   The Holland Point Citizens Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the criteria set forth in the Anne Arundel County Code,
§
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the North Beach Park Special
Community Benefit District assessments in furtherance of the purposes of the
district.
   (xx)   Owings Beach Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Owings Beach Special Community Benefit District
are the subdivision known as Owings Beach as shown on the plat of Owings Beach
recorded among the plat records of the County in Plat Book No. 15, Folio No.
26.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of the construction,
maintenance, and repair of, and snow removal from, non-County-owned roads,
streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, street or road signs, street or road lights,
bulkheads, drainage ditches, and culverts and the maintenance of community
areas.
   (yy)   Owings Cliffs Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Owings Cliffs Special Community Benefit District
are those properties within Maryland State Real Property Tax District 8-597.
      (2)   The district is established for the purposes of maintaining,
acquiring, and improving real and personal property, including roads, that the
community owns or has the legal right to use; and defraying the administrative
costs associated with these purposes, including office expenses, insurance,
repayment of loans, and legal fees.
      (3)   The Owings Cliffs Citizens Association Ltd., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the Owings Cliffs Special
Community Benefit District in furtherance of the purposes of the district.
   (zz)   Oyster Harbor Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Oyster Harbor Special Community Benefit District
are the subdivision known as Oyster Harbor as shown on the plats of Oyster
Harbor recorded among the plat records of the County in Plat Book No. 22, Folio
Nos. 9, 16, and 22.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of the construction,
maintenance, and repair of, and snow removal from, non-County-owned roads,
streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, street or road signs, street or road lights,
bulkheads, drainage ditches, and culverts; the maintenance of community areas;
establishing and operating a community security program; and dredging.
      (3)   The Oyster Harbor Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Oyster Harbor Citizens Association, Inc., a community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (aaa)   Parke West Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the district are those lands shown on State
Department of Assessments and Taxation Map 15, Block 9 as Parcels 431 and 1048;
Map 15, Block 10 as Parcels 446, 447, and 448; and Map 15, Block 16 as Parcels
171, 351, and 1082.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of the acquisition and
maintenance of equipment and materials required to maintain and improve
community property, including but not limited to parks, playground areas,
parking lots, and community-owned roads; the acquisition and maintenance of
recreational equipment for use on or improvements to community property; the
provision of special security protection to prevent rowdyism, vandalism, and
trespassing on property within the community; and to pay the administrative
expenses necessary to accomplish these purposes, including but not limited to
liability insurance on community property, audit and bonding expenses, utility
expenses, postage, and printing.
      (3)   The Parke West Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Parke West Homeowners Association, Inc.
   (bbb)   Pine Grove Village Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Pine Grove Village Special Community Benefit
District are those lands known as Pine Grove (Homes) Village and Cottage Grove
Beach and identified on Maryland State
Department of Assessments and Taxation Map 11 (revised to May 1997) as Parcel
224 and Map 17 (revised to May 1997) as Parcels 488, 489, 491, and 497.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining
community-owned property and paying the associated administrative costs,
including payment of any insurance costs and utilities.
      (3)   The Pine Grove Village Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Pine Grove Village Community Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (ccc)   Pines on the Severn Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The properties to be included in the proposed Pines on the Severn
Special Community Benefit District are all properties within Maryland State
Real Property Tax Districts 3-656 and 3-426.
      (2)   The purposes of the district are to maintain, acquire, and improve
community property; provide community security; and pay the administrative
expenses incidental to carrying out these purposes, including office expenses,
insurance, repayment of loans, and legal fees.
      (3)   The Pines Community Improvement Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the Pines on the Severn
Special Community Benefit District in furtherance of the purposes of the
district.
   (ddd)   The Provinces Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of The Provinces Special Community Benefit District are
those lands shown on the plats of The Provinces, excluding Sections 8, 9, 10
and 11, which are identified on State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Map 14 as Parcels 732, 744, 652 and 753.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving community properties to include Lake Marion Park and other common
areas owned by The Provinces Civic Association; maintaining and improving
subdivision signs; funding community recreation activities; and funding the
administrative costs related to the special community benefit district,
including insurance.
      (3)   The Provinces Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by The Provinces Civic Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (eee)   Queens Park Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the district are those lands shown on the plats of
Queens Park, Sections 1 and 2, and Queens Park, Cambridge Crossing Addition, as
recorded in the plat records of Anne Arundel County, and further identified as
Parcels 79, 158, 537, 538, and 539 on State Department of Assessments and
Taxation Map Number 17.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving community property, including playground facilities and equipment;
providing community services; and defraying the administrative expenses
connected with these activities.
      (3)   The Queens Park Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Queens Park Community Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (fff)   Rockview Beach/Riviera Isles Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Rockview Beach/Riviera Isles Special Community
Benefit District are those lands shown on Maryland Department of Planning Map
17 (updated to September 2002), as Parcels 442, 443, 476, 477, 510, and 511.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving community real and personal property and paying the administrative
costs associated with the completion of the above, including insurance,
utilities, printing, postage, and the repayment of any loan and the interest
thereon.
      (3)   The Rockview Beach/Riviera Isles Improvement Association, Inc., a
civic or community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the expenditure of the
special assessments collected from the Rockview Beach/Riviera Isles Special
Community Benefit District.
   (ggg)   Scheides Cove Community Association Special Community Benefit
District.
      (1)   The limits of the Scheides Cove Community Association Special
Community Benefit District are those properties that are identified by the
following real property tax account numbers and addresses:
Property Address Property Tax Account Number
Property Address   Property Tax Account Number
909 Mallard Circle 3876-3184-1480
905 Mallard Circle 3876-1634-7550
901 Mallard Circle 3876-3184-1482
897 Mallard Circle 3876-3184-1483
893 Mallard Circle 3876-3184-1484
889 Mallard Circle 3876-3184-1485
885 Mallard Circle 3876-3184-1486
881 Mallard Circle 3876-3184-1451
662 Quail Run      3876-3184-1460
666 Quail Run      3876-9003-5637
670 Quail Run      3876-3184-1462
892 Pine Trail     3075-1887-8100
888 Pine Trail     3075-2283-1700
884 Pine Trail     3075-0669-7530
880 Pine Trail     3075-2662-6000
870 Pine Trail     3075-2695-8408
868 Pine Trail     3075-3435-7310
730 Pine Trail     3075-3240-4600
 
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of ensuring that the
channel and entrance from the Magothy River to Scheides Cove remains a
navigable waterway to accommodate vessels with a draft of up to 42 inches,
serving those properties within Scheides Cove as well as those bordering said
channel and entrance; preserving and enhancing the maritime and environmental
qualities of Scheides Cove; providing sand when and where allowable for all
Association members’ beaches that surround the entrance to Scheides Cove, using
dredged sand that accumulates in the entrance of the Cove; defraying the costs
associated with the completion of the above, including the repayment of any
loan, interest thereon, and any permitting or administrative costs associated
with carrying out these purposes; and seeking funding from any federal, State,
County, or other source that may be available to defray the costs associated
with carrying out the objectives and purposes of the Scheides Cove Community
Association Special Community Benefit District, as well as from property owners
within said district.
      (3)   The Scheides Cove Community Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the special community
benefit district assessments in furtherance of the purposes of the Scheides
Cove Community Association Special Community Benefit District.
   (hhh)   Selby on the Bay Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Selby on the Bay Special Community Benefit
District are those lands identified as Parcels 27 to 34, 36, 37, 386, 388 to
395, 404, 429, 454, 497, and 511 on State Department of Assessments and
Taxation Map 60 (revised to May 1997), also known as Selby on the Bay, Selby
Heights, and North Selby, and generally referred to as the Selby Community.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of acquiring,
maintaining, and improving real and personal property, including beaches,
parks, buildings, easements, recreation equipment, signs, lights, and other
equipment, or any interest therein, necessary to carry out community-wide
projects approved by the property owners in the district; providing
recreational activities directly related to the Selby Community; paying the
costs of special police officers and a security patrol; and paying the
administrative costs associated with the purposes described in this subsection,
including repayment of any loan and interest thereon, insurance costs, utility
costs, postage, audit costs, and legal costs.
      (3)   The Selby Community Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall administer the expenditures of the special community benefit
assessments collected from the district.
   (iii)   Severn Grove Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the proposed Severn Grove Special Community Benefit
District are those lands shown on the plats of Severn Grove, Plat Book 8, Page
41, as recorded in the plat records of Anne Arundel County, Maryland.
      (2)   The district is established for the purposes of maintaining and
improving all real and personal property owned by the Severn Grove Improvement
Association, Inc.; providing community recreational activities; and paying all
costs associated with these purposes, including office expenses, postage and
mailing, the repayment of any loans, insurance costs, legal and audit fees,
administrative fees to the County, and bonding expenses.
      (3)   The Severn Grove Improvement Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the Severn Grove Special
Community Benefit District in furtherance of the purposes of the district.
   (jjj)   Severna Forest Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Severna Forest Special Community Benefit District
are those lands shown on plats one through seven of Severna Forest and recorded
in the plat records of the County.
      (2)   The district is established for the purposes of spraying for gypsy
moths, maintaining, repairing, improving, and replacing community real and
personal property, facilities and accesses thereto, and defraying associated
costs, including the acquisition and repayment of any loans and interest on the
loans, insurance costs, accounting fees, legal expenses, and other
administrative expenses.
      (3)   The Severna Forest Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Severna Forest Community Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (k-3)   Severndale Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Severndale Special Community Benefit District are
all those lands shown on the plats of Severndale recorded among the plat
records of the County in Liber 30, Folio 100; Liber 31, Folio 21; and Liber 32,
Folio 32.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of the provision of
maintenance and repair for community areas and property, both real and personal
including beach property, pier, road and right-of-way to beach, lighting,
sanitary facilities, and community signs and payment of administrative expenses
associated with these purposes and the administration of the district,
including postage, mailing, auditing, and insurance.
   (lll)   Sherwood Forest Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Sherwood Forest Special Community Benefit
District are all those lots of ground shown on the official plats of Sherwood
Forest, being Plats 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, being recorded among the plat
records of the County in Plat Book 7, Folios 30 through 36; revised Plat 7,
being recorded among the plat records of the County in Plat Book 21, Folio 49;
Plat 9, being recorded among the plat records of the County in Liber 31, Folio
20; and Plat 10, being recorded among the plat records of the County in Plat
Book 34, Folio 49; any and all property conveyed to the Sherwood Forest Company
or the Sherwood Forest Club, Inc., by a deed from Redmond C. Stewart, dated
July 13, 1972, and recorded among the land records of the County in Liber 2506,
Folio 207 and the confirmatory and quitclaim deed from Redmond C. Stewart to
the Sherwood Forest Company dated March 25, 1980, and recorded among the land
records of the County in Liber 3570, Folio 635, a portion of which is known as
the Clumber Subdivision as shown on a plat entitled “Clumber”, recorded among
the plat records of the County in Plat Book 40, Folio 35; all of that property
of the Sherwood Forest Water Company which property was conveyed to the
Sherwood Forest Water Company by a deed recorded among the land records of the
County in Liber 2585, Folio 371; and in Liber 3045, Folio 752; and all of those
properties conveyed to the Sherwood Forest Club as set forth in a deed from
Redmond C. Stewart recorded among the land records of the County in Liber 1331,
Folio 550, and a deed and agreement from Redmond C. Stewart recorded among the
land records of the County in Liber 1331, Folio 557, and the agreement with
Redmond C. Stewart recorded among the land records of the County in Liber 1567,
Folio 204.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of providing total
administration, personnel, operation, maintenance, and repair or replacement of
all community facilities and property, including recreational areas and all
community buildings, roads, providing security, erosion control, snow removal,
and solid waste collection; purchasing, leasing, developing, or constructing
real property; purchasing or leasing, operating, and maintaining vehicles,
tools, and other equipment used in carrying out the purposes of the district;
and payment of all legal, administrative, and organizational expenses of the
district.
      (3)   The Sherwood Forest Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Sherwood Forest Club, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (mmm)   Shoreham Beach Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Shoreham Beach Special Community Benefit District
are the subdivision known as Shoreham Beach as shown on the plat records of the
County in Plat Book No. 10, Folio No. 20; Plat Book No. 10, Folio No. 37; and
Plat Book No. 11, Folio No. 11.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of providing for the
acquisition, construction, maintenance, improvement, and repair of community
property or any area in which the community has any interest in real property,
and community-wide projects, including, but not limited to, streets, pathways,
easements, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, signs, drainage ditches, boat ramps,
piers, groins, bulkheads, breakwaters, and lighting; community security; shore
erosion control; and any administrative costs incidental to the foregoing
purposes, including the repayment of any loan.
      (3)   The Shoreham Beach Citizens Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the Shoreham Beach Special
Community Benefit District in furtherance of the purposes of the district.
   (nnn)    Snug Harbor Special Community District.
      (1)   The limits of the Snug Harbor Special Community Benefit District
are those lands described in a deed dated August 31, 1953, and recorded among
the land records of the County in Liber JHH 829, Folio No. 522, as shown on a
Plat of Snug Harbor, recorded in Liber JHH 829, Folio No. 527 of the land
records, and recorded also among the plat records of the County in Book 10,
page 8.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of acquisition,
construction, improvement, maintenance, repair, and protection of community
property and common areas, including non-County-owned roads, paths, grasslands,
the community bridge, the community pier, signs, lights, ditches, and culverts;
dredging to maintain access to and use of the community marina, including
dredging from the Chesapeake Bay into the community marina and dredging in the
community marina; and covering the costs associated with these purposes,
including administrative costs, legal fees, and insurance.
   (ooo)   South River Heights Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the South River Heights Special Community Benefit
District are those lands shown on the plats of South River Heights and recorded
in Book 1, Folio 31 and Book 2, Folio 47 of the plat records of Anne Arundel
County.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of the construction,
operation, maintenance, and repair of certain community-owned property and
improvements within the boundaries of the district and for the administrative
expenses associated with these purposes.
      (3)   The South River Heights Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the South River Heights Residents Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (ppp)   South River Manor Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the South River Manor Special Community Benefit
District are those lands identified on Plat 1241, Plat Book 25, Folio 21, as
Lots 21 through 57, inclusive, Block G, plus the area called Community Area, as
recorded in the plat records of Anne Arundel County.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintenance of and
improvement to community property; provision of community security; resurfacing
private, community-owned roads;
purchase of property for community recreation areas; and defraying the
administrative costs associated with the above purposes, including repayment of
any loan or interest thereon and any necessary insurance costs.
      (3)   The South River Manor Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the South River Manor Civic Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (qqq)    South River Park Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the South River Park Special Community Benefit
District are those lands shown on Plats 0034, 0189, and B0154 and recorded in
the plat records of Anne Arundel County at Book 2, Page 31; Book 5, Page 4; and
Book 15, Page 1, respectively.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining the
clubhouse, piers, and all other community property and assets and paying the
associated administrative costs, including insurance and utilities.
      (3)   The South River Park Special Community Benefit district shall be
administered by the South River Park Citizens Association, Inc., a civil or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (rrr)   Southgate Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Southgate Special Community Benefit District are
those lands shown on the plats of the Highlands in Plat Book 32, Folios 96 and
97; Plat Book 33, Folios 19 and 20; Plat Book
34, Folio 45; Plat Book 35, Folios 30 and 31; Plat Book 38, Folio 13; Plat Book
43, Folios 1, 2, and 28; and Plat Book 60, Folio 25, as recorded in the plat
records of Anne Arundel County.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of spraying for gypsy
moths.
      (3)   The Southgate Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Southgate Trust for Improvement of Neighborhood Government,
Sting, Inc., a civic or community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (sss)   Steedman Point Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Steedman Point Special Community Benefit District
are those properties identified on State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Map 24 (updated to May, 1998) as Parcels 413, 295, 682, 545, 414, 250 and 484.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of constructing,
maintaining, and maintaining access to Steedman Point Road, which runs from the
County road known as Lake Shore Drive into and through the community to its
terminus at the driveway to Lot 7C.
      (3)   The Steedman Point Improvement Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Steedman Point Special Community Benefit District.
   (ttt)   Stone Haven Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Stone Haven Special Community Benefit District
are those lands shown on the plats of Stone Haven, Plat 1, dated August 17,
1949, and Plat 2, dated April 30, 1950, as recorded in the plat records of Anne
Arundel County, Maryland at Book 21, Folio 50 and Book 22, Folio 14,
respectively.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving the community park and ballfield and the community beach area and
paying the associated administrative costs, including liability insurance and
front foot assessments.
      (3)   The Stone Haven Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Stone Haven Improvement Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (uuu)   Sylvan Shores Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Sylvan Shores Special Community Benefit District
are those lands within the revised Sylvan Shores Sanitary Subdistrict as
described in Bill Nos. 75-11 and 9-13.
      (2)   The purposes of the district are acquiring, maintaining, improving,
and operating real property, facilities, and personal property owned or to be
owned by Sylvan Shores Services Company, Inc. for the common use and enjoyment
of the owners and residents of the community; providing recreational events and
gatherings directly related to the community; providing security for the
protection of real property, facilities, and personal property owned or to be
owned by Sylvan Shores Services Company, Inc. for the common use and enjoyment
of the owners and residents of the community; and providing for the
administrative expenses necessary to accomplish these purposes.
      (3)   Sylvan Shores Services Company, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the criteria set forth in the Anne Arundel County Code,
§
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the special community
benefit district assessments in furtherance of the purposes of the Sylvan
Shores Special Community Benefit District.
   (vvv)   Sylvan View on the Magothy Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Sylvan View on the Magothy Special Community
Benefit District are all those lands shown on the plats of Sylvan View on the
Magothy: Plat Book 23; Folio No. 22; Plat Book 30,
Folio No. 99; Plat Book 31, Folio No. 38; Plat Book 31, Folio No. 77; and Plat
Book 31, Folio No. 94, the plats recorded in the plat records of the County.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintenance and
improvement of real property or any interest in real property necessary to
accomplish community-wide projects; dredging to maintain access to the
community pier area; and providing for the administrative expenses incidental
to carrying out these activities, including postage and mailing, auditing,
insurance, legal costs, and the repayment of any loan.
      (3)   The Sylvan View Community Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for the expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Sylvan View Special Community Benefit District.
   (www)   Tanglewood Lane Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Tanglewood Lane Special Community Benefit
District are those lands shown on State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Map 58 described as follows: Parcel 0013, Lot 1, 3698 Tanglewood Lane; Parcel
0055, 3716 Queen Anne Bridge Road; Parcel 0013, Lot 2, 3700 Tanglewood Lane;
Parcel 0103, Lot 3, 3704 Tanglewood Lane; Parcel 0171, 3712 Tanglewood Lane;
Parcel 0013, Lot 4, 3714 Tanglewood Lane; Parcel 0013, Lot 5, 3732 Tanglewood
Lane; Parcel 0013, Lot 6, 3715 Tanglewood Lane; Parcel 0013, Lot 7, 3725
Tanglewood Lane; Parcel 0013, Lot 8, 3731 Tanglewood Lane; Parcel 0137, 3710
Tanglewood Lane; Parcel 0066, Lot 2, 3629 Patuxent River Road; Parcel 0120,
3760, Tanglewood Lane; Parcel 0139, Lot 2, Davidsonville Road (3752 Tanglewood
Lane); and Parcel 0180, Davidsonville Road (3750 Tanglewood Lane).
      (2)   The following land will not be subject to assessment until the
first day of the fiscal year following the establishment of ingress and egress
on Tanglewood Lane: Parcel 0055, 3716 Queen Anne Bridge Road and Parcel 0066,
Lot 2, 3629 Patuxent River Road.
      (3)   The district is established for the purpose of paving the
community-owned streets; maintaining and improving the community-owned streets,
including but not limited to pavement repairs and snow removal; and defraying
the administrative costs associated with the purposes above, including
repayment of any loan and interest thereon, and any necessary insurance and
operating costs.
      (4)   The Tanglewood Lane Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by the Tanglewood Lane Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-1011(d).
   (xxx)   Timbers Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Timbers Special Community Benefit District are
the subdivision known as the Timbers (formerly Rubert Manor Section B) as shown
on Plat No. 2285, recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel County,
Maryland, in Plat Book No. 42, Page 10, and the property with tax
identification number 300021281400.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of acquiring,
maintaining, operating, improving, developing, protecting, and disposing of
community-owned property; providing recreation facilities; and providing for
the administrative and operating expenses incidental to carrying out these
purposes.
      (3)   The Timbers Civic Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the special community
benefit district assessments in furtherance of the purposes of the Timbers
Special Community Benefit District.
   (yyy)   Upper Magothy Beach Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Upper Magothy Beach Special Community Benefit
District are all those lands shown on the plat entitled Magothy Beach, which
plat is recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel County in Plat Book No.
9, Folio 43; formerly in Plat Book No. 4, Folio 15; formerly in Plat Cabinet
No. 1, Rod A-4, Plat 15, as recorded in the plat records of Anne Arundel
County, Maryland.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving community property, including community-owned roads; providing
community security; and providing for the administrative expenses incidental to
carrying out these purposes, including insurance costs and the repayment of any
loan and interest thereon.
      (3)   The Magothy Beach Improvement Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for the expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Upper Magothy Beach Special Community Benefit District.
   (zzz)   Venice Beach Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Venice Beach Special Community Benefit District
are set forth in a deed recorded among the land records of the County in Liber
SH No. 44, Folio No. 477.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of supporting an
erosion program; construction, maintenance, improvement of, and snow removal
from non-County-owned roads, streets, beach, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, street
or road signs and lights, traffic control devices, bulkheads, drainage ditches,
and culverts; acquiring, improving, and maintaining community property, both
real and personal, or any interest in real property necessary to accomplish
community-wide projects; providing special police protection; and the funding
of administrative expenses to carry-out these purposes, including, but not
limited to, mailing expenses, secretarial costs, insurance costs, fidelity bond
costs, audit fees, attorney’s fees, court costs, the repayment of any loan, and
other payment of other expenses necessary for the administration and
implementation of these purposes.
   (aaaa)   Venice on the Bay Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Venice on the Bay Special Community Benefit
District are those lands shown on State Department of Assessments and Taxation
Map 12, Block 20 (revised to May 1998) as Parcels 7 and 8.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving the community-owned beach, boat ramp, pond-side park, meeting hall,
and other community properties and paying the administrative costs associated
with the above purposes, including insurance costs, taxes, and the repayment of
any loan.
      (3)   The Venice Civic Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall administer the expenditures of the special community benefit
assessments collected from the district.
   (bbbb)   Warthen Knolls Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Warthen Knolls Special Community Benefit District
are: Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4 of Warthen Knolls, as shown on the plat recorded among
the land records of Anne Arundel County in Plat Book 91, Folio 35; Lots 5, 9,
and 10 of Warthen Knolls addition, as shown on the plat recorded among
the land records of Anne Arundel County in Plat Book 98, Folio 32; and Lots 5R,
6R, 7R, and 8R of Warthen Knolls, as shown on the plat recorded among the land
records of Anne Arundel County in Book 4642, Folio 473.
      (2)   The purposes of the district are to maintain and improve that
portion of Warthen Drive that is a private road and right-of-way and that
extends from the County-maintained cul-de-sac on Warthen Drive and defray the
costs associated with the above, including repayment of any loans, interest
thereon, and any necessary insurance costs.
      (3)   The Warthen Knolls Property Owners Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for administering the Warthen Knolls Special
Community Benefit District.
   (cccc)   Wetheridge Estates Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Wetheridge Estates Special Community Benefit
District are those lands identified as Lots 1 through 12 of Parcel 222 as shown
on State Department of Assessments and Taxation Map 56, Block 4.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining
community property, including repair, maintenance, and replacement of existing
bulkheads, piers, and pilings and covering the expenses
associated with the completion of the above purposes, including repayment of
any loan and any necessary insurance costs.
      (3)   The Wetheridge Estates Special Community Benefit District shall be
administered by Wetheridge Estates, Inc., a civil or community association that
meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (dddd)   Wilelinor Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Wilelinor Special Community Benefit District are
those lands shown on the plat of Wilelinor Estates, Plat Book 28, Page 27, as
recorded in the plat records of Anne Arundel County.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving real property intended for the common benefit of the properties in
the district; dredging Church Creek in and adjacent to the community marina;
and providing for the administrative expenses incidental to carrying out these
activities, including insurance, utilities, correspondence costs, audit and
legal costs, and the repayment of any loan.
      (3)   The Wilelinor Community Association, Inc., a civic or community
association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d), shall be responsible for the expenditure of the special assessments
collected from the Wilelinor Special Community Benefit District.
   (eeee)   Woodland Beach Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Woodland Beach Special Community Benefit District
are the subdivision known as Woodland Beach as shown on the plat of Woodland
Beach recorded among the plat records of the County in Plat Book No. 8, Folio
Nos. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 15.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of construction,
maintenance, and repair of, and snow removal from, non-County-owned roads,
streets, alleys, and sidewalks; construction, erection, and maintenance of non-
County-owned street or road lights, street or road signs, drainage ditches,
culverts, drainage facilities, and bulkheads as necessary for erosion control;
construction, maintenance, and operation of community areas and buildings; and
providing salaries, expenses, and allowances for special police officers.
   (ffff)   Woodland Beach (Pasadena) Special Community Benefit District.
      (1)   The limits of the Woodland Beach (Pasadena) Special Community
Benefit District are those lands identified on State Department of Assessments
and Taxation Map 17 as: Parcels 24, 25, 171, 196, 236, 237, 238, 244, 246, 247,
248, 249, 250, 251, 258, 333, 337, 366, 383, 481 and 505.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintaining and
improving community property, including the community-owned roads, bulkheads
and pier; providing security lighting and fencing for the community areas; and
covering the expenses associated with the completion of the above purposes,
including repayment of any loan and any necessary insurance costs.
      (3)   The Woodland Beach (Pasadena) Special Community Benefit District
shall be administered by the Woodland Beach Improvement Association, Inc., a
civic or community association that meets the requirements of § 4-7-101(d).
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 2-104) (Bill No. 14-87; Bill No. 15-87; Bill No. 43-87;
Bill No. 96-87; Bill No. 7-88; Bill No. 8-88; Bill No. 51-88; Bill No. 52-88;
Bill No. 101-88; Bill No. 19-89; Bill No. 55-89; Bill No. 19-90; Bill No. 59-
90; Bill No. 11-91; Bill No. 24-91; Bill No. 44-91; Bill No. 18-92; Bill No.
29-92; Bill No. 61-92; Bill No. 7-93; Bill No. 8-93; Bill No. 32-93; Bill No.
33-93; Bill No. 53-93; Bill No. 23-94; Bill No. 25-94; Bill No. 31-94; Bill No.
18-95; Bill No. 22-95; Bill No. 23-95; Bill No. 102-96; Bill No. 7-97; Bill No.
17-97; Bill No. 18-97; Bill No. 73-97; Bill No. 76-97; Bill No. 106-97; Bill
No. 68-98; Bill No. 26-99; Bill No. 32-99; Bill No. 66-99; Bill No. 14-00; Bill
No. 15-00; Bill No. 16-00; Bill No. 82-00; Bill No. 6-01; Bill No. 7-01; Bill
No. 16-01; Bill No. 17-01; Bill No. 24-01; Bill No. 27-01; Bill No. 63-01; Bill
No. 100-01; Bill No. 101-01; Bill No. 102-01; Bill No. 13-02; Bill No. 14-02;
Bill No. 24-02; Bill No. 79-02; Bill No. 82-02; Bill No. 13-03; Bill No. 50-03;
Bill No. 5-04; Bill No. 18-04; Bill No. 22-04; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 36-04;
Bill No. 27-05; Bill No. 40-05; Bill No. 86-05; Bill No. 2-06; Bill No. 6-07;
Bill No. 14-07; Bill No. 67-07; Bill No. 3-08; Bill No. 14-09; Bill No. 15-09;
Bill No. 16-09; Bill No. 69-09; Bill No. 56-10; Bill No. 1-11; Bill No. 3-11;
Bill No. 22-11; Bill No. 24-13; Bill No. 4-14; Bill No. 63-14; Bill No. 87-14;
Bill No. 10-15; Bill No. 59-15; Bill No. 60-15; Bill No. 16-17; Bill No. 98-17;
Bill No. 100-17; Bill No. 10-19; Bill No. 82-19; Bill No. 8-20; Bill No. 91-20;
Bill No. 24-21; Bill No. 118-21; Bill No. 22-22; Bill No. 73-24)
§ 4-7-205. Rate of tax.
   (a)   Uniform rate of assessment. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, the special community benefit tax shall be based on a uniform rate of
assessment for each platted lot in the district as are other County real
property taxes.
   (b)   Uniform assessment for each platted lot. The special community benefit
tax shall be a uniform assessment for each platted lot in the district in
Capetowne Special Community Benefit District; Heritage Special Community
District; Hillsmere Estates Special Community Benefit District; Scheides Cove
Community Association Special Community Benefit District; Severndale Special
Community Benefit District; Timbers Special Community Benefit District; and
Woodland Beach Special Community Benefit District.
   (c)   Uniform assessment for each improved lot. The special community
benefit tax shall be a uniform assessment per improved lot in the Mil-Bur
Special Community Benefit District and the Sherwood Forest Special Community
Benefit District.
   (d)   Uniform assessment for each real property tax account. The special
community benefit tax shall be a uniform assessment for each real property tax
account in Amberley Special Community Benefit District; Avalon Shores Special
Community Benefit District; Bay Ridge Special Community Benefit District;
Beverly Beach Special Community Benefit District; Birchwood Special Community
Benefit District; Broadwater Creek Special Community Benefit District; Cape
Anne Special Community Benefit District; Cape St. Claire Special Community
Benefit District; Chartwell Special Community Benefit District; Deale Beach
Special Community Benefit District; Eden Wood Special Community Benefit
District; Greenbriar II Special Community Benefit District; Greenbriar Gardens
Special Community Benefit District; Hollywood on the Severn Special Community
Benefit District; Homewood Community Association Special Community Benefit
District; Hunter’s Harbor Special Community Benefit District; Kensington
Special Community Benefit District; Landhaven Special Community Benefit
District; Little Magothy River Special Community Benefit District; Loch Haven
Special Community Benefit District; Long Point on the Severn Special Community
Benefit District; Magothy Beach Special Community Benefit District; Magothy
Forge Special Community Benefit District; Manhattan Beach Special Community
Benefit District; Mason Beach Special Community Benefit District; Parke West
Special Community Benefit District; Pine Grove Village Special Community
Benefit District; The Provinces Special Community Benefit District; Queens Park
Special Community Benefit District; Rockview Beach/Riviera Isles Special
Community Benefit District; Selby on the Bay Special Community Benefit
District; Severn Grove Special Community Benefit District; Severna Forest
Special Community Benefit District; Shoreham Beach Special Community Benefit
District; Snug Harbor Special Community Benefit District; South River Heights
Special Community Benefit District; South River Manor Special Community Benefit
District; South River Park Special Community Benefit District; Southgate
Special Community Benefit District; Stone Haven Special Community Benefit
District; Sylvan Shores Special Community Benefit District; Sylvan View on the
Magothy Special Community Benefit District; Tanglewood Lane Special Community
Benefit District; Upper Magothy Beach Special Community Benefit District;
Warthen Knolls Special Community Benefit District; Wetheridge Estates Special
Community Benefit District; and Woodland Beach (Pasadena) Special Community
Benefit District.
   (e)   Fixed rate of assessment for each real property tax account for
improved property. The special community benefit tax shall be a fixed rate of
assessment for each real property tax account for an improved property in the
Indian Hills Special Community Benefits District.
   (f)   Uniform assessment for each real property tax account. The special
community benefit tax shall be a uniform assessment for each real property tax
account for an improved property in Bittersweet Special Community Benefit
District; Carrollton Manor Special Community Benefit District; Fair Haven
Cliffs Special Community Benefit District; Felicity Cove Special Community
Benefit District; Highview on the Bay Special Community Benefit District;
Idlewilde Special Community Benefit District; Owings Cliffs Special Community
Benefit District; Pines on the Severn Special Community Benefit District;
Steedman Point Special Community Benefit District; Venice on the Bay Special
Community Benefit District; and Wilelinor Special Community Benefit District.
   (g)   Exemptions. The special community benefit tax shall not apply to
property that is exempt from taxation under Title 7, Subtitle 2 of the Tax-
Property Article of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 2-106) (Bill No. 96-87; Bill No. 7-88; Bill No. 8-88;
Bill No. 52-88; Bill No. 101-88; Bill No. 19-89; Bill No. 19-90; Bill No. 11-
91; Bill No. 12-91; Bill No. 44-91; Bill No. 61-92; Bill No. 7-93; Bill No. 8-
93; Bill No. 32-93; Bill No. 33-93; Bill No. 53-93; Bill No. 31-94; Bill No.
18-95; Bill No. 22-95; Bill No. 23-95; Bill No. 7-97; Bill No. 17-97; Bill No.
18-97; Bill No. 76-97; Bill No. 106-97; Bill No. 68-98; Bill No. 26-99; Bill
No. 66-99; Bill No. 14-00; Bill No. 16-00; Bill No. 82-00; Bill No. 6-01; Bill
No. 7-01; Bill No. 16-01; Bill No. 24-01; Bill No. 27-01; Bill No. 100-01; Bill
No. 101-01; Bill No. 12-02; Bill No. 13-02; Bill No. 24-02; Bill No. 13-03;
Bill No. 5-04; Bill No. 18-04; Bill No. 22-04; Bill No. 27-05; Bill No. 40-05;
Bill No. 2-06; Bill No. 83-06; Bill No. 6-07; Bill No. 14-07; Bill No. 67-07;
Bill No. 15-09; Bill No. 16-09; Bill No. 69-09; Bill No. 3-11; Bill No. 22-11;
Bill No. 87-14; Bill No. 59-15; Bill No. 60-15; Bill No. 16-17; Bill No. 98-17;
Bill No. 10-19; Bill No. 8-20; Bill No. 24-21; Bill No. 22-22; Bill No. 49-22)
   Editor’s note – The provisions in § 4-7-205(g) made by Bill No. 49-22 apply
retroactively to July 1, 2022.
SUBTITLE 3. SHORE EROSION CONTROL DISTRICTS
   State Code reference – Local Government Article, §§ 21-201 et seq., §§ 21-
301 et seq.; Natural Resources Article, §§ 8-1001 - 8-1007.
§ 4-7-301. Procedure for establishment of district.
   (a)   State law. A shore erosion control district may be established in
accordance with the provisions of Local Government Article, § 21-303, of the
State Code.
   (b)   Petition. A petition for the establishment of a shore erosion control
district shall be submitted with a subdivision plat of the proposed district as
recorded among the land records of the County and certified by the Office of
Planning and Zoning as an accurate configuration of the area to be included
within the proposed district; an identification of the tax accounts
representing the parcels or lots of real property in the proposed district that
are to be assessed; and a description of the erosion control project to be
undertaken.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 3-103) (Bill No. 17-88)
§ 4-7-302. Amendment, modification, dissolution of district.
   (a)   Generally. The County Council, by ordinance, may amend, modify, or
dissolve an existing shore erosion control district.
   (b)   Requirements. An existing district may not be amended, modified, or
dissolved unless a petition is signed by the owners of at least 75% of the
properties in the existing district whose property will be affected by the
amendment, modification, or dissolution of the district.
   (c)   Adding area to the district. Where a proposed amendment will have the
effect of adding a new area to an existing district, the petition shall be
signed by the owners of at least 75% of the properties in the new area as well
as by the owners of at least 75% of the properties in the existing district.
   (d)   Contracts and outstanding obligations. The County Council may not make
an amendment or modification of an existing district or dissolve an existing
district if the effect of the amendment, modification, or dissolution is to
impair an outstanding obligation of the district or a contract to which the
district is a party or a beneficiary.
   (e)   Dissolution. An ordinance dissolving an existing shore erosion control
district shall provide for an equitable division of assets belonging to the
district among the persons who own property in the district on the effective
date of the ordinance dissolving the district. Unencumbered and unexpended
funds remaining in the district account on the effective date of the ordinance
dissolving the district shall be distributed to the current property owners of
the district proportionately on the same basis as the shore erosion control tax
was most recently collected.
(Bill No. 3-06)
§ 4-7-303. Districts established.
   (a)   Generally. There are established within the County the following
special tax districts for shore erosion control for the purpose of the
construction, maintenance, and repair of facilities for shore erosion control
under the provisions of Local Government Article, §§ 21-301 et. seq., of the
State Code.
   (b)   Annapolis Cove Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the
Annapolis Cove Shore Erosion Control District are those lands shown on the
plats of Annapolis Cove: Plat Book 75, Folio 36 (formerly Ogleton); Plat Book
82, Folios 30 and 31, Plat Book 91, Folio 49, and Plat Book 97, Folios 32 and
33, as recorded in the plat records of the County.
   (c)   Annapolis Landing Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the
Annapolis Landing Shore Erosion Control District are those lands shown on the
plats of Tudor Hall, now known as Annapolis Landing, and recorded in Plat Book
67, pages 15 through 31, in the plat records of the County.
   (d)   Bay Road Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the Bay Road
Shore Erosion Control District are of approximately 1.3 acres, more or less, as
conveyed by a deed on January 11, 1966, recorded in Liber L.N.P. 1939, Folio
No. 580, as shown on a Plat of Riviera Beach, Section Z, as formerly filed in
Plat Book W.N.W. No. 2, Folio No. 16, now recorded in Plat Book No. 2, Folio
No. 22, the property being in the Third Assessment District.
   (e)   Camp Wabanna Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the Camp
Wabanna Shore Erosion Control District are those lands shown on Maryland
Department of Planning Map 65 as Parcel 87, Property Tax Account Number 1000-
0139-5215.
   (f)   Cape Anne Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the Cape Anne
Shore Erosion Control District are the subdivision known as Cape Anne as shown
on the plat recorded among the plat records of the County on October 31, 1928,
in Liber F.S.R., 2, Folio No. 12, such subdivision being part of a tract known
as "Franklin Point" situate on Chesapeake Bay and Broadwater Creek, as recorded
in Plat Book No. 6, Folio No. 35.
   (g)   Elizabeth's Landing Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the
Elizabeth's Landing Shore Erosion Control District are all those lands shown on
the plats of Elizabeth's Landing in Plat Book 73, Folio Nos. 27, 28, 29, 30 and
49; Plat Book 79, Folio Nos. 46, 47, 48, 49 and 50; and Plat Book 82, Folio
Nos. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45 and 46, as recorded in
the plat records of the County.
   (h)   Hillsmere Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the Hillsmere
Shore Erosion Control District are lot No. 71, Block A, Section 1, Hillsmere
Estates, as recorded among the plat records of the County in Plat Book No. 23,
Folio No. 14, being the same property conveyed to Otto Reechel and Iva L.
Reechel, his wife, from Hillsmere Estates, Inc., by deed dated March 11, 1955,
and recorded among the land records of the County in Liber J.H.H. 913, Folio
No. 203.
   (i)   Holly Point Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the Holly
Point Shore Erosion Control District are lot Nos. 53 and 54 in Holly Point in
the Third Assessment District as conveyed by a deed recorded in Liber No. 1969,
Folio No. 191, and as shown on a plat recorded in Liber F.S.R. 15, Folio No.
449.
   (j)   Indian Landing Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the
Indian Landing Shore Erosion Control District are property owned by the Indian
Landing Boat Club, Inc., in the Second Assessment District, being all the land
contained in the following deeds: a deed dated December 24, 1906, recorded in
Liber G.W. 52, Folio No. 481; a deed dated August 9, 1907, recorded in Liber
G.W. 53, Folio No. 437; and a deed dated October 4, 1937, recorded in Liber
F.A.M. 172, Folio No. 170.
   (k)   Pine Grove Village Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the
Pine Grove Village Shore Erosion Control District are those lands known as Pine
Grove (Homes) Village and Cottage Grove Beach, and shown on State Tax Map 11,
Block 22, Parcel 224 and State Tax Map 17, Block 4, Parcels 488, 489, 491 and
497.
   (l)   Providence Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the
Providence Shore Erosion Control District are approximately 1.63 acres owned by
the Providence Club, Inc., as shown as Parcel D on Plat No. 2 of Providence as
recorded in Plat Book No. 32, Folio No. 28, the property being in the Third
Assessment District.
   (m)   Robinson Cove Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the
Robinson Cove Shore Erosion Control District are lot No. 26, Block A, Pat Lane,
Longview on the Magothy, Robinson Cove, as contained in Plat Book No. 24, Folio
No. 33, the property being in the Third Assessment District.
   (n)   Snug Harbor Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the Snug
Harbor Shore Erosion Control District are those lands described in a deed dated
August 31, 1953, and recorded among the land records of the County in Liber
J.H.H. 829, Folio No. 522, as shown in a plat of Snug Harbor, recorded in Liber
J.H.H. 829, Folio No. 527 of the land records, and recorded also among the plat
records of the County in Book No. 10, page 8.
   (o)   Tydings-on-the-Bay Shore Erosion Control District.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (o)(2), the limits of the Tydings-
on-the-Bay Shore Erosion Control District are as established by the County
Commissioners on or about November 29, 1937, which district was described in
the minutes of such meeting as lots numbered 1 to 37, inclusive, as shown on
the plat of the subdivision of the Tydings Farm recorded among the plat records
of the County, such lots being known as Zone No. 1; and all that portion
running back of center of Chesapeake Road southwest approximately 450 feet and
including in such strip a portion of lot A, now owned by George W. Heer, in the
rear of lots 31 to 37, inclusive (such portion apparently intended to have been
known as Zone No. 2), also Zone No. 3 immediately in the rear of Zone No. 2
running from that line southwest approximately 492 feet including that
additional portion of lot A immediately in the rear portion of Zone No. 2 which
is a part of lot A; Zone No. 4 lying immediately in the rear adjacent to Zone
No. 3 and running back southwest for a distance of 522 feet and including also
a portion of lot A immediately in the rear of lot A in Zone No. 3; Zone No. 5
beginning in the rear of and immediately adjacent to the rear of Zone No. 4,
running back to the rear boundary line of the Tydings Farm as shown on the
aforesaid plat and including also that portion of lot A lying immediately in
the rear of that part of lot A which is in Zone No. 4.
      (2)   The following lots of ground in the Podickory Subdivision are
excepted from the Tydings- on-the-Bay Shore Erosion Control District:
         (i)   lots 1 to 10, inclusive; 16 to 26, inclusive, as shown on plat
of Section 1 of Podickory Point prepared by J. R. McCrone, Jr., Inc.,
Registered Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, dated December, 1962, and
recorded among the plat records of the County in Plat Book No. 32, Page 36; and
lots 11R to 15R, inclusive, as shown on a revised plat entitled, "A
Resubdivision of Lots 11-15, Section 1 and Lots 2-4, Section 2, Podickory
Point," prepared by J. R. McCrone, Jr., Inc., Registered Professional Engineers
and Land Surveyors, dated November, 1963, and recorded among the plat records
of the County in Plat Book No. 32, page 66;
         (ii)   lots 1, 5 to 25, inclusive, as shown on plat of Section 2 of
Podickory Point prepared by J. R. McCrone, Jr., Inc., Registered Professional
Engineers and Land Surveyors, dated May, 1963, and recorded among the plat
records of the County in Plat Book No. 32, page 48; and lots 2R to 4R,
inclusive, as shown on a revised plat entitled, "A Resubdivision of Lots 11-15,
Section 1 and Lots 2-4, Section 2, Podickory Point," prepared by J. R. McCrone,
Jr., Inc., Registered Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, dated
November, 1973, and recorded among the plat records of the County in Plat Book
No. 32, page 66.
   (p)   Ulmstead Estates Shore Erosion Control District.
      (1)   The limits of the Ulmstead Estates Shore Erosion Control District
are set forth in deeds recorded in Liber No. 1655, Folio Nos. 73 and 83 of the
land records of the County, and including the property retained within Ulmstead
Estates by Lillian M. Lynch or descendants of Lillian M. Lynch; and parcel 71,
owned by Louise R. Cramer as recorded in the land records of the County in
Liber No. 2646, Folio No. 738.
      (2)   This district is established for the purpose of financing a shore
erosion control project on the real property located within Ulmstead Estates
and recorded on Subdivision Plat III of Ulmstead Estates as dedicated for a
community beach.
   (q)   Venice Beach Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the Venice
Beach Shore Erosion Control District are those lands shown on a plat of "Venice
Beach" dated August 28, 1929, and recorded among the land records of Anne
Arundel County in Plat Book 7, Folio 13, Plat 370.
   (r)   Watergate Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the Watergate
Shore Erosion Control District are all of that area known as Watergate in the
Second Assessment District as shown on the following plats: Plat Book No. 32,
Folio No. 84; and Plat Book No. 33, Folio No. 37.
   (s)   Whitehurst Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of the
Whitehurst Shore Erosion Control District are lot number 5, Block C, as shown
on the plat entitled "Whitehurst", recorded among the land records of the
County in Plat Book No. 33, Folio No. 6, being one of the lots of ground and
premises which by deed dated July 29, 1965, and recorded among the land records
of the County in Liber L.N.P. No. 1892, Folio No. 299, etc., was granted and
conveyed by The Dixon Holding Company to Whitehurst Building Corporation.
   (t)   Winchester-on-the-Severn Shore Erosion Control District. The limits of
the Winchester-on-the-Severn Shore Erosion Control District are lots 4, 5, 6,
and 7 of Winchester-on-the- Severn in the Third Assessment District, as shown
on Plat No. 1 of Winchester-on-the-Severn, as recorded in Plat Book 24, Folio
No. 31, formerly Cab. 4, Rod G-7, Plat 10.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 3-104) (Bill No. 25-87; Bill No. 17-88; Bill No. 77-88;
Bill No. 5-91; Bill No. 9-93; Bill No. 21-04; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 3-06;
Bill No. 92-16)
Attorney's note – The list of shore erosion control districts in this section
is not exhaustive. Local Government Article, § 21-204, of the State Code,
provides that territory within each subdivision in each Maryland county that
abuts or borders on the Chesapeake Bay tributaries or any other stream or body
of water in Maryland are created into separate taxing and assessment districts.
§ 4-7-304. Rate of tax.
   (a)   Uniform rate of assessment for each platted lot or parcel. Except as
provided in subsection (b), the shore erosion control special benefit tax shall
be based on a uniform rate of assessment for each platted lot or real property
tax account in the district.
   (b)   Uniform assessment for each platted lot or real property tax account.
The shore erosion control special benefit tax shall be a uniform assessment for
each platted lot or real property tax account in the district in Annapolis Cove
Shore Erosion Control District; Annapolis Landing Shore Erosion Control
District; Camp Wabanna Shore Erosion Control District; Pine Grove Village Shore
Erosion Control District; and Snug Harbor Shore Erosion Control District.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 3-109) (Bill No. 17-91; Bill No. 9-93; Bill No. 21-04;
Bill No. 3-06)
§ 4-7-305. Emergency funds.
   (a)   Declaration. The County Executive may declare an emergency as to the
repair or replacement of any shore erosion control works in a shore erosion
control district on finding the application of funds held in the account for
the district to be in the public interest.
   (b)   Advancement of funds. On declaration of an emergency by the County
Executive, and if the State Secretary of Natural Resources approves the work to
be accomplished, the Controller may advance funds held in the account of a
shore erosion control district to the qualified officers of the community
association of the district for the purpose of contracting for the
accomplishment of necessary repairs or replacement of erosion control works.
(1967 Code, § 17-402; 1985 Code, Art. 6, § 3-108) (Bill No. 13-75; Bill No. 17-
88; Bill No. 3-06)
SUBTITLE 4. WATERWAYS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS

State Code reference – Natural Resources Article, §§ 8-705 - 8-709.
§ 4-7-401. Procedure for establishment of district.
   (a)   State law. Real property may be formed into a waterways improvement
district in accordance with the Natural Resources Article, §§ 8-705 through 8-
709, of the State Code, and this title.
   (b)   Petition. The County may establish a waterways improvement district on
presentation to the County Executive and the County Council of a written
verified petition signed by 75% of the owners of the real properties proposed
to be included in the district requesting the establishment of the district.
Each petition shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   a plat of the proposed district as recorded among the land records
of the County and certified by the Office of Planning and Zoning as an accurate
configuration of the area to be included within the proposed district;
      (2)   a description of the project to be undertaken and of the
prospective economic advantage to be gained by completion of the project; and
      (3)   an identification of the tax accounts representing the parcels of
real property in the proposed district that are to be assessed.
   (c)   Referral to State Department of Natural Resources. On receipt of the
petition with the accompanying documents, the County Executive and the County
Council shall refer the petition and accompanying documents to the Waterways
Improvement Division of the State Department of Natural Resources for a report
and evaluation of benefits to be achieved by creating the proposed district.
   (d)   Ordinance. On receipt of a report from the Waterway Improvement
Division of the State Department of Natural Resources recommending the creation
of the proposed district and including the estimated costs for the project, the
County Executive may request the County Council to establish the district by
ordinance. The ordinance shall designate the area included within the district.
   (e)   Denial. If the Waterways Improvement Division of the State Department
of Natural Resources does not recommend the creation of the proposed district,
the petition requesting the creation of a district shall be denied.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 4-102, 4-103) (Bill No. 17-88)
State Code reference – Natural Resources Article, § 8-705(a).
§ 4-7-402. District council.
   The County Executive and the County Council shall act as the district
council for the waterways improvements districts and shall carry out the duties
imposed by law, or which are reasonably necessary to implement the provisions
in the Natural Resources Article, §§ 8-705 through 8-709, of the State Code,
and this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 4-105)
§ 4-7-403. Financing waterways improvement projects.
   (a)   Loan from State. To provide funds for a waterways improvement district
project, the County may accept a loan made by the State through the Waterway
Improvement Fund to cover the estimated costs and the costs actually incurred
in the implementation of the project.
   (b)   No loan from State. If the State is prohibited, by law, or otherwise
determines not to provide a loan to the County for a waterways improvement
project, the district council may establish a district-wide account for the
purpose of collecting funds to cover the estimated and actual cost incurred in
the implementation of the project.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 4-106) (Bill No. 40-86; Bill No. 41-86; Bill No. 17-88;
Bill No. 12-02)
§ 4-7-404. Amendment or modification of district.
   (a)   Generally. The County Council, by ordinance, may amend or modify an
existing waterways improvement district.
   (b)   Requirements. An existing district may not be amended or modified
unless a petition is signed by the owners of at least 75% of the properties in
the existing district whose property will be affected by the amendment or
modification of the district.
   (c)   Adding area to the district. Where a proposed amendment will have the
effect of adding a new area to an existing district, the petition shall be
signed by the owners of at least 75% of the properties in the new area as well
as by the owners of at least 75% of the properties in the existing district.
   (d)   Contracts and outstanding obligations. The County Council may not make
an amendment or modification of an existing district if the effect of the
amendment or modification is to impair an outstanding obligation of the
district or a contract to which the district is a party or a beneficiary.
(Bill No. 3-06)
§ 4-7-405. Abolition of district; alternative.
   (a)   When abolition allowed. The district council may abolish a waterways
improvement district after determining that the waterways improvement project
for the district has been completed, the costs incurred in constructing or
implementing the project have been paid, and there are no loans outstanding for
the project. Before the abolition of a district, the unexpended funds remaining
in a district-wide account for the district shall be refunded to each current
property owner in the district in an amount proportional to the amount
received.
   (b)   Continuance for purposes of expansion, maintenance, or repair. Instead
of abolishing a waterways improvement district, the district council may
continue the existence of the district for the purposes of expanding,
maintaining, or repairing the project. Funds for expansion, maintenance, or
repair of a project shall be provided in accordance with §§
4-7-101(h) and
4-7-403.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 4-109, 4-110) (Bill No. 3-06)
§ 4-7-406. Districts established.
   (a)   Generally. There are established the following waterways improvement
districts.
   (b)   Amberley Waterways Improvement District.
      (1)    The limits of the Amberley Waterways Improvement District are the
properties on the following plats recorded among the land records of Anne
Arundel County: Amberley (Plat 1, formerly Hollywood Acres) recorded in Liber
22 at Folio No. 34, as Plat Number 1040; Amberley (Plat 4, revision of lots 68-
71, Block A, Plat No. 2) recorded in Liber 29 at Folio No. 16 as Plat Number
1452; Amberley (Plat 2, formerly Hollywood Acres) recorded in Liber 22, at
Folio No. 36 as Plat Number 1041; Amberley (Plat 3, formerly Hollywood Acres)
recorded in Liber 22, at Folio No. 22, at Folio No. 38, as Plat Number 1042;
and Amberley (Plat 5) near St. Margarets recorded in Liber 40 at Folio No. 21,
as Plat Number 2196. As used in this section, "waterfront properties" are the
following properties within the Amberley Waterways Improvement District:
Tax Account Number Address
Tax Account Number Address
3-025-15615076     698 Holly Drive N
3-025-31593303     700 Holly Drive N
3-025-02617201     704 Holly Drive N
3-025-07692210     708 Holly Drive N
3-025-03166000     712 Holly Drive N
3-025-32567700     716 Holly Drive N
3-025-90016481     720 Holly Drive N
3-025-01807025     1602 Laurel Lane
3-025-30115730     1606 Laurel Lane
3-025-31969850     1608 Laurel Lane
3-025-01711600     1610 Laurel Lane
3-025-16852140     736 Holly Drive N
3-025-12023450     740 Holly Drive N
3-025-23158375     742 Holly Drive N
3-025-20613625     744 Holly Drive N
3-025-01247400     746 Holly Drive N
3-025-09291115     1650 Poplar Lane
3-025-06393800     1652 Poplar Lane
3-025-05718508     1654 Poplar Lane
3-025-26321090     754 Holly Drive N
3-025-33590680     756 Holly Drive N
3-025-14807100     760 Holly Drive N
3-025-00318564     762 Holly Drive N
3-025-18590956     764 Holly Drive N
3-025-18378079     766 Holly Drive N
 
Tax Account Number Address
Tax Account Number Address
3-025-26335000     768 Holly Drive N
3-025-09513608     772 Holly Drive N
3-025-34019000     776 Holly Drive N
3-025-25888503     778 Holly Drive N
3-025-32161148     780 Holly Drive N
3-025-07020400     782 Holly Drive N
3-025-16433500     786 Holly Drive N
3-025-02721600     788 Holly Drive N
3-025-04995405     790 Holly Drive N
3-025-19474025     792 Oak Lane
3-025-24474400     794 Oak Lane
3-025-20015025     796 Oak Lane
3-025-14142800     798 Oak Lane
3-025-09916820     800 Oak Lane
3-025-31981000     802 Holly Drive E
3-025-28437500     804 Holly Drive E
3-025-29069580     806 Holly Drive E
3-025-27228060     808 Holly Drive E
3-025-22615531     810 Holly Drive E
3-025-00318561     812 Holly Drive E
3-025-09290600     814 Holly Drive E
3-025-13455900     818 Holly Drive E
3-025-32907100     822 Holly Drive E
3-025-32484400     824 Holly Drive E
3-025-01790550     830 Holly Drive E
3-025-20551850     832 Holly Drive E
3-025-14485800     838 Holly Drive E
3-025-30049805     195 Beech Lane
3-025-32385100     1700 Beech Lane
 
      (2)   The district is established to repay a $135,000 loan from the State
of Maryland to dredge Whitehall Creek, and to defray the costs thereof,
including administrative costs. The loan is to be repaid through annual
assessments, as set forth in subsection (b)(4), on the properties in the
district for a period of 25 years, beginning with the year immediately
following the completion of the project, or sooner if required by the State of
Maryland.
      (3)   The Amberley Waterways Improvement District shall be administered
by the Amberley Community Association, Inc., a civic or community association
that meets the criteria set forth in Anne Arundel County Code §
4-7-101(d).
      (4)   The method of taxation for the annual assessment shall be as
follows: (1) the waterfront properties shall pay an equal share of 60% of the
annual amount necessary to amortize the loan from the Districts, and Waterways
Improvements Districts State of Maryland and to pay the administrative fee
charged by the County and any other administrative costs; (2) all properties,
including waterfront properties, shall pay an equal share of 40% of the annual
amount necessary to amortize the loan from the State of Maryland and to pay the
administrative fee charged by the County and any other administrative costs.
 
   (c)   Brown's Pond Waterways Improvement District.
      (1)   The limits of the Brown's Pond Waterways Improvement District are
parcel 18, Block 7, Tax Map 46 Anne Arundel County, Maryland, as more
particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County
in Liber No. 1681, Folio No. 356; parcel 20, Block 7, Tax Map 46 of Anne
Arundel County, Maryland, as more particularly described in a deed recorded
among the land records of the County in Liber No. 2368, Folio No. 841; parcel
21, Block 7, Tax Map 46 of Anne Arundel County, Maryland, as more particularly
described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County in Liber No.
4237, Folio No. 207; parcel 22, Block 7, Tax Map 46 of Anne Arundel County,
Maryland, as more particularly described in deeds recorded among the land
records of the County in Liber No. 3422, Folio No. 720 and Liber No. 2645,
Folio No. 848; parcel 23, Block 7, Tax Map 46 of Anne Arundel County, Maryland,
as more particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the
County in Liber No. 3888, Folio No. 883; parcel 24, Block 7, Tax Map 46 of Anne
Arundel County, Maryland, as more particularly described in a deed recorded
among the land records of the County in Liber No. 3214, Folio No. 895; parcel
26, Block 7, Tax Map 46 of Anne Arundel County, Maryland, as more particularly
described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County in Liber No.
2753, Folio No. 134; parcel 362, Block 7, Tax Map 46 of Anne Arundel County,
Maryland, as more particularly described in a deed recorded among the land
records of the County in Liber No. 3285, Folio No. 495; parcel 209, Block 8,
Tax Map 46 of Anne Arundel County, Maryland, as more particularly described in
a deed recorded among the land records of the County in Liber No. 4437, Folio
No. 707; parcel 25, Block 7, Tax Map 46 of Anne Arundel County, Maryland, as
more particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the
County in Liber No. 2628, Folio No. 742; parcel 295, Block 7, Tax Map 46 of
Anne Arundel County, Maryland, as more particularly described in a deed
recorded among the land records of the County in Liber No. 2869, Folio No. 252;
parcel 291, Block 8, Tax Map 46 of Anne Arundel County, Maryland, as more
particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County
in Liber No. 1866, Folio No. 293; parcel 371, Block 7, Tax Map 46 of Anne
Arundel County, Maryland, as more particularly described in a deed recorded
among the land records of the County in Liber No. 3359, Folio No. 643; parcel
224, Block 8, Tax Map 46 of Anne Arundel County, Maryland, as more particularly
described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County in Liber No.
4437, Folio No. 703; parcel 17pt, Block 7, Tax Map 46 of Anne Arundel County,
Maryland, as more particularly described in a deed recorded among the land
records of the County in Liber No. 0046, Folio No. 004; parcel 393, Block 8,
Tax Map 46 of Anne Arundel County, Maryland, as more particularly described in
a deed recorded among the land records of the County in Liber No. 4437, Folio
No. 724; and parcel 19, Block 7, Tax Map 46 of Anne Arundel County, Maryland,
as more particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the
County in Liber No. 3759, Folio No. 75.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of dredging a channel
in Brown's Pond; construction of jetties; further maintenance and other
improvements; and paying administrative fees set forth by the County in
connection with the district.
      (3)   (i)   To secure repayment of a loan from the State Department of
Natural Resources through the Waterway Improvement Fund, an annual assessment
is levied on property in the Brown's Pond Waterways Improvement District for a
period of 25 years beginning with the year immediately following the year in
which the waterways improvement project is completed, or sooner if required by
the State, according to terms set forth in the agreement between the State and
the County governing body sitting as district council for the district.
         (ii)   Notwithstanding §
4-7-101(h) , the annual assessment for each property within the waterways
improvement district shall be assessed and levied by the County Council sitting
as district council for a waterways improvement district according to the
benefits accruing to each tax parcel and dividing the respective share of
burden into the sum of the annual amount necessary to amortize the loan plus
anticipated County administrative costs consisting of 5% of that amount. Each
annual assessment shall constitute a lien on the real property against which it
is assessed and the improvements on the real property and shall be paid
annually as County taxes are paid. Further assessments to provide for future
maintenance and other improvements shall be levied in the manner provided by
law.
   (d)   Buckingham Cove Waterways Improvement District.
      (1)   The limits of the Buckingham Cove Waterways Improvement District
are lot 10 as shown on the plats of Buckingham Estates and recorded in the land
records of the County at Plat Book 33, Folio 45; those lots shown as Section K,
Plat 3 (as revised) of Manhattan Beach and recorded in the land records of the
County at Plat Book 3, Folio 38, and further identified on State Department of
Assessments and Taxation Map 32-E as parcels numbered 136, 98, 100, 444, 99,
104, 52, 53, and 89; and those lands shown on State Department of Assessments
and Taxation Map 32-H, Block 4 as parcels 49, 194, and 206.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of improving Buckingham
Cove by dredging the main channel in the west fork of Dividing Creek and the
extension known as Buckingham Cove; and providing further maintenance should it
become necessary.
      (3)   The Buckingham Cover Waterways Improvement District shall be
administered by the Buckingham Cove Improvement Association, Inc., a civic or
community association that meets the requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
      (4)   (i)   To secure repayment of a loan from the State Department of
Natural Resources through the Waterway Improvement Fund and a loan from Anne
Arundel County, an annual assessment is levied on property in the Buckingham
Cove Waterways Improvement District for a period of 25 years beginning with the
year following the year in which the waterways improvement project is
completed, or sooner if required by the State, according to the terms set forth
in the agreement between the State and the County governing body sitting as
district council for the district, and the agreement between the Buckingham
Cove Improvement Association, Inc., and Anne Arundel County.
         (ii)   The annual assessment for each property in the waterways
improvement district shall be an amount determined by dividing the number of
tax parcels in the district into the total amount necessary to amortize the
total of: the loan from the Department of Natural Resources, the loan from Anne
Arundel County, any maintenance costs, and the anticipated County
administrative costs. The annual assessment shall constitute a lien against the
real property against which it is assessed and shall be paid annually as County
taxes are required to be paid. Further assessments to provide for future
maintenance and other improvements shall be levied in the manner provided by
law.
   (e)   Cattail Creek and Upper Magothy River Waterways Improvement District.
      (1)   The limits of the district are those lands shown in the
consolidated property file of the State Department of Assessments and Taxation
as:
Tax Account Number Address
Tax Account Number Address
3-000-1702-5400    144 Arundel Beach Road
3-036-0630-4163    River Road
3-123-0089-9753    175 Topeg Drive
3-123-0143-0500    147 Topeg Drive
3-123-0912-2800    179 Topeg Drive
3-123-0932-5207    157 Berrywood Drive
3-123-1411-3010    183 Topeg Drive
3-123-1624-1600    133 Berrywood Drive
3-123-1693-6610    171 Topeg Drive
3-123-2514-4130    161 Berrywood Drive
3-123-2935-7434    129 Berrywood Drive
3-123-3322-0600    187 Topeg Drive
3-123-9002-9296    125 Berrywood Drive
3-124-9001-9624    66 Marnel Drive
3-124-9001-9626    70 Marnel Drive
3-124-9001-9646    88 Robinson Landing Road
3-217-3393-4900    8360 Country Life Road
3-217-0780-5700    8362 Country Life Road
 
      (2)   The district is established to improve Cattail Creek and the Upper
Magothy River by dredging spur channels from the main channel to each of the
properties included in the district.
      (3)   (i)   To secure repayment of a loan from the State Department of
Natural Resources through the Waterway Improvement Fund, an annual assessment
is levied on the property in the Cattail Creek and Upper Magothy River
Waterways Improvement District for a period of 25 years beginning the year
following the year in which the waterways improvement project is completed, or
sooner, if required by the State, according to the terms set forth in the
agreement between the State and the County governing body sitting as district
council for the district.
         (ii)   The annual assessment for each property in the district is
determined by multiplying the number of cubic yards of spoil removed from the
spur channel to the property by the cost per cubic yard of the dredging,
divided by 25, which is the number of years for which the loan runs, plus the
yearly County administrative cost. The annual assessment shall constitute a
lien against the property against which it is assessed, and carries the same
obligation as County real property taxes.
   (f)   Johns Creek Waterways Improvement District.
      (1)   The limits of the Johns Creek Waterways Improvement District are:
Tax Account Number Address
Tax Account Number Address
7738-9004-0469     846 Shady Oaks Road
7738-0010-5000     5105 Holly Drive
7738-0290-0950     5109 Holly Drive
7738-0176-3425     5111 Holly Drive
7738-0045-1500     5113 Holly Drive
7738-0307-5300     5115 Holly Drive
7738-0174-7200     5117 Holly Drive
7738-0416-9200     5119 Holly Drive
7000-0395-7808     5015 Muddy Creek Road
 
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of dredging a channel
in John's Creek; rebuilding bulkheads; and further maintenance and other
improvements.
      (3)   (i)   To secure repayment of a loan from the State Department of
Natural Resources through the Waterway Improvement Fund, an annual assessment
is levied on property in the John's Creek Waterways Improvement District for a
period of 25 years beginning with the year immediately following the year in
which the waterways improvement project is completed, or sooner if required by
the State, according to terms set forth in the agreement between the State and
the County governing body sitting as district council for the district.
         (ii)   The annual assessment for each property within the waterways
improvement district shall be an amount determined by dividing the number of
tax parcels in the district into the sum of the annual amount necessary to
amortize the loan from the Department of Natural Resources plus anticipated
County administrative costs consisting of 5% of that amount. Each annual
assessment shall constitute a lien on the real property against which it is
assessed, and shall be paid annually as County taxes are required to be paid.
Further assessments to provide for future maintenance and other improvements
shall be levied in the manner provided by law.
   (g)   Lake Placid Waterways Improvement District.
      (1)   The limits of the Lake Placid Waterways Improvement District are
lots 117 through 130, inclusive, and lots 138 through 164, inclusive, as shown
on a plat entitled "Revised Plat of Shoreacres", dated October, 1929, and
recorded among the land records of the County as Plat No. 377 found in Plat
Book No. 7, Folio No. 19, Speed 22.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of providing an
immediate continuation of channel dredging of Lake Placid as defined in the
County capital project description, FY 1979, capital project No. C52277; and
providing for future maintenance and other improvements as permitted by Bill
No. 22-78 if future maintenance or improvements become necessary.
      (3)   (i)   Securing repayment of a loan not to exceed $280,000 from the
State Department of Natural Resources through the Waterway Improvement Fund, a
uniform annual assessment is levied on property in the Lake Placid Waterways
Improvement District for a period not to exceed 25 years beginning with fiscal
year 1983 and continuing through fiscal year 2008 according to terms that may
be set forth in an agreement between the State and the County governing body
sitting as district council of the district.
         (ii)   The annual assessment for each property within the Waterways
Improvement District shall be an amount equal to the ratio which the assessed
valuation of the individual property not including the improvements thereon
bears to the total assessed valuation of the properties not including the
improvements thereon within the district, multiplied by the sum of the annual
amount necessary to amortize the loan from the State Department of Natural
Resources, plus anticipated County administrative costs, consisting of 5% of
that amount. The annual assessment shall constitute a lien upon the real
property against which it is assessed and shall be paid annually as County
taxes are required to be paid. Further assessments to provide for future
maintenance and other improvements shall be levied in the manner provided by
law.
   (h)   Lake Hillsmere Waterways Improvement District.
      (1)   The limits of the Lake Hillsmere Waterways Improvement District are
lots No. 25 and No. 26 in the Revised Plat No. 1, Section 4, Block V of
Hillsmere Estates dated December, 1959, as recorded among the land records of
the County in Plat No. 1598, Book No. 31, Folio No. 23; lots No. 1 through 4
and 7 through 9 of Block P; and lots No. 3 and 4 and 10 through 12 of Block Z,
all in Plat No. 2, Section 3 of Hillsmere Estates dated May, 1954, as recorded
among the land records of the County in Plat No. 1252, Book No. 25, Folio No.
8, Speed 22 as amended per J. R. McCrone, Jr., Inc. survey dated April 3, 1979;
resubdivided lot No. 13 and its contiguous eastern portion of Resubdivided
Tract B in Plat 2, Section 3, Block Z of Hillsmere Estates which resulted from
the resubdivision of lots No. 13 and No. 14 and Tract B as recorded among land
records of the County in Liber No. 3158, Folio No. 826; parcel 240 of map
reference 56, Block 24 as recorded among the land records of the County in
Liber No. 3131, Folio No. 131; part of Parcel 269 of map reference 56, Block 18
as recorded among the land records of the County in Liber No. 2898, Folio No.
482; and part of Parcel 269 of map reference 56, Block 18 as recorded among the
land records of the County in Liber No. 3030, Folio No. 664.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of providing a channel
dredging project in Lake Hillsmere; providing for future maintenance; and
providing any other improvements permitted by this title.
      (3)   To secure repayment of a loan not to exceed $85,950 from the State
Department of Natural Resources, through the Waterway Improvement Fund, an
annual assessment is levied on the property in the Lake Hillsmere Waterways
Improvement District for a period of 25 years, beginning with the year
immediately following the year in which the waterways improvement project is
completed, or sooner if required by the State. The annual assessment for each
property within the Waterways Improvement District is an amount equal to the
ratio which the assessed valuation of the individual property not including the
improvements thereon bears to the total assessed valuation of all properties
not including the improvements thereon, within the district multiplied by the
sum of the annual amount necessary to amortize the loan plus anticipated County
administrative costs consisting of 5% of that amount. Each annual assessment
shall constitute a lien on the real property against which it is assessed and
the improvements on the real property and shall be paid annually as County
taxes are required to be paid. Further assessments to provide for future
maintenance and other improvements shall be levied in the manner provided by
law.
   (i)   Lake Hillsmere Waterways Improvement District II.
      (1)   The limits of the district are those lands shown in the
consolidated property file of the State Department of Assessments and Taxation
as Tax Account Number 2412: 9001-4225, 117 Indian Lane; 9001-4224, 115 Indian
Lane; 0550-6120, 113 Indian Lane; 1228-9300, 111 Indian Lane; 0302-1740, 109
Indian Lane; 0655-4700, 103 Fogel Drive; 1239-8410, 101 Fogel Drive; 0655-4703,
104 Fogel Drive; 0549-9030, Carroll Drive; 0654-4750, Carroll Drive; 0907-2505,
602 Harbor Drive; 9002-2260, 610 Harbor Drive; 9003-5716, 614 Harbor Drive; and
9000-7837, 624 Harbor Drive.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of maintenance dredging
of the main channels of Lake Hillsmere; maintaining the stone jetty at the
entrance to the channel; providing for further jetty maintenance should it
become necessary.
      (3)   To secure repayment of a loan from the State Department of Natural
Resources through the Waterway Improvement Fund and a loan from Anne Arundel
County, an annual assessment is levied on the property in the Lake Hillsmere
Waterways Improvement District for a period of 25 years beginning the year
following the year in which the waterways improvement project is completed, or
sooner if required by the State, according to the terms set forth in the
agreement between the State and the County governing body sitting as District
Council for the district, and the agreement between the Lake Hillsmere
Waterways Improvement District II and Anne Arundel County.
      (4)   The annual assessment for each property in the district shall be an
amount determined by dividing the number of tax parcels in the district into
the total amount necessary to amortize the total of the loan from the
Department of Natural Resources; the loan from Anne Arundel County; any
maintenance costs; and the yearly County administrative cost.
      (5)   The annual assessment shall constitute a lien against the property
against which it is assessed and shall be paid annually as County real property
taxes are required to be paid. Further assessments to provide for future
maintenance and other improvements shall be levied in the manner provided by
law.
      (6)   The district shall be administered by the Lake Hillsmere Waterways
Improvement District II, a civic or community association that meets the
requirements of §
4-7-101(d).
   (j)   Romar Estates Waterways Improvement District.
      (1)   The limits of the Romar Estates Waterways Improvement District are
lots 1 through 25 as shown on the plat of Romar Estates as recorded in the land
records of the County in Plat Book 31, Folio 34.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of dredging Aberdeen
Creek to remove accumulated silt in the existing channel leading to the foot of
Romar Drive; dredging to remove silt from existing boat slips; replacement of
existing bulkhead and piling; and future maintenance and other improvements as
permitted by this title.
      (3)   (i)   To secure payment of a loan from the State Department of
Natural Resources through the Waterway Improvement Fund, an annual assessment
is levied on property in the Romar Estates Waterways Improvement District for a
period of 25 years beginning with the year immediately following the year in
which the waterways improvement project is completed, or sooner if required by
the State, according to terms set forth in the agreement between the State and
the County governing body sitting as district council for the district.
         (ii)   The annual assessment for each property within the waterways
improvement district shall be an amount determined by dividing the number of
real property tax accounts in the district into the total of the loan from the
State Department of Natural Resources, any maintenance costs budgeted by the
district, and anticipated County administrative costs. The annual assessment
shall constitute a lien upon the real property against which it is assessed and
shall be paid annually as County taxes are required to be paid. Further
assessments to provide for future maintenance and other improvements shall be
levied in the manner provided by law.
   (k)   Snug Harbor Waterways Improvement District.
      (1)   The limits of the Snug Harbor Waterways Improvement District are
the following properties as shown in the consolidated property file of the
State Department of Assessments and Taxation as Tax Account Number 7746: 0040-
8008, known as 4921 Mariners Drive; 0040-8009, known as 4924 Mariners Drive;
0047-0410, known as 4913 Mariners Drive; 0067-4100, known as 4912 Mariners
Drive; 0070-9800, known as 1724 Lake Avenue; 0082-5400, known as 4911 Whipple
Way; 0082-5450, known as 4907 Whipple Way; 0082-6705, known as 1749 Fellner
Drive; 0098-1126, known as 4919 Mariners Drive; 0113-1204, known as 1701
Maryland Avenue; 0122-2200, known as 1705 Lake Avenue; 0142-6600, known as 1741
Fellner Drive; 0146-4400, known as 1704 Lake Avenue; 0260-1220, known as 4904
Mariners Drive; 0284-7806, known as 4931 Mariners Drive; 0285-4007, known as
1725 Maryland Avenue; 0286-8600, known as 1709 Cedar Avenue; 0336-4360, known
as 4908 Whipple Way; 0359-1000, known as 1716 Maryland Avenue; 0360-3600, known
as 1747 Fellner Drive; 0361-4200, known as 1737 Cedar Avenue; 0374-7829, known
as 4913 Whipple Way; 0379-1403, known as 4950 West End Avenue; 0405-8600, known
as 1743 Fellner Drive; 0411-3975, known as 4902 Mariners Drive; 0445-7700,
known as 1708 Lake Avenue; 0459-7600, known as 1751 Fellner Drive; 0459-8650,
known as 1713 Maryland Avenue; 0468-1200, known as 1715 Lake Avenue; 0494-6150,
known as 1714 Maryland Avenue; 0510-3000, known as 4925 Mariners Drive; 0525-
8800, known as 1734 Maryland Avenue; 0526-2601, known as 1700 Bay View Drive;
9000-2298, known as 4917 Mariners Drive; 9000-5070, known as 4906 Mariners
Drive; 9000-5288, known as 1704 Maryland Avenue; 9001-7453, known as 1720
Maryland Avenue; 9002-7602, known as 1700 Maryland Avenue; 9009-2808, known as
4907 Mariners Drive; 9006-0650, known as 1713 Cedar Avenue; 9006-9282, known as
1737 Maryland Avenue; 9021-6917, known as 4946 West End Avenue; and 0031-1100,
known as 4920 Mariners Drive.
      (2)   The district is created for the purpose of providing for the repair
of the bulkhead, pilings, and catwalk; the dredging of the harbor and the
channel; and future maintenance and other improvements as permitted by §
4-7-405(b), should future maintenance or improvements become necessary.
      (3)   (i)   To secure repayment of a loan from the State Department of
Natural Resources through the Waterway Improvement Fund, an annual assessment
is levied on property in the Snug Harbor Waterways Improvement District for a
period of 25 years beginning with the year immediately following the year in
which the waterways improvement project is completed, or sooner if required by
the State, according to terms set forth in the agreement between the State and
the County governing body sitting as district council of the district.
         (ii)   The annual assessment for each property within the Waterways
Improvement District shall be an amount determined by dividing the number of
tax parcels in the district into the sum of the annual amount necessary to
amortize the loan from the Department of Natural Resources plus anticipated
County administrative costs consisting of 5% of that amount. Each annual
assessment shall constitute a lien on the real property against which it is
assessed, and shall be paid annually as County taxes are required to be paid.
Further assessments to provide for future maintenance and other improvements
shall be levied in the manner provided by law.
   (l)   Spriggs Pond Waterways Improvement District.
      (1)   The limits of the Spriggs Pond Waterways Improvement District are
lots No. 4 through 8 in Block 7, as shown on a plat entitled "Century ‘21',
Plat Two" dated June 1972, recorded among the land records of the County in
Plat No. 2661, Book No. 49, Folio 36; lot No. 1 in Block F, and lots No. 14/15
through 24 in Block A, as shown on a plat entitled "Longview on the Magothy"
dated June 1952, recorded among the land records of the County in Plat No.
1093, Book No. 23, Folio 13; parcel 465 of Map Reference 32, Block 18, as more
particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County
in Liber No. 109, Folio No. 209; parcel 474 of Map Reference 32, Block 18, as
more particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the
County in Liber No. 2933, Folio No. 240; parcel 475 of Map Reference 32, Block
18, as more particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of
the County in Liber No. 145, Folio No. 222; parcel 478 of Map Reference 32,
Block 18, as more particularly described in a deed recorded among the land
records of the County in Liber No. 0809, Folio No. 017; parcel 500 of Map
Reference 32, Block 18, as more particularly described in a deed recorded among
the land records of the County in Liber No. 3700, Folio No. 302; parcel 567 of
Map Reference 32, Block 18, as more particularly described in a deed recorded
among the land records of the County in Liber No. 3436, Folio No. 632; parcel
775 of Map Reference 32, Block 18, as more particularly described in a deed
recorded among the land records of the County in Liber No. 0868, Folio No. 085;
parcel 828 of Map Reference 32, Block 18, as more particularly described in a
deed recorded among the land records of the County in Liber No. 1772, Folio No.
068; parcel 829 of Map Reference 32, Block 18, as more particularly described
in a deed recorded among the land records of the County in Liber No. 0821,
Folio No. 577; parcel 830 of Map Reference 32, Block 18, as more particularly
described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County in Liber No.
3277, Folio No. 315; parcel 831 of Map Reference 32, Block 18, as more
particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the County
in Liber No. 3168, Folio No. 387; parcel 832 of Map Reference 32, Block 18, as
more particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of the
County in Liber No. 3809, Folio No. 805; parcel 833 of Map Reference 32, Block
18, as more particularly described in a deed recorded among the land records of
the County in Liber No. 1125, Folio No. 365; parcel 834 of Map Reference 32,
Block 18, as more particularly described in a deed recorded among the land
records of the County in Liber No. 1406, Folio No. 289; parcel 838 of Map
Reference 32, Block 18, as more particularly described in a deed recorded among
the land records of the County in Liber No. 1269, Folio No. 121; parcel 967 of
Map Reference 32, Block 18, as more particularly described in a deed recorded
among the land records of the County in Liber No. 2266, Folio No. 553; and
parcel 968 of Map Reference 32, Block 18, as more particularly described in a
deed recorded among the land records of the County in Liber No. 3228, Folio No.
116.
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of improving Spriggs
Pond on the Magothy, including expanding the breakwater; rebuilding channel
bulkheads; dredging the channel; and providing future maintenance and other
improvements as permitted by §
4-7-405(b), as necessary.
      (3)   (i)   To secure repayment of a loan from the State Department of
Natural Resources through the Waterway Improvement Fund, an annual assessment
is levied on property in the Spriggs Pond Waterways Improvement District for a
period of 25 years, beginning with the year immediately following the year in
which the waterways improvement project is completed, or sooner if required by
the State.
         (ii)   The annual assessment for each property in the district shall
be an amount determined by dividing the number of tax parcels in the district
into the sum of the annual amount necessary to amortize the loan plus
anticipated County administrative costs consisting of 5% of that amount. Each
annual assessment shall constitute a lien on the real property against which it
is assessed and the improvements on the real property and shall be paid
annually as County taxes are required to be paid. Further assessments to
provide for future maintenance and other improvements shall be levied in the
manner provided by law.
   (m)   Whitehall Waterways Improvement District.
      (1)   The limits of the Whitehall Waterways Improvement District are lots
4 through 20 as shown on the Revised Plat of Whitehall Manor dated December 9,
1964 and recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel County in Plat Book
33, Page 32; and parcel 212, as shown on State Department of Assessments and
Taxation Map 46 (updated to May, 1998).
      (2)   The district is established for the purpose of dredging Whitehall
Cove and the Whitehall and Homewood Canals and providing for future maintenance
and improvements as permitted under §
4-7-405(b), should maintenance or improvements become necessary.
      (3)   (i)   To secure repayment of a loan from the State Department of
Natural Resources through the Waterway Improvement Fund, an annual assessment
is levied on the property in the Whitehall Waterways Improvement District for a
period of 25 years beginning the year following the year in which the waterways
improvement project is completed, or sooner if required by the State, according
to the terms set forth in the agreement between the State and the County
governing body sitting as district council for the district.
         (ii)   Notwithstanding §
4-7-101(h), the annual assessment for each property in the district shall be
assessed and levied by the County Council, sitting as the District Council for
a waterways improvement district, based on shares allocated to each tax
account, as follows:
Tax Account Number Address Share
Tax Account Number Address             Share
3000-0116-3200     1038 Whitehall Cove ½ share
3908-0244-9320     605 Canal Lane      ½ share
3908-0149-9300     615 Canal Lane      ½ share
3908-1006-4400     613 Canal Lane      1 share
3908-0629-3017     609 Canal Lane      1 share
3908-2445-6552     607 Canal Lane      1 share
3908-9002-2022     603 Canal Lane      1 share
3908-2917-2553     601 Canal Lane      1 share
3908-2588-9245     Candy Court         1 share
3908-2588-9244     Candy Court         1 share
3908-3394-4904     Candy Court         1 share
3908-3394-4903     Candy Court         1 share
3908-9000-6900     Homewood Canal      1 share
3908-9001-0523     606 Candy Court     1 share
3908-2926-5605     605 Candy Court     1 share
 
The total number of shares and half-shares shall be divided into the total of
the loan repayment, any maintenance costs budgeted by the district, and the
County administrative charge. The elimination of any tax account by combination
with another account shall reduce the total number of shares accordingly. The
annual assessment shall constitute a lien against the property against which it
is assessed, and carries the same obligation as County real property taxes.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 4-104) (Bill No. 40-86; Bill No. 41-86; Bill No. 81-88;
Bill No. 86-88; Bill No. 102-88; Bill No. 10-90; Bill No. 2-92; Bill No. 48-92;
Bill No. 90-92; Bill No. 24-94; Bill No. 125-94; Bill No. 114-96; Bill No. 5-
97; Bill No. 45-97; Bill No. 98-98; Bill No. 19-00; Bill No. 50-00; Bill No.
19-04; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 3-06; Bill No. 62-06; Bill No. 84-06; Bill No.
5-14; Bill No. 17-25)
TITLE 8. SPECIAL TAXING DISTRICTS
Section
   
4-8-101.   Scope.
   
4-8-102.   Authorization.
   
4-8-103.   Bond resolutions.
   
4-8-104.   Disclosure to buyers.
   
4-8-105.   Exemption from purchasing laws.
   
4-8-106.   Financing of required improvements.
§ 4-8-101. Scope.
   (a)   State law. Real property within a defined geographic area in the
County may be formed into a special taxing district in accordance with Local
Government Article, §§ 21-501 et seq., of the State Code, and this title.
   (b)   Intent. The approvals and authorizations provided in any ordinance
described in §
4-8-102 and any bond resolution described in §
4-8-103 are intended solely to authorize the County to accomplish certain
financing transactions under and in accordance with the provisions of Local
Government Article, §§ 21-501 et seq., of the State Code.
   (c)   Construction. Any approvals, authorizations, or activities provided in
an ordinance or bond resolution shall not constitute, be deemed to constitute,
or imply that the County Council, the County Executive, or any department,
office, or agency of the County approves, favors, authorizes, or consents to
any action or activity within or required for the development of the district,
including any land use approval, requirements for the provision of public
utilities or services, or any administrative, judicial, quasi-judicial, or
legislative action.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 4A-101) (Bill No. 58-97; Bill No. 116-97)
§ 4-8-102. Authorization.
   (a)   Required provisions. An ordinance establishing a special taxing
district shall include a description of the area to be included in the
district; the types of infrastructure and related costs that are intended to be
funded; the following items that are to be made part of each contract of sale
for real property located in a district: reasonable disclosure of any special
assessments, special taxes, or other fees or charges for which a buyer will be
liable due to the special taxing district and that the seller's failure to
provide disclosure in the form required shall render the contract of sale
voidable at the option of the buyer before the date of settlement; and a
requirement that adequate debt service reserve funds be maintained.
   (b)   Prohibited provisions. An ordinance establishing a special taxing
district may not allow acceleration of assessments or taxes by reason of bond
default or an increase in the maximum special assessments, special taxes, or
other fees or charges applicable to an individual property if any other
property owner becomes delinquent in the payment of special assessment, special
tax, or other fee or charge securing special obligation debt issued under this
section.
   (c)   Permissive provisions. An ordinance establishing a special taxing
district may provide for exemption, deferrals, and credits; that a lien shall
attach to each property within a special taxing district to the extent of a
property owner's obligation under any special taxing district financing; and
for the reimbursement to the County of its expenses to administer the special
fund in each special tax district.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 4A-102) (Bill No. 58-97; Bill No. 23-04)
§ 4-8-103. Bond resolutions.
   (a)   Generally. If a special taxing district is authorized pursuant to §
4-8-102 and the County intends to issue bonds, the County Council may adopt one
or more resolutions that:
      (1)   designate an area or areas as a special taxing district;
      (2)   create a special fund with respect to the special taxing district;
      (3)   pledge to the special fund the proceeds of the ad valorem or
special tax to be levied in accordance with Local Government Article, §§ 21-501
et seq., of the State Code;
      (4)   require that the proceeds from the tax be paid into the special
fund;
      (5)   specify the proposed undertaking;
      (6)   specify the maximum principal amount of bonds to be issued;
      (7)   specify the maximum rate or rates of interest for the bonds;
      (8)   agree to a covenant to levy on all real and personal property
within the special taxing district, ad valorem taxes, or special taxes in a
rate and an amount at least sufficient in each year in which any of the bonds
are outstanding to provide for the payment of the principal of, the interest,
and the redemption premium on the bonds and replenish any debt service fund, or
for any other purposes related to the ongoing expenses of or security for the
bonds;
      (9)   specify the following:
         (i)   the maximum amount to be assessed with respect to any parcel of
property located within a special taxing district;
         (ii)   a tax year or other date after which no further special taxes
shall be levied or collected on a parcel;
         (iii)   the circumstances under which the special tax levied against
any parcel may be increased as a consequence of delinquency or default by the
owner of that parcel or any other parcel within the special taxing district;
         (iv)   procedures allowing for the prepayment of special taxes;
         (v)   establishment of sinking funds;
         (vi)   establishment of debt service reserve funds;
         (vii)   pledges of other assets and revenues towards the payments of
the principal and interest; and
         (viii)   provision for municipal bond insurance or any other type of
financial guaranty of the bonds; and
      (10)   provide for any other matters not inconsistent with Local
Government Article, §§ 21-501 et seq., of the State Code, that the County
Council determines necessary or desirable to effect the proposed undertaking.
   (b)   Permissive provisions in resolution. In addition to the authorization
granted in subsection (a), the County Council may authorize the County
Executive or the Controller to specify any of the following:
      (1)   the actual principal amount of the bonds to be issued;
      (2)   the actual rate or rates of interest for the bonds;
      (3)   the manner in which and the terms on which the bonds are to be
sold;
      (4)   the time or times that the bonds may be executed, issued, and
delivered;
      (5)   the form and tenor of the bonds and the denominations in which the
bonds may be issued;
      (6)   the manner in which and the times and places that the principal of
the bonds is to be paid;
      (7)   provisions pursuant to which any or all of the bonds may be called
for redemption prior to their stated maturity dates; and
      (8)   any other provisions not inconsistent with Local Government
Article, §§ 21-501 et seq., of the State Code, that the County Council
determines necessary or desirable to effect the financing of the proposed
undertaking.
   (c)   Approval by County Executive. Any resolution adopted pursuant to Local
Government Article, §§ 21-501 et seq., of the State Code, and this title shall
be approved by the County Executive before it may become effective.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 4A-103) (Bill No. 58-97; Bill No. 17-00)
§ 4-8-104. Disclosure to buyers.
   (a)   Disclosure required. A contract to sell real property shall disclose
to the initial buyer and any later buyer during the life of any special
assessment, special tax, fee, or charge authorized under this title the amount
of any special assessment, special tax, fee, or charge that the buyer must pay.
Any contract that does not disclose all items required by this section is
voidable at the option of the buyer before the date of settlement.
   (b)   Contents of notice.
      (1)   A notice in a contract of sale that substantially conforms to the
following text complies with this section:
"Each year the buyer of this property must pay a special assessment or special
tax imposed under §§
4-8-101 et seq. of the Anne Arundel County Code, as of (date of this contract
of sale). The special assessment or special tax on this property amounts to
(dollar amount in arabic numbers) each year, as of (date of each scheduled
increase), the assessment or tax may increase to (maximum amount or method for
determining the same). For further information on this assessment or tax, the
buyer may contact the County Office of Finance."
      (2)   If an increase in any special assessment, special tax, fee, or
charge is likely to occur in the foreseeable future but the timing or amount of
the increase is not certain when the contract is signed, the notice shall also
expressly disclose that fact.
   (c)   Declaration. Before any bonds are issued under this title, the
Controller shall record among the land records of the County at the cost of the
special taxing district a declaration encumbering all real property located in
the district and designating that property as subject to a special taxing
district. The declaration shall terminate when the Controller records a release
stating that all bonds are fully repaid.
   (d)   Notice on tax bill. The Controller shall indicate on the real property
tax bill for each property in a special taxing district the amount of any
special assessment or special tax imposed on the property.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 4A-104) (Bill No. 58-97; Bill No. 17-00)
§ 4-8-105. Exemption from purchasing laws.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "authorized infrastructure" means
infrastructure:
      (1)   to be owned by the County and constructed or otherwise provided by
a subdivider or other developer under a public works agreement or similar
agreement with the County; or
      (2)   to be owned by a governmental entity or agency other than the
County.
   (b)   Exemption. Unless otherwise provided in an ordinance described in §
4-8-102 or in a resolution described in §
4-8-103, the provisions of §§
4-8-101 et seq. do not apply to actions authorized by any such ordinance or
resolution in the exercise of the powers conferred on the County by Local
Government Article, §§ 21-501 et seq., of the State Code, including the
execution and delivery by the County of an acquisition, development, or similar
agreement providing for the financing, construction, or acquisition of
authorized infrastructure to be financed from the proceeds of bonds to be
issued under the authority of Local Government Article, §§ 21-501 et seq., of
the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 4A-105) (Bill No. 116-97; Bill No. 61-99)
§ 4-8-106. Financing of required improvements.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the proceeds of bonds
issued under authority of Local Government Article, §§ 21-501 et seq., of the
State Code, may be used to finance in whole or in part improvements that are
required under this Code to be installed by a subdivider or other developer for
the subdivision or other development of land.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 4A-106) (Bill No. 55-98)
TITLE 9. TAX INCREMENT FINANCING DISTRICTS
Section
   
4-9-101.   Exemption from purchasing laws.
   
4-9-102.   Financing of required improvements.
§ 4-9-101. Exemption from purchasing laws.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "authorized infrastructure" means
infrastructure:
      (1)   to be owned by the County, and constructed or otherwise provided by
a subdivider or other developer under a public works agreement or similar
agreement with the County; or
      (2)   to be owned by a governmental entity or agency other than the
County.
   (b)   Exemption. Unless otherwise provided in an ordinance, the provisions
of §§
4-8-101 et seq. do not apply to actions authorized by an ordinance or
resolution, as the case may be, in the exercise of the powers conferred on the
County by the Tax Increment Financing Act and Local Government Article, §§ 21-
501 et seq., of the State Code, including the execution and delivery by the
County of an acquisition, development, or similar agreement providing for the
financing, construction, or acquisition of authorized infrastructure to be
financed from the proceeds of bonds to be issued under the authority of the Tax
Increment Financing Act and Local Government Article, §§ 21-501 et seq., of the
State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 4B-101) (Bill No. 61-99)
§ 4-9-102. Financing of required improvements.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the proceeds of bonds
issued under authority of the Tax Increment Financing Act of the State Code and
Local Government Article, §§ 21-501 et seq., of the State Code, may be used to
finance in whole or in part improvements that are required under this Code to
be installed by a subdivider or other developer for the subdivision or other
development of land.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 4B-102) (Bill No. 61-99)
TITLE 10. BONDS, TAX ANTICIPATION NOTES, AND INTERIM NOTES
Section
Subtitle 1. Bonds in General
   
4-10-101.   Borrowing limitations.
   
4-10-102.   Bonds for water or wastewater facilities – In general.
   
4-10-103.   Bonds for water or wastewater facilities – Issuance.
   
4-10-104.   Bonds and notes for capital improvements.
   
4-10-105.   Reimbursement of expenditures.
Subtitle 2. Bonds and Indebtedness of Third Parties
   
4-10-201.   Form of approval.
   
4-10-202.   Agreements requiring approval by County Council.
   
4-10-203.   Maryland Economic Development Revenue Bond fees.
Subtitle 3. Tax Anticipation Notes
   
4-10-301.   Authority to issue.
   
4-10-302.   Amount authorized.
   
4-10-303.   Statement of Controller.
   
4-10-304.   Authority of County Executive.
   
4-10-305.   Form of notes.
   
4-10-306.   Manner of execution.
   
4-10-307.   Method of sale.
   
4-10-308.   Application of proceeds.
   
4-10-309.   Covenant as to payment.
   
4-10-310.   Arbitrage covenant.
Subtitle 4. Interim Notes
   
4-10-401.   Authority to issue, sell, and deliver.
   
4-10-402.   Amount authorized.
   
4-10-403.   Payment pledge.
   
4-10-404.   Manner of execution.
   
4-10-405.   Report to City Council.
   
4-10-406.   Not subject to certain provisions of State law.
Charter reference – §§
719 -
722.
State Code reference – Local Government Article, Title 19.
SUBTITLE 1. BONDS IN GENERAL
§ 4-10-101. Borrowing limitations.
   (a)   Ceiling for indebtedness. The aggregate amount of bonds and other
evidences of indebtedness outstanding at one time may not exceed:
      (1)   5.2% of the County's assessable basis of real property;
      (2)   13% of the County's assessable basis of personal property; and
      (3)   13% of the operating real property described in the Tax-Property
Article, § 8-109(c), of the State Code.
   (b)   Exclusions. The following are not bonds or evidences of indebtedness
within the meaning of subsection (a):
      (1)   tax anticipation notes or other evidences of indebtedness having a
maturity not in excess of 12 months;
      (2)   bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued or guaranteed by
the County payable primarily or exclusively from taxes levied in or on, or
other revenues of, special taxing districts; and
      (3)   bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued for self-
liquidating and other projects payable primarily or exclusively from the
proceeds of assessments or charges for special benefits or services, including
bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued for water or wastewater
facilities.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-101) (Bill No. 54-01)
§ 4-10-102. Bonds for water or wastewater facilities – In general.
   (a)   Maintenance. The County shall maintain the current interest and joint
sinking funds to secure payment, when due, of the principal of and interest on
outstanding bonds issued by the County. The joint sinking funds are special
funds under §
718(a) of the Charter.
   (b)   Required deposits. There shall be deposited in the joint sinking
funds:
      (1)   revenues collected from special benefit assessments and area
service charges imposed with respect to water or wastewater facilities
installed or constructed with proceeds from bonds sufficient to meet the annual
sinking fund increments based on established bond amortization tables; and
      (2)   interest earned on the bond proceeds, before expenditure, and on
the moneys accumulated in the funds.
   (c)   Interest. Maturing interest on and principal of the bonds shall be
paid from the funds.
   (d)   Appropriations. The annual current expense budget for the County shall
provide for appropriations to the funds for the revenues and disbursements as
provided in this section. Whenever the revenues are insufficient to meet
appropriations, the County may appropriate to the funds from net operating
revenues of its water or wastewater facilities not otherwise pledged an amount
sufficient to make up the deficit, or the County shall levy for that purpose
under §
718(f) of the Charter.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-102)
§ 4-10-103. Bonds for water or wastewater facilities – Issuance.
   (a)   Generally. With respect to bonds of the County issued for water or
wastewater facilities, the following provisions shall be considered an exercise
of the authority conferred by Local Government Article, § 10-203, of the State
Code, and § 719 of the Charter, and those provisions shall govern the issuance
of the bonds until altered by law.
   (b)   General obligation bonds. The County may issue water or wastewater
facilities bonds payable primarily from special taxes levied in specified areas
or from any assessments or charges for special benefits or services, as
provided in this Code, in which case the County shall pledge its faith and
credit to the collection and the primary sources of revenue in accordance with
covenants contained in the ordinance authorizing the bonds, and to make up any
deficiency on such primary sources by the levy of ad valorem taxes, without
limitation, as authorized by §
718(f) of the Charter. The bonds shall constitute general obligations of the
County and they shall so recite.
   (c)   Revenue bonds. The County, in the alternative, may issue water or
wastewater facilities bonds payable exclusively from assessments or charges for
special benefits or services, in which case the County shall pledge its faith
and credit to the collection and application of the revenues in accordance with
covenants contained in the ordinance authorizing the bonds. The bonds shall
constitute revenue bonds of the County, payable solely or exclusively from the
revenues pledged thereto, and they shall so recite.
   (d)   When issuance is prohibited. The County may not issue bonds of either
type if, at the time of the issuance of the bonds, the amount of the bonds plus
the unpaid amount of bonds issued by the County for water or wastewater
facilities exceeds 5.6% of the County's assessable basis of real property, 14%
of the County's assessable basis of personal property, and 14% of the operating
real property described in the Tax-Property Article, § 8-109(c), of the State
Code, computed as of the first day of the then-current fiscal year.
   (e)   Variations from Charter. In the issuance of bonds of either type, §§
720 and
721 of the Charter shall be complied with except that the declaration as to
source of payment shall be modified as set forth above. In addition, the
ordinance authorizing the bonds may provide for the capitalization of interest
for a period of two years from date of issue as well as for the deferment of
maturities for that period. In the case of bonds payable exclusively from
certain revenues, the ordinance may also provide for the sale of the bonds by
private negotiation.
   (f)   Agreement or indenture of trust. The County, in the ordinance
authorizing an issue of bonds payable exclusively from revenues, may authorize
the execution by the County Executive with a qualified bank or trust company of
an agreement or indenture of trust to secure payment. The agreement or
indenture of trust may contain covenants binding on the County with respect to
the use and application of specific revenues, the establishment and maintenance
of appropriate reserves, the prior redemption of bonds, the issuance of
additional bonds, the employment of consultants, the maintenance and operation
of water or wastewater facilities and the fixing and alteration of rates and
charges for the use and employment of such facilities. In addition, the County
may agree to the appointment by a court of competent jurisdiction of a receiver
to maintain and operate the water or wastewater facilities securing the
agreement or indenture of trust if the County defaults in the performance of
its covenants under the agreement, including covenants to pay the principal of
and interest on the bonds. However, in order to assure the self-liquidating
status of any water or wastewater facilities constructed or acquired with the
proceeds of bonds issued under such an agreement or indenture of trust, the
County may not agree to deposit under the agreement any revenues other than net
revenues from the operation of the water or wastewater facilities.
   (g)   Rule of construction; conflicts. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as a limitation on the power of the County Council to make other or
different provisions respecting bonds as may be permitted by the general laws
of the State or the Charter, and in the case of a conflict between this section
and any other or different provisions, the latter shall prevail.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-103) (Bill No. 54-01)
§ 4-10-104. Bonds and notes for capital improvements.
   (a)   Useful life. The County may not issue bonds or bond anticipation notes
for the acquisition of a capital facility or construction of a capital project
or a separately identifiable integral component of a capital facility or
capital project unless the bonds or notes have a final maturity date within the
probable useful life or the average probable useful lives of the capital
project or projects for which the series of bonds or bond anticipation notes
are issued, accounting from the date of issue of the series of bonds. The
County Council shall determine the probable useful life of a facility, project,
or undertaking. The determination by the County Council of the probable useful
life of the project is conclusive.
   (b)   Stated in ordinance. Each bond issue authorization ordinance shall
state the probable useful life of each capital facility, capital project, and
separately identifiable integral component proposed to be funded through the
issuance of general obligation bonds, estimated in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles and practices and, to the extent applicable,
federal, State, and local laws and regulations.
   (c)   Replacement bonds. The County may execute and deliver bonds, in the
manner provided in §
720 of the Charter, for the replacement of any bonds of the County previously
issued that have become mutilated or have been destroyed or lost or pay any
bonds of the County and any coupons issued with the bonds that have matured and
have become mutilated or have been destroyed or lost, without requiring
presentation of the bonds or coupons, on satisfaction of the requirements of
this subsection. The Controller, with the written approval of the Chief
Administrative Officer, may authorize the replacement of bonds if:
      (1)   the owner of the bonds has requested replacement bonds before
receipt by the County of any notice that the lost bonds have been acquired by a
bona fide purchaser;
      (2)   the owner of the bonds has filed with the County a sufficient
indemnity bond, said indemnity bond being in an amount equal to twice the face
value of the bonds plus the amount of coupons attached; and
      (3)   the owner of the bonds has agreed to satisfy all other expenses
incurred by the County in connection with the issuance of replacement bonds.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-104) (Bill No. 102-87; Bill No. 13-89)
§ 4-10-105. Reimbursement of expenditures.
   (a)   Declaration of intent. For the purposes of § 148 and related
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the County Executive is
designated as the official authorized to declare on behalf of the County an
official intent to reimburse expenditures with bond or note proceeds and is
authorized to establish procedures for recording and making available evidence
of such intent and generally to take such actions as may be appropriate to
assure compliance by the County with applicable provisions of the Internal
Revenue Code regarding such declaration of intent. For the purposes § 148 and
related provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, official intent to
reimburse expenditures also may be declared on behalf of the County in a
resolution or ordinance of the County Council.
   (b)   Delegation in writing. The authority of the County Executive to
declare official intent may be delegated in writing by the County Executive to
one or more designees.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-105) (Bill No. 62-91)
SUBTITLE 2. BONDS AND INDEBTEDNESS OF THIRD PARTIES
§ 4-10-201. Form of approval.
   (a)   Revenue or private activity bonds in general. Unless otherwise
provided by law, the issuance of revenue or private activity bonds by the
County on behalf of a third party that do not constitute in any manner an
indebtedness of the County or a charge against the general credit or taxing
powers of the County shall be approved by a resolution introduced by request of
the County Executive and adopted by the County Council.
   (b)   Private activity bonds by volunteer fire company. The issuance of
private activity bonds by a qualified volunteer fire company under § 150(e) of
the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, shall be approved by the County for the
purposes of § 147(f) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, by a resolution
introduced on behalf of the County Executive and adopted by the County Council.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-301) (Bill No. 61-04)
§ 4-10-202. Agreements requiring approval by County Council.
   (a)   Prohibition. Except as provided in this section, the County may not
pledge its credit, commit its taxing power, obligate the County in any manner
for the payment of bonded or other debt, or make a commitment for future
payment of County funds in any agreement relating to or arising from:
      (1)   the issuance of economic development revenue bonds, industrial
revenue bonds, and other private activity bonds by the County on behalf of
private entities;
      (2)   the issuance of private activity bonds by qualified volunteer fire
companies;
      (3)   the issuance of bonds by the Maryland Economic Development
Corporation, the Maryland Industrial Development Financing Authority, or
similar entities; or
      (4)   the facilities, equipment, or activities funded by the proceeds of
the bonds described in subsections (a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(3).
   (b)   Approval by ordinance. An agreement binding the County to any
obligation within the scope of subsection (a), or binding a County Executive to
seek an appropriation to fund any obligation within the scope of subsection
(a), shall be approved by ordinance of the County Council and, until unless so
approved, shall have no legal force or effect. The approval may take the form
of an ordinance that authorizes the County Executive to execute an agreement
under such terms and conditions as the County Council may specify in the
ordinance or that ratifies an agreement after execution by the County
Executive.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-302) (Bill No. 61-04)
§ 4-10-203. Maryland Economic Development Revenue Bond fees.
   (a)   Application fee. Each borrower under the Maryland Economic Development
Revenue Bond Act shall pay to the Controller on submission of the application
for initial funding or refinancing of an existing bond an application fee of
$1,000 that shall be credited against the issuer fee if the loan is approved
and closes.
   (b)   Issuer fee. Each borrower under the Maryland Economic Development
Revenue Bond Act shall pay to the Controller an issuer fee calculated by bond
counsel:
      (1)   at the time of closing on the economic development revenue bond
loan in an amount equal to:
         (i)   a yield of 0.125% per year on the principal amount of bonds
issued for new projects; or
         (ii)   0.25% of the principal amount of bond proceeds approved for
refunding; or
         (iii)   a combination of the amounts determined under subsections (b)
(1)(i) and (b)(1)(ii) that is based on the portion of the loan used for new
projects and refunding when the loan is used in part for new projects and in
part for refunding; or
      (2)   in an amount equal to a yield of 0.125% per year on the principal
amount of the loan at the times set forth in the loan documents.
   (c)   Limitation on amount of fees. The fees authorized under subsections
(a) and (b) may not exceed the amount that is the maximum applicable arbitrage
limitation established under § 148 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended.
(Bill No. 30-08)
SUBTITLE 3. TAX ANTICIPATION NOTES
§ 4-10-301. Authority to issue.
   To avoid cash shortages resulting from the receipt of tax and other County
revenues that are sometimes unpredictable or that may vary because of
unforeseen circumstances, the County may issue, sell, and deliver one or more
series of its general obligation tax anticipation notes. The net proceeds from
the sale of notes shall be used and applied for the public purpose of paying
other available funds together with any expenses of the County budgeted for the
fiscal year during which the notes are issued, sold, and delivered.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-201)
§ 4-10-302. Amount authorized.
   The aggregate principal amount of notes which may be outstanding at any time
may not exceed the amount certified by the Controller as the amount of
additional moneys needed to meet, when due, the budgeted expenses of the County
for the fiscal year in which the notes are to be delivered, prior to the
receipt of tax revenues in the fiscal year. The amount of notes that may be
outstanding at any time may not exceed the lesser of:
      (1)   5% of the gross revenues for all funds set forth in the current
expense budget of the County for the current fiscal year; or
      (2)   the amount of ad valorem and other taxes levied for the current
fiscal year or certified by the Controller to be properly treated as revenues
in the current fiscal year to the extent such taxes are reasonably anticipated
by the Controller to be available for payment of the principal of the notes at
maturity, after provision for interest on the notes, other County debt service
and any other County obligations to which such ad valorem and other taxes are
pledged.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-202)
§ 4-10-303. Statement of Controller.
   (a)   Contents of statement. Prior to the issuance of any series of notes,
the Controller shall prepare and submit to the County Executive a statement
showing:
      (1)   that, at the time of submission of the statement, the then
estimated amount of uncollected revenues of the County for the current fiscal
year equals or exceeds the principal amount of the notes and the estimated
interest on the notes;
      (2)   the additional moneys needed to meet, when due, the budgeted
expenses of the County for the current fiscal year, prior to the receipt of tax
revenues in the current fiscal year;
      (3)   the proposed principal amount of the series of notes then to be
issued, the proposed date of maturity of the series of notes and an estimate of
the interest charges to be incurred with respect to the notes based on
prevailing interest costs;
      (4)   the aggregate principal amount of notes outstanding on the proposed
date of issuance of the series of notes; and
      (5)   5% of the gross revenues for all funds set forth in the current
expense budget of the County for the current fiscal year and the amount of ad
valorem and other taxes levied for the current fiscal year or certified by the
Controller to be properly treated as revenues in the current fiscal year, to
the extent such taxes are reasonably anticipated by the Controller to be
available for payment of the principal of the notes at maturity, after
provision for interest on the notes, other County debt service, and any other
County obligations to which the ad valorem and other taxes are pledged.
   (b)   Acceptance of or variation to statement. As provided in §
4-10-307, the County Executive may accept the proposed principal amount and
maturity or make such variations as may seem to the County Executive in the
best interests of the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-203) (Bill No. 23-04)
§ 4-10-304. Authority of County Executive.
   With respect to each series of notes, the County Executive may take the
following actions and make the following commitments on behalf of the County:
      (1)   to establish the principal amount and maturity of such series of
notes and the rate of interest payable on the notes, all within the limitations
prescribed in this subtitle;
      (2)   to reserve to the County the option to redeem any such series of
notes in whole or in part at such times and upon the payment of such premiums
as the County Executive may determine to be in the best interests of the
County;
      (3)   to retain qualified bond counsel, whose qualifications are subject
to approval by the County Attorney, to handle all legal proceedings with
respect to the issuance and sale of any such series of notes and to pass on the
validity of the issuance and sale, and to employ a qualified banknote company
to print or engrave such notes in accordance with established standards, the
cost of any such employment to be treated as specialized services;
      (4)   to appoint a bank having trust powers, or a trust company, having
its principal or a branch office in the County, as paying agent for any such
series of notes, such authority to include the power to agree with respect to
the compensation of said paying agent for the services to be rendered by it and
to appoint said bank or trust company as note registrar for any such series of
notes; and
      (5)   to take such further actions and to execute and deliver such
documents, instruments and certificates as are necessary and desirable in
connection with the issuance of the notes.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-204) (Bill No. 13-89)
§ 4-10-305. Form of notes.
   (a)   Generally. Each note shall be dated the date of delivery of the note,
shall mature within 60 days of its initial authentication and delivery, and
shall bear interest from its date payable at the maturity of the note or on any
prior redemption date. The notes shall be registered as to both principal and
interest in the names of the owners of the notes on books kept for such purpose
by the Controller at the Controller's office in Annapolis, Maryland, said
Controller being hereby designated as note registrar for each series of notes
as to which the County Executive has not designated a bank or trust company as
note registrar. The notes shall be designated "Anne Arundel County, Maryland,
Tax Anticipation Notes" and the notes of each series shall be further
designated as the County Executive may determine.
   (b)   Specific requirements. The County Executive may establish the form of
each series of notes, provided that the form shall:
      (1)   state "ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY, MARYLAND, a body politic and corporate
of the State of Maryland (the ‘County'), hereby acknowledges itself indebted,
for value received and upon presentation and surrender hereof, hereby promises
to pay on the maturity date to the registered owner hereof, the principal
amount of this note, with interest thereon from the date of issue to the
maturity date, at the interest rate per year and at the office of the paying
agent, all as specified herein." and "This note is issued in anticipation of
the receipt of current taxes. The full faith and credit and unlimited taxing
power of the County are hereby irrevocably pledged to the prompt payment of the
principal of and interest on this note according to its terms, and the County
hereby covenants and agrees to pay promptly the principal of this note and the
interest thereon at the date and in the manner mentioned herein"; and
      (2)   contain the date of issue, the maturity date, the principal amount,
the interest rate and the place of payment of such series of notes; redemption
provisions, if any, established by the County Executive; provisions for the
registration of such notes; the form of certificate of authentication; and such
other provisions, terms, legends, and text as may be necessary or desirable.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-205)
§ 4-10-306. Manner of execution.
   The several series of notes shall be executed on behalf of the County by the
manual or facsimile signature of the County Executive and the seal of the
County or facsimile of the seal shall be imprinted on the notes, attested by
the manual or facsimile signature of the Chief of Staff to the County
Executive. Each note shall be authenticated by the manual or facsimile
signature of the Chief Administrative Officer or the authorized deputy. In
addition, the County Executive may provide for authentication of the notes by
any bank or trust company appointed to act as note registrar. A note is not
valid for any purpose nor does it constitute an obligation of the County unless
so authenticated.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-206) (Bill No. 13-89)
§ 4-10-307. Method of sale.
   The County Executive may sell the notes on the most favorable terms
available from time to time, without solicitation of competitive bids, at
private sale, and private sale is hereby found and determined to be in the best
interests of the County. The notes shall not be subject to the provisions of
Local Government Article, §§ 19-205 and 19-206, of the State Code, that pertain
to the public sale of certain bonds and other matters. The notes may not be
issued except for cash, be sold at less than the par value of the notes, or
bear interest at a rate in excess of the maximum interest rate, if any,
specified by the County Council by public local law to be payable on
obligations of the County. The County Executive may negotiate with any bank or
banker for a loan commitment and deliver to the bank or banker the notes from
time to time, as funds are required, pursuant to the terms of said commitment.
Following each such sale, or the negotiation of each such commitment, the
County Executive shall report the same at the next meeting of the County
Council and shall accompany the report with the data on which the County
Executive had relied to conclude that the most favorable terms practicably
available to the County in the prevailing market for comparable obligations had
been obtained.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-207)
§ 4-10-308. Application of proceeds.
   The proceeds of the sale of each series of notes shall be paid directly to
the Controller and shall be deposited in the proper accounts of the County.
There shall be deducted from the total gross proceeds received from the sale of
each series of notes the cost of issuing the notes, including the cost of any
printing or reproduction expenses, all legal fees, and other reasonably related
expenses. The balance of the proceeds of the sale of each series of notes shall
be expended to meet and pay, together with any other available funds, expenses
budgeted for the current fiscal year as such expenses may become payable. Any
part of the funds derived from the sale of each series of notes not expended
for the purposes set forth in §
4-10-301 shall be set apart in a separate fund by the Controller and applied in
payment of the principal of the series of notes.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-208)
§ 4-10-309. Covenant as to payment.
   (a)   Collection and setting apart funds. The County hereby irrevocably and
unconditionally covenants with the holder or holders of the notes:
      (1)   to collect and set apart in a separate fund a sufficient amount of
any ad valorem and other taxes which may have been levied and which are now, or
may become, payable to the County in order to provide funds to pay the
principal of and interest on the notes, when due; and
      (2)   to take all action within the legal power of the County as may be
necessary, desirable, or appropriate in order to obtain and set apart funds
sufficient to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the
notes, when due.
   (b)   Other funds. The County may provide other funds for the payment of the
principal of and interest on the notes from any lawful source. The notes shall
constitute general obligations of the County.
   (c)   Levy of taxes. For the purpose of paying, on the date of maturity, the
principal of and interest on the notes to the extent not paid from taxes levied
for the fiscal year in which the notes are issued or from taxes properly
treated as revenues in such fiscal year, the County shall levy or cause to be
levied ad valorem taxes which it is empowered to levy, without limitation, on
real property, tangible personal property, and certain intangible personal
property within its corporate limits and subject to County taxation in amount
sufficient to provide for the payment, when due, of the principal of and
interest on the notes, such levy to be made to the full extent permitted by
law.
   (d)   General obligation. The full faith and credit of the County are hereby
irrevocably pledged to the payment of the maturing principal of and interest on
the notes and to the levy and collection of the taxes prescribed in this
section as and when such taxes may become necessary in order to provide
sufficient funds to meet the debt service requirements of the notes.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-209)
§ 4-10-310. Arbitrage covenant.
   The County hereby solemnly covenants that it will not make any use of the
proceeds of the notes or of any moneys that, pursuant to § 148 and related
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, may be deemed to be
proceeds of such notes, which would cause such notes to be "arbitrage bonds"
within the meaning of that section and those regulations.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 9-210)
SUBTITLE 4. INTERIM NOTES
§ 4-10-401. Authority to issue, sell, and deliver.
   (a)   Authorization. Pursuant to §
721(b) of the Charter, the County is hereby authorized to issue, sell, and
deliver one or more series of interim notes to provide a temporary means of
financing the funding of appropriations for capital projects approved in a
capital budget to the extent the same are to be financed from borrowing and the
borrowing is not, at the time of issuance of the notes, authorized pursuant to
an enacted bond issue authorization ordinance. The net proceeds from the sale
of the interim notes shall be used and applied for the public purpose of
funding capital projects approved in an effective capital budget. The authority
contained in this section shall be in addition and supplementary to any other
authority vested in the County to borrow money.
   (b)   Order of County Executive. Interim notes issued hereunder to
temporarily fund appropriations for capital projects shall be authorized by
order of the County Executive. The County Executive shall have the authority to
fix the terms, maturity, interest rates, method of issuance and sale, which may
be by private negotiated sale or by competitive sale, and other conditions of
issuance as provided by this subtitle.
   (c)   Limitations. The issuance of interim notes shall be subject to the
limitations set forth in §
719 of the Charter.
   (d)   Payment date. Any interim notes issued hereunder shall be paid not
later than the last day of the fiscal year in which the notes are issued.
(Bill No. 2-17)
§ 4-10-402. Amount authorized.
   Interim notes may be issued only if, upon the issuance of the interim notes,
the aggregate principal amount of interim notes outstanding under this subtitle
does not exceed 50% of the amount of appropriations for capital projects
approved in a capital budget to the extent the same are to be financed from
borrowing and the borrowing is not, at the time of issuance of the interim
notes, authorized pursuant to an enacted bond issue authorization ordinance.
(Bill No. 2-17)
§ 4-10-403. Payment pledge.
   (a)   Tax levy. If not paid or redeemed as set forth in subsections (b) or
(c), the County shall levy or cause to be levied ad valorem taxes upon all real
and tangible personal property within its boundaries subject to assessment for
taxation in rates and amounts sufficient in each and every fiscal year in which
such interim notes are outstanding to provide for the prompt payment, when due,
of the principal of and interest on the interim notes. If the proceeds from the
taxes levied in any fiscal year are inadequate for such payment, additional
taxes shall be levied in the succeeding fiscal year to remedy such deficiency.
The full faith and credit and taxing power of the County is pledged, subject to
the limitation on the tax levy set out in §
710(d) of the Charter, to the prompt payment of the principal of and interest
on the interim notes as and when such interim notes shall become due and
payable and to the levy and collection of the taxes herein described as and
when such taxes may become necessary to provide sufficient funds to pay the
debt service requirements on the interim notes. The County shall covenant and
agree with owners of the interim notes to levy and collect the taxes herein
described.
   (b)   Other funds. The County may apply to the payment of the principal of
or interest on the interim notes any funds received by it from the State of
Maryland or the United States of America or any governmental agency or
instrumentality, or from any other legally available source, including the
proceeds of bonds, if such funds are available to the County for the purpose of
accomplishing the type of projects which the interim notes are issued to
finance. The taxes hereby required to be levied may be reduced by the amount of
any such funds received or receivable in any fiscal year.
   (c)   Redemption. If not paid otherwise as set forth in subsection (b),
interim notes shall be redeemed not later than the last day of the fiscal year
of issuance of the interim notes from the proceeds of bond anticipation notes
or bonds issued pursuant to a duly enacted bond issue authorization ordinance
that authorizes the financing of projects which the interim notes have been
issued to finance.
(Bill No. 2-17)
§ 4-10-404. Manner of execution.
   The interim notes shall be executed on behalf of the County by the manual or
facsimile signature of the County Executive. The seal of the County or
facsimile of the seal shall be imprinted on the interim notes and attested by
the manual or facsimile signature of the Administrative Officer to the County
Council. Each note shall be authenticated by the manual or facsimile signature
of the Chief Administrative Officer. In the alternative, the County Executive
may provide for authentication of the interim notes by any bank or trust
company appointed to act as note registrar. An interim note is not valid for
any purpose nor does it constitute an obligation of the County unless so
authenticated.
(Bill No. 2-17)
§ 4-10-405. Report to County Council.
   Within 30 days of each sale of interim notes, the County Executive shall
report the sale to the County Council.
(Bill No. 2-17)
§ 4-10-406. Not subject to certain provisions of State law.
   Interim notes authorized hereunder are specifically exempted from the
provisions of the Local Government Article, §§ 19-205 and 19-206, of the State
Code.
(Bill No. 2-17)
TITLE 11. BUDGET
Section
   
4-11-101.   Current expense budget – Long-term contracts and personnel
summaries.
   
4-11-102.   Capital budget and capital program.
   
4-11-103.   Closing of capital project.
   
4-11-104.   Department of Public Works budget.
   
4-11-105.   Rates for water and wastewater services.
   
4-11-106.   Revenue Reserve Fund.
   
4-11-107.   Grant-in-aid program.
   
4-11-108.   (Reserved).
   
4-11-109.   Community Benefit Program.
   
4-11-110.   Agricultural and woodland preservation program sinking fund.
   
4-11-111.   Expenditure of real property transfer tax.
   
4-11-112.   Proceeds of additional marriage license fee.
   
4-11-113.   Court Fines and Fees Special Revenue Fund.
   
4-11-114.   Grants Special Revenue Fund.
   
4-11-115.   Bond Premium Special Revenue Fund.
   
4-11-116.   Energy Loan Revolving Fund.
   
4-11-117.   Funding of the Reserve Fund for Retiree Health Benefits.
   
4-11-118.   Video Lottery Facility Local Impact Grant Special Revenue Fund.
   
4-11-119.   Watershed Protection and Restoration Special Revenue Fund.
   
4-11-120.   Developer Street Light Special Fund.
   
4-11-121.   Reserve Fund for Permanent Public Improvements.
   
4-11-122.   Arts Council of Anne Arundel County Special Revenue Fund.
   
4-11-123.   Annapolis and Anne Arundel County Conference and Visitors Bureau
Special Revenue Fund.
   
4-11-124.   Housing Trust Special Revenue Fund.
   
4-11-125.   Opioid Abatement Special Revenue Fund.
   
4-11-126.   Community Reinvestment and Repair Special Revenue Fund.
Charter reference – §§
701 et seq.
§ 4-11-101. Current expense budget – Long-term contracts and personnel
summaries.
   (a)   Contracts. In addition to other material and information required by
the Charter or other law, the proposed current expense budget for each fiscal
year shall list each existing contract under which the County is or may be
obligated to expend funds and which is to be performed in the upcoming fiscal
year or in any succeeding fiscal year thereafter. For each contract, the
current expense budget shall identify the number of the contract; the party
with whom the County has contracted; the purpose of the contract; the duration
and performance terms of the contract; and the terms for payment under the
contract.
   (b)   Departmental personnel summaries.
      (1)   In addition to other material and information required by the
Charter or other law, the proposed current expense budget for each fiscal year
shall list detailed departmental personnel summaries that include the number of
employees by position title and classification; the pay grade for each
position; the number of positions requested in the current fiscal year's budget
by position title and classification; the number of positions approved in the
current fiscal year's budget by position title and classification; and the
number of positions requested in the upcoming fiscal year's budget by position
title and classification. Once the proposed County budget for the upcoming
fiscal year has been submitted by the County Executive to the County Council as
required by §
706 of the Charter, a departmental personnel summary shall be revised only by
an amendment to the budget that is presented to and adopted by the County
Council.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the number of
positions requested in the upcoming fiscal year's budget by position title and
classification may include reclassifications of positions approved in the
current fiscal year's budget that are currently occupied by employees who will
remain in their current position title and classification and will be
considered as underfilling the reclassified positions. In these instances, the
current expense budget shall identify the positions that are occupied and that
are being reclassified and considered underfilled. The employee underfilling a
reclassified position cannot be reclassified into the reclassified job
classification that the employee is underfilling unless the employee is deemed
to be reclassified or hired into the reclassified position in accordance with
the provisions of this Code and the Employee Relations Manual.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 8-101) (Bill No. 58-03; Bill No. 76-15; Bill No. 18-21)
Charter reference – §
704.
§ 4-11-102. Capital budget and capital program.
   (a)   Generally. In addition to other material and information required by
the Charter or other law, the proposed capital budget and capital program for
each fiscal year as submitted by the County Executive to the County Council
shall include the information described in this section.
   (b)   Contents generally. The proposed capital budget and capital program
shall include:
      (1)   a key that describes the types of activities associated with each
phase of a capital project, as defined by the Department of Public Works and
included in the budget document; and
      (2)   the following information regarding the phases of a capital
project: the current phase of the project; the action undertaken in the fiscal
year that ends June 30 of the calendar year in which the budget is submitted;
and the action required to complete the project.
   (c)   Specific information required for capital projects. The following
information shall be provided regarding a capital project:
      (1)   the project name and number;
      (2)   the project class;
      (3)   a brief narrative description of the project and an explanation of
how the project conforms to an applicable master plan or feasibility study;
      (4)   a map or location reference, if applicable;
      (5)   the fiscal year in which the project first appeared in the capital
program, by capital project number;
      (6)   the initial total cost of the project and a brief explanation of
significant changes;
      (7)   the total project cost of the capital project for the prior and
current capital budgets and capital programs described by its phases of
activity, including plans and engineering; land acquisition; construction;
furniture, fixtures, and equipment; and overhead;
      (8)   the dollar change in the total project cost from the prior year to
the proposed budget;
      (9)   for multi-year recurring projects, an explanation of the proposed
use of the funds for the upcoming fiscal year, including an identification of
the facilities or uses to which the funds will be applied;
      (10)   the projected impact of the completed project on the current
expense budget;
      (11)   any amounts encumbered and expended by April 1 of the current and
prior year.
      (12)   previously approved and projected funding for each fiscal year in
the six-year capital program, identified by each source of funds, including
bonds, pay-as-you-go funds, and grant funds;
      (13)   the amount of estimated funding required beyond the six-year
capital program;
      (14)   a statement as to whether the project is contingent on the receipt
of State, federal, or other non-County funds or grants and the amount of the
funds or grants;
      (15)   a brief narrative description of the public benefit to be achieved
by the project; any changes in the name of the project since its inception; any
changes in the scope of the project from the prior year; any changes in the
timing of the project from the prior year; an explanation for any changes in
the total project cost from the prior year; and any amendments to the project
that were previously adopted by ordinance; and
      (16)   a summary of the recommendations of the Planning Advisory Board.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 8-102) (Bill No. 27-00; Bill No. 19-02; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 4-22)
Charter reference – §
705.
§ 4-11-103. Closing of capital project.
   (a)   Time for closing. The Office of Finance shall close out a capital
project in the fiscal year in which the significant anticipated costs of the
capital project have been incurred by the County and the facility being
constructed pursuant to the capital project is either in use or capable of
being used for its intended purpose.
   (b)   Monthly report. The Controller shall file a monthly report with the
County Auditor explaining why a capital project has not been closed if the
Office of Finance has not closed a capital project within six months following
its original estimated completion date as determined by the Department of
Public Works or when the facility is either in use or capable of being used for
its intended purpose.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 8-103) (Bill No. 23-04)
§ 4-11-104. Department of Public Works budget.
   (a)   Expense detail. In compliance with §§
717 and
718 of the Charter, the current expense and capital budgets for water and
wastewater utilities submitted by the Director of Public Works for each fiscal
year shall contain the following expense detail:
      (1)   anticipated operating expenses for the water utility and wastewater
utility, including the expenses of maintenance and replacement of worn-out
facilities and equipment, making new connections and extensions, not to be
financed from bond funds, supplies, additional equipment, personnel, direct and
indirect administrative overhead, purchase of water or wastewater treatment by
the County;
      (2)   anticipated expenses of planning and design not payable from bond
funds;
      (3)   anticipated expenses of debt service on general obligation and
revenue bonds or other obligations issued by the County for utility capital
improvements, or to be issued in accordance with the capital budget in the
ensuing fiscal year for those purposes;
      (4)   anticipated expense of meeting sinking fund requirements;
      (5)   other anticipated costs and expenses considered necessary to
maintain the utilities in good operating condition in accordance with sound
engineering practice; and
      (6)   anticipated expenses of payments in lieu of taxes as required by §
717 of the Charter.
   (b)   Revenue detail. In compliance with §§
717 and
718 of the Charter, the current budgets for water and wastewater utilities
submitted by the Director of Public Works for each fiscal year shall contain
the anticipated revenues from:
      (1)   water connection charges, wastewater connection charges, water
readiness-to-serve charges, private fire protection charges, metered water
delivered charges, wastewater use charges, and public fire hydrant charges;
      (2)   special water benefit charges, special wastewater benefit charges,
and area benefit charges that may be established as provided in §§
13-5-601 et seq. of this Code;
      (3)   all assessments and other charges imposed;
      (4)   prior years' surplus or collections and from interest on any
invested funds of the utilities, including bond proceeds; and
      (5)   miscellaneous revenues or sources established by ordinance of the
County Council.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 8-104) (Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 4-11-105. Rates for water and wastewater services.
   (a)   Requirement. The rates, assessments, and other charges for water and
wastewater utility services furnished by the County, or for direct or indirect
benefits accruing from the water and wastewater utility services, shall be
fixed as prescribed in the Charter and this Code on a basis to provide gross
revenues from the utility services sufficient to pay the amounts appropriated
for the utility services from the current revenues of the utility services as
outlined in §
4-11-104.
   (b)   Rule of construction. This section may not be construed to prevent
inter-fund cash borrowing authorized by §§
711(c) and
718(c) of the Charter; supplementary or emergency appropriations for the
utilities as authorized by §
712 of the Charter; or appropriation of tax revenues to redeem a pledge of the
full faith and credit of the County made under the Sanitary Commission Act or
under §
4-10-103.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 8-105)
§ 4-11-106. Revenue Reserve Fund.
   (a)   Creation and description. There is hereby created a revenue reserve
account known as the Revenue Reserve Fund. The Revenue Reserve Fund is a
continuing, non-lapsing account in which funds are retained to support
appropriations if estimated general fund revenues decline below current expense
budget appropriations during a fiscal year.
   (b)   Appropriation. The budget as proposed by the County Executive and
approved by the County Council may contain an appropriation to fund the Revenue
Reserve Fund except that the amount of the annual appropriation to the Revenue
Reserve Fund may not cause the sum of the balance of the Revenue Reserve Fund
plus the appropriation to exceed an amount equal to 8% of the estimated General
Fund revenues for the upcoming fiscal year.
   (c)   Interest earnings. Interest earnings of the fund shall be retained to
the credit of the fund except that the Controller may credit interest earnings
of the Revenue Reserve Fund to the General Fund if credited interest earnings
cause the total amount of the fund to exceed an amount equal to 8% of the
estimated General Fund revenues for the upcoming fiscal year.
   (d)   Transfer to general fund. During the course of a fiscal year, the
County Executive, with the approval of the County Council by ordinance, may
authorize a transfer from the Revenue Reserve Fund to general fund revenues in
the current expense budget to fund existing appropriations if the County
Executive determines that revenues for the current fiscal year will be below
the estimated revenues relied on to fund the current expense budget and all
reasonable reductions in expenditures have been made and will not be sufficient
to offset the anticipated shortfall.
   (e)   County Council procedure. In acting on a bill to transfer funds from
the Revenue Reserve Fund, the County Council shall proceed as it does upon
requests for transfers of appropriations under §
711 of the Charter.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 8-107) (Bill No. 45-92; Bill No. 25-98; Bill No. 17-00;
Bill No. 58-02; Bill No. 70-15; Bill No. 25-21; Bill No. 50-22; Bill No. 41-23)
State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 16-107.
§ 4-11-107. Grant-in-aid program.
   (a)   Establishment. There is a grant-in-aid program for the purpose of
aiding incorporated improvement or community associations or health centers in
the construction of community activity or health buildings. To be eligible for
aid, the association shall satisfy the Chief Administrative Officer that it is
an eleemosynary corporation in good standing with the State Department of
Assessments and Taxation; obtain the written approval of the Chief
Administrative Officer for the plans and specifications of the building; and
satisfy the Chief Administrative Officer that the building will be used
exclusively for medical services or community or civic activities, including
youth activities centers, dances, bingos, dinners, and the like.
   (b)   Contribution. On fulfilling the conditions in subsection (a), the
association shall be eligible for a contribution by the County. The County
Executive may award a grant-in-aid in an amount not to exceed $10,000 or, with
the approval of the County Council, in an amount in excess of $10,000.
   (c)   Agreement; lien. Before receipt of the contribution, the association
shall record at its own expense among the land records of the County, an
agreement stating that if the building ceases to be used for public purposes,
the grant shall be refunded immediately to the County and, until that time, the
County is entitled to a lien on the building to the extent of the grant.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 8-108) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 84-09)
§ 4-11-108. (Reserved).
§ 4-11-109. Community Benefit Program.
   (a)   Establishment. There is a Community Benefit Program for the purpose of
assisting incorporated nonprofit community associations and other incorporated
nonprofit organizations to upgrade or improve their subdivisions or
communities.
   (b)   Eligibility. To be eligible for a grant, an association or
organization shall be in good standing with the Maryland State Department of
Assessments and Taxation and:
      (1)   (i)   be active in the following area in the southwest portion of
the County: From the point at which Maryland Route 4 enters Anne Arundel County
from the south thence running in a westerly direction along the common boundary
between Anne Arundel County and Calvert County to the shores of the Patuxent
River, thence running in a northerly direction along the westernmost boundary
of Anne Arundel County and binding along the shores of the Patuxent River to
the point at which the western boundary of Anne Arundel County intersects with
Kings Branch, thence running along Kings Branch in an easterly and then
northerly direction to the intersection of Kings Branch with Mt. Airy Road,
then in an easterly direction on Mt. Airy Road to the point at which Mt. Airy
Road intersects with Maryland Route 424, thence running in a southeasterly
direction along the southwest border of Birdsville Road, to the point at which
Birdsville Road intersects with Maryland Route 2, thence running in a southerly
direction along the western border of Maryland Route 2 to the point at which
Maryland Route 2 intersects with Maryland Route 408, thence running in a
southwesterly direction along the northwestern border of Maryland Route 408 to
the point at which Maryland Route 408 intersects with Brooks Woods Road, thence
running in a southeasterly direction along the southwestern border of Brooks
Woods Road to the point at which Brooks Woods Road intersects with Little Road,
thence running in a generally westerly direction along the northern border of
Little Road to the point at which Little Road intersects with Bay Front Road,
thence running in an easterly direction along the southern border of Bay Front
Road to the point at which Bay Front Road intersects with Fishers Station Road,
thence running in a southwesterly direction along the northwestern border of
Fishers Station Road until Fishers Station Road intersects with Maryland Route
4, thence running in a southerly direction along the western border of Maryland
Route 4, to the point of beginning; and
         (ii)   agree to use the grant to protect and benefit the County and
the communities located near a sanitary landfill operated solely for the
disposal of rubble that contributes a host community benefit fee to the County;
or
      (2)   (i)   be active in the area of the northern portion of the County
bounded by Route 295 (Baltimore-Washington Parkway), Route 176 (Dorsey Road),
Route 170 (Telegraph Road), Route 174 (Reece Road), and Route 175 (Annapolis
Road); and
         (ii)   agree to use the grant to protect and benefit the County and
the communities located near a video lottery facility.
   (c)   Amount of grant. The County Executive may award a grant to an eligible
association or organization in an amount not to exceed $10,000 or, with the
approval of the County Council, in an amount in excess of $10,000.
   (d)   Agreement. Each association or organization that receives a grant
shall enter into an agreement with the County that ensures compliance with the
requirements of subsection (b) and contains any other provisions that the
County Executive determines to be necessary or prudent to protect the interests
of the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 8-110) (Bill No. 44-95; Bill No. 86-09)
§ 4-11-110. Agricultural and woodland preservation program sinking fund.
   (a)   Establishment. There is an agricultural and woodland preservation
sinking fund. The sinking fund is a non-lapsing fund.
   (b)   Payments into fund. The County shall pay into the sinking fund
appropriations from the general fund. Amounts on deposit in the sinking fund
may be invested and reinvested by the County, and all proceeds from investments
made by the fund shall be paid into the sinking fund.
   (c)   Payment from the fund. The County shall make payments from the sinking
fund for expenses of principal and interest on long-term obligations of the
County for the purchase of agricultural and woodland preservation easements and
for issuance and administration of the long-term obligations.
   (d)   Purpose; no rights to holder of debt instrument. The sinking fund is
established for the sound financial administration of the agricultural and
woodland preservation program. The holder of a debt instrument issued by the
County relating to the agricultural and woodland preservation program shall
have no rights in or with respect to the sinking fund, including any moneys or
investments held in the fund, and the County may modify the sinking fund
without the consent of any such holder.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 8-111) (Bill No. 21-00)
§ 4-11-111. Expenditure of real property transfer tax.
   Anne Arundel County may dedicate and, as provided in the annual County
budget, expend:
      (1)   up to 50% of the revenues received from the real property transfer
tax rate levied under §
4-3A-101(c)(1) in each fiscal year for the payment of debts and costs incurred
for the construction of water and wastewater facilities; and
      (2)   if the County has an Agricultural Land Preservation Program
certified under § 5-408 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the
State Code, up to 20% of the revenues received from the real property transfer
tax rate levied under §
4-3A-101(c)(1) in each fiscal year for the purchase of agricultural easements
under the County Agricultural Land Preservation Program.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 7-101.1) (Bill No. 40-23)
State Code reference – 1994 Md. Laws, Ch. 96.
Editor's note – This section was transferred to the Public Local Laws of
Maryland (Article 2 - Anne Arundel County) by 1985 Md. Laws, Ch. 8, § 10. This
section formerly appeared as Article 81, § 278C, of the State Code. With the
revision of the tax laws through the Tax-Property Article of the State Code,
various local provisions were transferred to the public local laws for the
appropriate county. This section was added to the 1967 County Code as § 17-711,
and renumbered in the 1985 County Code as Article 6, § 7-101.1.
Editor’s note – This section was amended by 2021 Md. Laws, Ch. 10, § 1.
§ 4-11-112. Proceeds of additional marriage license fee.
   The Controller shall deposit the proceeds of the additional marriage license
fee collected by the Clerk of the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County under §
2-3-105 into the general fund and the proceeds shall be used to promote or fund
domestic violence programs in accordance with the annual budget.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 10-104) (Bill No. 50-93)
§ 4-11-113. Court Fines and Fees Special Revenue Fund.
   (a)   Fund established. There is a Court Fines and Fees Special Revenue Fund
into which revenues shall be paid from the following sources:
      (1)   all appearance fees collected by the Clerk of the Circuit Court for
Anne Arundel County under the authority of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Article, § 7-204(d), of the State Code; and
      (2)   fifty percent of the fines imposed and recognizances forfeited to
the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County under the authority of Chapter 808 of
the 1943 Laws of Maryland.
   (b)   Special fund. The Court Fines and Fees Special Revenue Fund is a
special, nonlapsing fund.
   (c)   Purposes. The revenues paid into the Court Fines and Fees Special
Revenue Fund shall be appropriated in the budget of the Circuit Court for Anne
Arundel County and dedicated to the general purposes of the Court Library and
Assignment Office and for maintenance and improvement of the Court's
facilities, equipment, and programs, including the following:
      (1)   necessary expenses for books, legal publications, library
equipment, and the services of the library and other personnel; and
      (2)   refurbishing or repairing of furniture in the court rooms and
library.
   (d)   Nonexclusive source of funding. General fund revenues may be used to
supplement appropriations from the Court Fines and Fees Special Revenue Fund
for the purposes described in subsection (c).
(Bill No. 24-08)
§ 4-11-114. Grants Special Revenue Fund.
   (a)   Fund established. There is a Grants Special Revenue Fund into which
shall be paid revenues from the following sources:
      (1)   State, federal, and private grants that limit expenditure of grant
funds to purposes specified in the grants, except grants which are used solely
as a funding source for capital projects; and
      (2)   the estimated amount of the County matching funds that will be
required during a fiscal year by State, federal, and private grants, except
grants which are used solely as a funding source for capital projects,
appropriated as part of an ordinance appropriating funds.
   (b)   Special fund. The Grants Special Revenue Fund is a special, nonlapsing
fund.
   (c)   Conditional appropriation of grants. Except for a grant which is used
solely as a funding source for capital projects, a grant not included in an
ordinance appropriating funds and any County matching funds required by the
grant are deemed appropriated for the purpose specified in the grant, if:
      (1)   there is a grant award letter or other writing that, to the
satisfaction of the Controller, confirms that the grant funds are available for
expenditure by the County;
      (2)   there are sufficient funds appropriated and available in the budget
for payment of any required County matching funds;
      (3)   the County Council is presented with a resolution to approve the
appropriation of the grant; and:
         (i)   within five business days, three or more members of the County
Council request the resolution be heard at the next regularly scheduled
hearing; or
         (ii)   the conditions of paragraph (i) are not met.
   (d)   Conditional appropriation of unanticipated grant revenues. Except for
a grant which is used solely as a funding source for capital projects, revenue
from a grant included in an ordinance appropriating funds but in excess of the
amount anticipated for the grant, and any County matching funds required by the
grant, are deemed appropriated for the purpose specified in the grant, subject
to the following conditions:
      (1)   there is a grant award letter or other writing that, to the
satisfaction of the Controller, confirms that the grant funds are available for
expenditure by the County;
      (2)   there are sufficient funds available in the budget of the agency
administering the grant in either the Grants Special Revenue Fund or the
General Fund for payment of any required County matching funds; and
      (3)   for appropriations of more than $500,000 funded by Coronavirus
State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds distributed by the U.S. Treasury,
approval by the County Council as described in subsection (e).
   (e)   Fiscal Recovery Funds – County Council approval. Within two business
days of receipt of a resolution to approve an appropriation exceeding $500,000
funded by Coronavirus State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds distributed by the
U.S. Treasury, three or more members of the County Council may request a
hearing be scheduled to act on the resolution, such hearing to be held not more
than ten business days from the date of receipt of the resolution. The failure
of three or more members of the County Council to request a hearing on the
resolution within two business days shall constitute approval of the
appropriation.
   (f)   Amendment of budget. Upon satisfaction of the conditions imposed on an
appropriation by subsections (c) through (e), the Budget Officer, without the
necessity of further action by the County Council, shall amend the budget as
recorded in the County financial system to show the appropriation within the
Grants Special Revenue Fund to the agency that will administer the expenditure
of the grant and any matching funds, provided that the Budget Officer shall
send a report to the Controller and to the County Auditor that, for each grant,
identifies the grant, the amount of the budgetary change, and the agency to
which the budgetary change was made.
(Bill No. 29-08; Bill No. 18-15; Bill No. 80-16; Bill No. 111-21; Bill No. 112-
21; Bill No. 52-24)
   Editor's Note – The changes made to this section by Bill No. 111-21 and Bill
No. 112-21 are in effect until December 31, 2024, after which time the changes
are repealed and of no further force and effect.
§ 4-11-115. Bond Premium Special Revenue Fund.
   (a)   Fund established. There is a Bond Premium Special Revenue Fund into
which the net bond proceeds from the sale of general improvements bonds sold at
a price above par value shall be deposited.
   (b)   Special fund. The Bond Premium Special Revenue Fund is a special,
nonlapsing fund.
   (c)   Purposes. The revenues paid into the Bond Premium Special Revenue Fund
shall be utilized to fund appropriations in the capital budget for a purpose or
purposes permitted for the expenditure of bond proceeds under federal income
tax law.
(Bill No. 27-10; Bill No. 81-16)
§ 4-11-116. Energy Loan Revolving Fund.
   (a)   Fund established. There is an Energy Loan Revolving Fund into which
forty percent (40%) of the net revenues from the Millersville Landfill Gas to
Energy Project shall be deposited. For the purposes of this section, "net
revenues" means the revenue attributable to the sale of electricity generated
by the project and the sale of other attributes of the project, less the
amounts payable to the Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority, debt
service on bonds issued to finance the construction of the project, the cost of
electricity at the Millersville Landfill and Resource Recovery Facility, the
Millersville Convenience Center, the Glen Burnie Convenience Center, and the
Sudley Convenience Center.
   (b)   Special fund. The Energy Loan Revolving Fund is a special, nonlapsing
fund.
   (c)   Purposes. The net revenues paid into the Energy Loan Revolving Fund
shall be appropriated for countywide energy efficiency and conservation
projects.
   (d)   Administration of the fund.  The projects financed by the Energy Loan
Revolving Fund shall be administered by the Office of Central Services.
(Bill No. 57-10; Bill No. 98-18)
§ 4-11-117. Funding of the Reserve Fund for Retiree Health Benefits.
   (a)   Funding plan required. On or before May 1, 2014 the County Executive
shall submit to the County Council a five-year plan for funding the Reserve
Fund for Retiree Health Benefits established by § 718(i) of the County Charter.
   (b)   Contents of plan. The plan shall include recommendations for:
      (1)   standards for determining the affordability of retiree health
benefits that consider future spending levels for the benefits and the ability
of County taxpayers to fund the benefits in addition to the value of the
benefits to retirees;
      (2)   any changes to the County's Retiree Health Benefits Program,
including any changes to the nature and scope of the benefits themselves,
necessary to stay within the recommended affordability standards;
      (3)   appropriations to the Reserve Fund for Retiree Health Benefits for
each of the next five fiscal years, beginning with fiscal year 2015; and
      (4)   a means of funding retiree health benefits that stays within the
recommended affordability standards, to include consideration of funding
retiree health benefits on an actuarial basis by contributions from both the
County and employees while the future retirees are actively employed by the
County.
   (c)   Advisory committee. The County Executive shall appoint an advisory
committee to review and comment on the plan that includes as members employees
and retirees as well as citizens not having a direct financial interest in the
County's Retiree Health Benefits Program.
(Bill No. 85-13)
§ 4-11-118. Video Lottery Facility Local Impact Grant Special Revenue Fund.
   (a)   Fund established. There is a Video Lottery Facility Local Impact Grant
Special Revenue Fund into which shall be paid the revenue from the local impact
grant distributed to the County under the State Government Article, § 9-1A-27,
of the State Code.
   (b)   Special fund. The Video Lottery Facility Local Impact Grant Special
Revenue Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund.
   (c)   Purposes. The revenue paid into the Video Lottery Facility Local
Impact Grant Special Revenue Fund shall be dedicated to and appropriated only
for those purposes set forth in the State Government Article, § 9-1A-31(b), of
the State Code.
   (d)   Recommendations of Local Development Council. The Video Lottery
Facility Local Development Council established under Title 24 of Article 3 of
this Code shall provide annual recommendations to the County Executive for the
expenditure of Video Lottery Facility Local Impact Grant funds. In addition,
the Video Lottery Facility Local Development Council shall review any ordinance
for the appropriation of funds from the Video Lottery Facility Local Impact
Special Revenue Fund and, on or before the thirtieth day after receipt of the
proposed ordinance, report its findings and recommendations to the County
Executive and County Council. The County Council may not vote on any ordinance
that is subject to this subsection until it has either received the Council’s
report or the time period for submission of the report has expired.
   (e)   Nonexclusive source of funding. General Fund revenues may be used to
supplement appropriations from the Video Lottery Facility Local Impact Grant
Special Revenue Fund for the purposes described in subsection (c).
(Bill No. 92-12; Bill No. 85-13; Bill No. 47-14; Bill No. 94-24)
§ 4-11-119. Watershed Protection and Restoration Special Fund.
   (a)   Fund established. There is a Watershed Protection and Restoration
Special Revenue Fund into which shall be paid the revenue required by the
Environment Article, § 4-202.1(h)(3), of the State Code.
   (b)   Special fund. The Watershed Protection and Restoration Special Revenue
Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund.
   (c)   Purposes. The revenue paid into the Watershed Protection and
Restoration Special Revenue Fund shall be dedicated to and appropriated for
those purposes set forth in the Environment Article, § 4-202.1(h)(4), of the
State Code, including the payment or reimbursement of debt service on bonds,
notes or other obligations that finance stormwater management projects and the
pledging of such revenue and fund to secure the repayment of this debt service.
   (d)   Nonexclusive source of funding. General Fund and other revenues may be
used to supplement appropriations from the Watershed Protection and Restoration
Special Revenue Fund for the purposes set forth in subsection (c).
(Bill No. 2-13; Bill No. 85-13)
§ 4-11-120. Developer Street Light Special Fund.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the terms "developer" and "development"
have the meanings set forth in §
17-1-101 of this Code.
   (b)   Fund established. There is a Developer Street Light Special Fund into
which shall be paid the revenue collected in accordance with §
17-11-301(c) of this Code.
   (c)   Special fund. The Developer Street Light Special Fund is a special,
nonlapsing fund.
   (d)   Purposes. The revenue paid into the Developer Street Light Special
Fund shall be appropriated for the purchase, construction, and installation of
street lighting associated with a development for which a developer paid a fee
in accordance with §
17-11-301(c) of this Code, and for the costs of the County in administering the
fund.
(Bill No. 104-13)
§ 4-11-121. Reserve Fund for Permanent Public Improvements.
   (a)   Fund established. There is hereby created a revenue reserve account
known as the Reserve Fund for Permanent Public Improvements.
   (b)   Funding.
      (1)   (i)   Subject to the limitation in paragraph (iii), revenue
resulting from the first one-tenth of a percentage point by which the County
income tax rate exceeds 2.50% shall be paid into the Fund.
         (ii)   Subject to the limitation in paragraph (iii), if the County
income tax rate exceeds 2.50% by less than one-tenth of a percentage point,
then all of the revenue resulting from the increase shall be paid into the
Fund.
         (iii)   The revenue paid into the Fund under paragraphs (i) or (ii)
shall not exceed $21,000,000 in any fiscal year.
      (2)   Unexpended Fund balances that would otherwise lapse into the
General Fund may also be paid into the Fund.
      (3)   Interest earnings of the Fund shall be retained to the credit of
the Fund.
   (c)   Continuing fund. The Reserve Fund for Permanent Public Improvements is
a continuing, non-lapsing fund.
   (d)   Purposes.
      (1)   The revenues paid into the Fund shall be appropriated solely as a
funding source for permanent public improvements in the capital budget,
including the payment or reimbursement of debt service on bonds, notes, and
other obligations that fund permanent public improvements in the capital budget
and the pledging of such revenue and Fund to secure the repayment of such debt
service.
      (2)   Notwithstanding other provisions of the Charter, the existence of
this Fund does not prohibit the use of other revenues and receipts to finance
permanent public improvements.
(Bill No. 42-19)
§ 4-11-122. Arts Council of Anne Arundel County Special Revenue Fund.
   (a)   Fund established. There is an Arts Council of Anne Arundel County
Special Revenue Fund.
   (b)   Special fund. The Arts Council of Anne Arundel County Special Revenue
Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund.
   (c)   Purposes. The revenues paid into the Fund shall represent the share of
hotel tax revenue required to be paid by the County to the Arts Council of Anne
Arundel County, Inc. under § 20-603(c) of the Local Government Article of the
State Code.
(Bill No. 42-21)
§ 4-11-123. Annapolis and Anne Arundel County Conference and Visitors Bureau
Special Revenue Fund.
   (a)   Fund established. There is an Annapolis and Anne Arundel County
Conference and Visitors Bureau Special Revenue Fund.
   (b)   Special fund. The Annapolis and Anne Arundel County Conference and
Visitors Bureau Special Revenue Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund.
   (c)   Purposes. The revenues paid into the Fund shall represent the share of
hotel tax revenue required to be paid by the County to the Annapolis and Anne
Arundel County Conference and Visitors Bureau under § 20-603(c) of the Local
Government Article of the State Code.
(Bill No. 42-21)
§ 4-11-124. Housing Trust Special Revenue Fund.
   (a)   Fund established. There is a Housing Trust Special Revenue Fund into
which shall be paid the revenue attributable to:
      (1)   any real property transfer tax rate levied under §
4-3A-101(c)(2) in excess of the revenue that would be derived from the real
property transfer tax rate under §
4-3A-101(c)(1);
      (2)   any special recordation tax rate in excess of the generally
applicable rate that is levied on an instrument of writing for which the
consideration payable or the principal amount of debt secured is $1,000,000 or
more; and
      (3)   any fee in lieu or other payments under
Title 12 of Article 17 of this Code.
   (b)   Special fund. The Housing Trust Special Revenue Fund is a special,
nonlapsing fund.
   (c)   Purposes. The revenue paid into the Housing Trust Special Revenue Fund
shall be dedicated and appropriated to provide affordable housing for moderate-
and low-income individuals in the County including the City of Annapolis.
(Bill No. 40-23; Bill No. 72-24)
Editor’s note – This section was added by 2021 Md. Laws, Ch. 10, § 1. The 2021
Md. Laws, Ch. 10, § 1 added § 4-11-122, but because of the addition of § 4-11-
122 and § 4-11-123 by Bill No. 42- 21, § 4-11-122 was renumbered as § 4-11-124.
§ 4-11-125. Opioid Abatement Special Revenue Fund.
   (a)   Fund established. There is an Opioid Abatement Special Revenue Fund
into which shall be paid the County’s share of settlement proceeds from the
national settlement agreement of the State and national litigation related to
the opioid industry, including the manufacturing, marketing, promotion,
distribution, and dispensing of opioids.
   (b)   Special fund. The Opioid Abatement Special Revenue Fund is a special,
nonlapsing fund.
   (c)   Purposes. The revenue paid into the Fund shall be used as permitted by
the “State-subdivision agreement between the State of Maryland and local
governments on proceeds relating to the settlement of opioids litigation”,
dated January 21, 2022, and § 7-331(f) of the State Finance and Procurement
Article of the State Code, as amended from time to time.
(Bill No. 18-22)
§ 4-11-126. Community Reinvestment and Repair Special Revenue Fund.
   (a)   Fund established. There is a Community Reinvestment and Repair Special
Revenue Fund, into which shall be paid all funds received from the State
Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund established pursuant to § 1-322 of the
Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of the State Code.
   (b)   Special fund. The Community Reinvestment and Repair Special Revenue
Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund.
   (c)   Purposes. The revenue paid into the Fund shall be used only for
funding community-based initiatives intended to benefit low-income communities,
community-based initiatives that serve disproportionately impacted areas, as
defined in § 36-101 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of the
State Code, and any related administrative expenses, provided that:
      (1)   funds may not be expended from the Fund for any law enforcement
agencies or activities; and
      (2)   funds expended from the Fund are supplemental to and may not
supplant funding that otherwise would be appropriated for County programs that
existed prior to July 1, 2023.
(Bill No. 57-23)
TITLE 12. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section
   
4-12-101.   Charge for worthless checks.
   
4-12-102.   Payment of governmental charges.
   
4-12-103.   Short-term advances to County Employees' Federal Credit Union.
   
4-12-104.   Lien certificates.
   
4-12-105.   Inmate medical fee.
   
4-12-106.   Automated mapping – Geographic information systems.
   
4-12-107.   Grant fund accounting.
§ 4-12-101. Charge for worthless checks.
   (a)   Imposition of charge. There is a charge of $25 for each check or
similar written instrument that is not paid in full by the financial
institution on which it is drawn for a reason other than the fault or neglect
of the County, when on first return "no funds," "payment stopped," or "account
closed" is indicated, or when presented a second time for payment it is
dishonored regardless of reason. The charge shall be imposed against the person
presenting the worthless check or instrument to the County, its officers,
agents, or employees in payment of a tax, charge, fee, assessment, or impost of
any kind levied or imposed under law.
   (b)   Mechanics. The charge shall be entered in the records of the Office of
Finance, collected by the Controller, and be recorded as a lien on the County
tax records when appropriate. The charge shall be collected in the same manner
as the tax, charge, fee, or assessment in connection with which the worthless
instrument was presented in payment is collected.
   (c)   Waiver. In cases where procedural or processing errors have occurred
or other justified circumstances are evident, the Controller or the
Controller's designee may waive the charge.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 10-101) (Bill No. 38-88; Bill No. 53-96; Bill No. 17-00)
§ 4-12-102. Payment of governmental charges.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "governmental charges" includes all
taxes, fees, and charges collected by the County and any additional charges
collected by the County in connection with the taxes, fees, or charges.
   (b)   Authority to accept. The County may accept payment of governmental
charges by a credit card, debit card, or electronic means, such as e-check,
electronic funds transfer, and automated clearing house.
   (c)   Required imposition of service charges and fees. Except as provided in
subsection (d), the County shall impose and collect a service charge in
connection with the payment of governmental charges by credit card or debit
card, but the service charge may not exceed the amount of any fee charged to
the County in connection with the payment method. The County shall impose and
collect a fee in connection with the payment of governmental charges by credit
card, debit card, or electronic means if the payment is rejected due to
insufficient funds.
   (d)   Permissive imposition of service charges. The County may impose and
collect a service charge in connection with the payment of fees by credit card,
debit card, or electronic means of fees charged for the following services and
programs:
      (1)   Department of Recreation and Parks: child care programs; facility
rentals; park access; and recreational, athletic, and park programs;
      (2)   Police Department: any fees collected by or payable to Animal
Control; and
      (3)   Department of Public Works: landfill dumping fees.
   (e)   Notice. Each bill or notification for a governmental charge that may
be paid by credit card, debit card, or electronic means shall state the types
of cards and electronic methods that may be used to pay the governmental charge
and the amount of any service or other charges.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 10-107) (Bill No. 26-00; Bill No. 75-00; Bill No. 8-05;
Bill No. 13-14)
§ 4-12-103. Short-term advances to County Employees' Federal Credit Union.
   The Controller may disburse funds for short-term advances to the Anne
Arundel County Employees' Federal Credit Union on the following conditions:
prior to disbursement, the advances must have the written approval of the
County Executive and the Chief Administrative Officer; the advances shall be
limited to not more than 15% of the total assets of the Credit Union; and the
advances must bear interest at the average rate of investment rate for the
County and shall be repaid in full within 120 days from the date of
disbursement.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 10-102) (Bill No. 13-89)
§ 4-12-104. Lien certificates.
   The Controller may provide for the issuance of a lien certificate stating
what County charges or assessments exist against property and may charge $50
for each certificate. A certificate shall include State and County taxes,
benefit assessments, and other charges and assessments. A charge due at or
prior to the time of issuance of a certificate is not a lien against any
property after the issuance of a certificate for the property unless the charge
is shown on the certificate.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 10-103) (Bill No. 46-94; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 35-11)
§ 4-12-105. Inmate medical fee.
   (a)   Establishment. There is a fee of $4 for each visit by an inmate in the
Anne Arundel County Detention Center to an institutional medical unit or non-
institutional physician, dentist, or optometrist in accordance with the
Correctional Services Article, § 11-203(c), of the State Code.
   (b)   Collection and use. The fee shall be deducted from the inmate's
spending financial account, reserve financial account, or similar account held
by the Superintendent of Detention Facilities on behalf of the inmate. The
proceeds from the fee shall be collected by the Superintendent of Detention
Facilities, paid monthly to the Controller, and deposited by the Controller in
the general fund of the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 10-105) (Bill No. 17-95; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 23-04)
§ 4-12-106. Automated mapping – Geographic information systems.
   The County shall charge a fee for system products or system services, as
defined in the State Government Article, § 10-901, of the State Code, that are
provided to the public. The fees charged for system products and system
services shall be established in accordance with the State Government Article,
§ 10-904, of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 10-106) (Bill No. 88-97; Bill No. 20-00)
§ 4-12-107. Grant fund accounting.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated. "Qualifying non-profit organization" means an organization exempt
from taxation pursuant to § 501 of the Internal Revenue Code that receives
County funds totaling more than $100,000 in any fiscal year or is entitled to
receive a share of County revenues totaling more than $100,000 in any fiscal
year. "Qualifying non-profit organization" does not mean any agency, office,
board, or commission established by County law or an organization that receives
County funds or revenues by virtue of a County procurement.
   (b)   Required submissions. No later than sixty days after the beginning of
the County's fiscal year during which the organization is to receive County
funds or a share of County revenue, a qualifying non-profit organization shall
provide to the Controller under oath or affirmation by a person authorized to
do so by the board of directors of the qualifying non-profit organization:
      (1)   a list of officers, directors, trustees, key employees, and the
five highest compensated employees of the organization, as defined for purposes
of the Internal Revenue Service Form 990, during the organization's most recent
tax year, together with the amount of compensation reported on Form W-2, Box 5
or Form 1099-MISC, Box 7, filed with the Internal Revenue Service for the
calendar year ending with or within the organization's tax year by the
organization and any related organization, as defined for purposes of the
Internal Revenue Service Form 990;
      (2)   a copy of any contract of employment or agreement for the
performance of services in exchange for compensation for any person listed in
subsection (b)(1);
      (3)   a copy of any contract of employment or agreement for the
performance of services in exchange for compensation in effect during the
fiscal year with any person or entity who is regulated as a lobbyist under the
General Provisions Article, § 5-702(a), (1), (2), (3), or (4), of the State
Code, or §
7-7-102 of this Code;
      (4)   a copy of any resolution of the board of directors approving the
contracts or agreements referred to in subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3);
      (5)   a copy of any written policies and procedures in effect during the
fiscal year, for disclosure of conflicts of interest, as defined for purposes
of compliance with the Internal Revenue Code, that identify the classes of
individuals within the organization covered by the policy, facilitate
disclosure of information that may help identify conflicts of interest, and
specify procedures to be followed in managing conflicts of interest;
      (6)   a copy of any written policies and procedures in effect during the
fiscal year for monitoring proposed or ongoing transactions for conflicts of
interest, as defined for purposes of compliance with the Internal Revenue Code,
and dealing with potential or actual conflicts, whether discovered before or
after the transaction has occurred, and addressing financial or business
transactions between the organization's officers and directors and the
organization; and
      (7)   a copy of a written policy providing for disclosure protection for
employees of the organization consistent with §
6-2-107 of this Code.
   (c)   Annual audit. Each qualifying non-profit organization shall prepare
financial statements for each fiscal year, which shall be prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and shall have the
annual financial statements audited by an independent certified public
accountant. Within 180 days of the end of the organization's fiscal year, the
organization shall provide copies of the audit to the Controller and the County
Auditor, as well as copies of any management letter and any independent
auditor's report on internal control over financial reporting and compliance
issued by the independent auditor.
   (d)   Alternative compliance. A qualifying non-profit organization may
otherwise comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) by executing
a grant funding agreement with the County containing such provisions as the
County Attorney, the Controller, and the Director of the Finance Department of
the City of Annapolis shall require to ensure transparency and accountability
in the expenditure of those funds or revenues.
   (e)   Remedy for non-compliance. The Controller may withhold any amounts
otherwise due to the qualifying non-profit organization until the information
required by subsections (b) or (c) has been received.
   (f)   Information to Auditor and City Finance Director. The Controller shall
provide a copy of the information submitted pursuant to subsections (b), (c),
and (d) to the County Auditor and the Director of the Finance Department of the
City of Annapolis.
   (g)   Site visits and review of records. Upon reasonable notice and at
reasonable times, the Controller, the County Auditor, and the Director of the
Finance Department of the City of Annapolis, together or separately, may
conduct periodic site visits at the business office of a qualifying non-profit
organization and such visits may include inspection and review of records
related to services and financial records.
   (h)   Organizations receiving $100,000 or less. An organization exempt from
taxation pursuant to Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code that receives
County funds totaling $100,000 or less in any fiscal year or is entitled to
receive a share of County revenues totaling less than $100,000 in any fiscal
year shall execute a funding agreement with the County containing such
provisions as the County Attorney, the Controller, and the Director of the
Finance Department of the City of Annapolis shall require to ensure
transparency and accountability in the expenditure of those funds or revenues.
The funding agreement shall also contain a provision requiring disclosure
protection for employees of the organization consistent with §
6-2-107 of this Code.
   (i)   Regulations. The Controller may promulgate such regulations as may be
necessary to implement this section.
(Bill No. 63-09; Bill No. 96-13)
APPENDIX – TAX ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS MAP
Click_to_view_this_Appendix
(Adobe Reader is required to view this Appendix)
ARTICLE 5. PENSIONS
   Title
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   COUNTY RETIREMENT AND PENSION SYSTEM
      
3.   EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT PLAN
      
4.   FIRE SERVICE RETIREMENT PLAN
      
5.   POLICE SERVICE RETIREMENT PLAN
      
6.   DETENTION OFFICERS' AND DEPUTY SHERIFFS' RETIREMENT PLAN
      
7.   POST-RETIREMENT BENEFIT ADJUSTMENTS TO RETIREES AND BENEFICIARIES
TITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; General Provisions
   
5-1-101.   Definitions.
   
5-1-102.   Pension funds; contributions.
   
5-1-103.   Amendment or termination of plans.
   
5-1-104.   Administration by Personnel Officer.
   
5-1-105.   Appeals.
   
5-1-106.   No vested employment rights.
   
5-1-107.   Disability retirement pension review boards.
   
5-1-108.   Credited interest rate.
   
5-1-109.   Actuarial assumptions.
   
5-1-110.   Status of payments.
Subtitle 2. Participation
   
5-1-201.   Participation – In general.
   
5-1-202.   Inter-plan transfers.
   
5-1-203.   Reemployment.
   
5-1-204.   Reinstatement.
   
5-1-205.   Credited service.
   
5-1-206.   Actual plan service – In general.
   
5-1-207.   Actual plan service – Authorized leave of absence.
   
5-1-208.   Actual plan service – Credited in-plan military service.
   
5-1-209.   Credited pre-plan military service.
   
5-1-210.   Disability leave service.
   
5-1-211.   Purchased service – Employees' Retirement Plan and Detention
Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan.
   
5-1-212.   Purchased service credits – fire service retirement plan and police
service retirement plan.
Subtitle 3. Transferred Service
   
5-1-301.   Definitions.
   
5-1-302.   Employees' Retirement Plan and Detention Officers' and Deputy
Sheriffs' Retirement Plan.
   
5-1-303.   Fire Service Retirement Plan and Police Service Retirement Plan.
   
5-1-304.   Fire Service Retirement Plan and Police Service Retirement Plan
transfers before July 1, 1991.
   
5-1-305.   Transferred service "window".
   
5-1-306.   Effect on benefits.
Subtitle 4. Benefits
   
5-1-401.   Payment of benefits.
   
5-1-402.   Limitation on calculation of annual basic pay.
   
5-1-403.   Limitation on benefits.
   
5-1-404.   Form of payment – Compliance with federal law.
   
5-1-405.   Rollover distribution.
   
5-1-406.   Cost-of-living adjustment.
   
5-1-407.   Beneficiaries.
   
5-1-408.   Contingent annuitant.
Subtitle 5. Deferred Retirement Option Program – Fire Service Retirement Plan,
   Police Service Retirement Plan and Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs'
Retirement Plan
   
5-1-501.   Definitions.
   
5-1-502.   Applicability.
   
5-1-503.   Eligibility.
   
5-1-504.   Applications.
   
5-1-505.   Limitation on the number of participants.
   
5-1-506.   Participation period; mandatory retirement upon expiration.
   
5-1-507.   Status during participation.
   
5-1-508.   DROP account.
   
5-1-509.   Early withdrawal from participation.
   
5-1-510.   Disability during participation.
   
5-1-511.   Death during participation.
   
5-1-512.   Retirement benefits of participants.
   
5-1-513.   Manner of payment.
   
5-1-514.   Beneficiaries.
   
5-1-515.   Reemployment of participant.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 5-1-101. Definitions.
   In this article, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Accrued benefit" means a benefit earned by employment to a certain
date based on annual basic pay and credited service determined as of that date
expressed in the form of an annual benefit commencing at normal retirement date
and payable in the normal form of payment for the plan.
      (2)   "Accumulated contributions" means the sum of all contributions made
by a participant through payroll deductions and otherwise under a plan,
credited to a participant's retirement account, plus credited interest.
      (3)   "Active participant" means a participant who is currently making
contributions to a plan or who is a tier two participant currently accruing a
benefit in the Employees' Retirement Plan and the term includes a participant
on an authorized leave of absence without pay of not more than one year.
      (4)   "Active vested participant" means an active participant who has met
the requirements for vesting under a plan.
      (5)   "Actual plan service" means the total time of employment with an
employer as a participant in a plan as provided in §
5-1-206 and the term includes (i) the total time of employment with an employer
as a participant in a plan that is transferred between County plans under §
5-1-202 and (ii) credited in-plan military service.
      (6)   "Actuarially equivalent" means as to any amount, an equivalent
amount, determined in accordance with the actuarial assumptions specified in
this article. Notwithstanding any other provision in this article to the
contrary, the mortality table used for purposes of adjusting any benefit or
limitation under § 415(b)(2)(B), (C), or (D) of the Internal Revenue Code, as
provided in §
5-1-403 of this article, shall be the mortality table prescribed in § 415(b)(2)
(E)(v) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (7)   "Annual basic pay" means the employee's annual salary for an
employee paid on a salary pay scale; the rate of hourly pay multiplied by 2,080
hours for a full-time employee paid on an hourly pay scale; and the rate of
hourly pay multiplied by scheduled hours for a part-time employee paid on an
hourly pay scale. "Annual basic pay" includes earnings that have been reduced
under the County's Deferred Compensation Plan under § 457 of the Internal
Revenue Code and under any other statutory fringe benefit program sponsored by
an employer and permitted by the Internal Revenue Code.
      (8)   "Beneficiary" means one or more persons designated by a participant
eligible to receive benefits in the event of the participant's death.
      (9)   "Board" means, unless the context indicates otherwise, the Board of
Trustees of the Anne Arundel County Retirement and Pension System.
      (10)   "Credited in-plan military service" means a participant's military
service after becoming a participant in a plan that is countable as actual plan
service.
      (11)   "Credited interest" means the monthly interest that accrues on a
participant's contribution from the first January after the date the
contribution was made through the month preceding the payment of any
contributions to the participant.
      (12)   "Credited pre-plan military service" means a participant's
military service before becoming a participant in a plan that is countable as
credited service.
      (13)   "Credited service" means a period of service that is recognized
for purposes of determining the entitlement to a benefit or calculating the
amount of a benefit under this article and the term includes, subject to the
provisions of §
5-1-205(a), the following types of service: actual plan service; credited pre-
plan military service; disability leave service; purchased service; and
transferred service.
      (14)   "Disability leave service" means a participant's accrued unused
disability leave that is countable as credited service.
      (15)   "Disability retirement date" means the effective date on which a
participant is determined to be eligible for a disability retirement pension
under a plan.
      (16)   "Disabled participant" means a participant who meets the
requirements for a disability retirement pension under a plan.
      (17)   "Early retirement date" means the date on which a participant is
eligible for an early retirement pension as established in a plan.
      (18)   "Early retirement pension" means the reduced amount of a
participant's normal retirement pension, payable at an early retirement date.
      (19)   "Early retirement reduction factor" means a factor used to reduce
a normal retirement pension.
      (20)   "Employee" means an individual who is employed by an employer.
      (21)   "Employer" means the County and, when applicable, any agency whose
employees are participants in a plan.
      (22)   "Final average basic pay" means the average of a participant's
three highest annual basic pays as of the anniversary date of the date of
termination unless one or more of the participant's annual basic pays was
reduced because of an involuntary transfer of the participant to a position
with a lower salary or hourly rate of pay on performance or disciplinary
grounds. If one or more of the participant's annual basic pays was reduced
because of an involuntary transfer or movement of the participant to a position
with a lower salary or hourly rate of pay on performance or disciplinary
grounds, the participant's final average basic pay shall mean the average of a
participant's three highest annual basic pays of the participant's last five
annual basic pays, with the last five annual basic pays consisting of the
participant's annual basic pay on the participant's date of termination and the
last four anniversary dates of the date of termination before the date of
termination.
      (23)   "Internal Revenue Code" means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
and any subsequent amendments.
      (24)   "Military service" means induction into the Armed Forces of the
United States, as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101(A)(4), for training and service
under the Selective Service Training and Service Act of 1940 or a subsequent
act of a similar nature; enlistment into the Armed Forces of the United States
as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101(A)(4); or membership in a reserve component of
the Armed Forces of the United States, as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101(A)(4), on
active duty or ordered or assigned to active duty.
      (25)   "Normal retirement date" means the date on which a participant is
eligible for a normal retirement pension as established in a plan.
      (26)   "Normal retirement pension" means a full unreduced accrued benefit
payable at a normal retirement date.
      (27)   "Participant" means, as the context requires, an employee who is
covered under a plan or a former employee who is entitled to a benefit under a
plan.
      (28)   "Pension fund" means, as the context requires, the assets of the
pension fund of the Employees' Retirement Plan; the pension fund of the Fire
Service Retirement Plan; the pension fund of the Police Service Retirement
Plan; or the pension fund of the Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs'
Retirement Plan.
      (29)   "Plan" means, as the context requires, the Employees' Retirement
Plan; the Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials; the Fire Service
Retirement Plan; the Police Service Retirement Plan; or the Detention Officers'
and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan.
      (30)   "Plan year" means a calendar year.
      (31)   "Purchased service" means service purchased by a participant that
is countable as credited service.
      (32)   "Qualified domestic relations order" means a qualified domestic
relations order as defined in § 414(p)(1)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (33)   "Retired participant" means a participant who is receiving a
retirement pension under a plan.
      (34)   "Terminated vested participant" means a participant who has
terminated service, having met the requirements for vesting under a plan, and
has not elected to withdraw accumulated contributions.
      (35)   "Transferred service" means service that is permitted to be
transferred under State law from a retirement or pension plan of the State or a
political subdivision of the State other than the County that is countable as
credited service, but the term does not include inter-plan transfers between
County plans under §
5-1-202.
      (36)   "Vesting" means the accrual by a participant of a right to the
benefits of a plan.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-101) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 66-05;
Bill No. 92-08; Bill No. 98-12)
§ 5-1-102. Pension funds; contributions.
   Each pension fund shall provide funding for the benefits provided under the
plan to participants and the cost of administering the plan and the pension
fund. All contributions made under a plan shall be paid to the pension fund for
that plan. Annually, each employer shall contribute to each pension fund the
amount necessary to pay for the benefits provided by each plan in accordance
with generally accepted actuarial practice.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-102) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-103. Amendment or termination of plans.
   (a)   Generally. It is intended that each plan be permanent, but the County
reserves the right to amend or terminate each plan. If a plan is amended or
terminated, amendment or termination may not adversely affect accrued benefits
as of the effective date of the amendment or termination.
   (b)   Death or disability benefits. An amendment to the death or disability
benefits of a plan does not apply to the death or disability benefits of a
participant whose death or disability occurs prior to the effective date of the
amendment; is caused by an injury that occurs prior to the effective date of
the amendment; or is caused by a disease the onset of which occurs prior to the
effective date of the amendment.
   (c)   Changes by ordinance. Credited interest rates, actuarial assumptions,
and the rate of participant contributions to the pension fund of a plan may be
changed by ordinance at any time.
   (d)   Plan termination. If a plan is terminated:
      (1)   to the extent funded on the date of plan termination, the accrued
benefits of active participants, to the extent not fully vested, become fully
vested as of the date of plan termination;
      (2)   the liability of the County shall be:
         (i)   for each active participant and each vested terminated
participant, the present value of the participant's accrued benefits as of the
date of plan termination, or if greater, individual accumulated contributions;
         (ii)   for each retired participant, disabled participant or any other
payee who is receiving benefits under the plan, the present value of the
retirement benefit which is payable as of the date of plan termination or, if
greater, the individual accumulated contribution reduced by all benefits which
have been paid to the date of plan termination;
      (3)   the County may not make future cost-of-living adjustments after the
date of plan termination; and
      (4)   the pension fund shall be distributed among the participants,
including terminated vested participants, in a manner determined by the
Personnel Officer to preclude individual discrimination, by the purchase of
annuities or by other equitable means of distribution.
   (e)   Balance returned to County. If the balance in a pension fund exceeds
the amount required to fund fully the liability of the County as defined in
subsection (d)(2) for all active vested participants, disabled participants,
retired participants, terminated vested participants, or for other payees who
are then receiving benefits under the plan, the excess shall be returned to the
County.
   (f)   Assets. The assets of a pension fund may not revert to the County
except as provided in this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-103) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-104. Administration by Personnel Officer.
   (a)   Generally. Each plan shall be administered by the Personnel Officer.
In matters relating to the administration of each plan, the Personnel Officer
may seek the advice and guidance of the Board.
   (b)   Powers. The Personnel Officer has the powers necessary for proper
administration of each plan, including the powers to prepare forms and
prescribe procedures to be used and followed by participants in filing
applications for benefits and for furnishing of evidence necessary to establish
a right to benefits; make determinations as to the rights of participants
applying for or receiving benefits; develop procedures for determining credited
service of participants, including affording participants an opportunity after
written notice to make objection to the determination in advance of retirement;
authorize disbursements from each pension fund in accordance with the plan and
establish necessary procedures for authorizing disbursements; audit and review
past benefit determinations and initiate recovery of any overpayments;
establish policies and standards and make determinations concerning total and
permanent disability for the purposes of this article; withhold funds for
making payment of taxes and for making payments under qualified domestic
relations orders; and, at the Personnel Officer's discretion, withhold funds
authorized by a participant.
      (c)   Limitation on recovery of overpayments. In the absence of fraud by
a participant, the Personnel Officer or their agents or assigns may not recover
an overpayment based on an erroneous past benefit determination caused by a
failure to properly apply the reduction in benefits upon reemployment under §
5-1-203 if the participant made a material change in position, including
accepting, resigning or retiring from employment, in reasonable reliance upon
an intentional or negligent misrepresentation of the amount of the
participant's benefit made to the participant by the Personnel Officer or an
employee or other agent of the Personnel Officer.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-104) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 25-13; Bill No. 51-13)
§ 5-1-105. Appeals.
   (a)   Generally. A person aggrieved by a final decision of the Personnel
Officer may appeal to the Board of Appeals. The time for appeal begins
following the final written decision of the Personnel Officer in accordance
with the rules and procedures of the Board of Appeals.
   (b)   Arbitration. In lieu of an appeal to the Board of Appeals and unless
otherwise limited by law or collective bargaining agreement, the County and a
person aggrieved by a final decision of the Personnel Officer may agree to
resolve a matter through arbitration.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-105) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-106. No vested employment rights.
   This article does not give a County employee the right to be retained in the
employ of the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-106) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-107. Disability Retirement Pension Review Boards.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "Board" means a Disability Pension Review
Board.
   (b)   Boards established. There is a Disability Retirement Pension Review
Board for each plan under this article.
   (c)   Members. Each Board consists of five members. Of the five members, two
shall be active participants of the plan; one shall be an attorney from the
Office of Law; one shall be an employee from the Office of Personnel; and one
shall be a physician licensed to practice in this State. The County Executive
shall appoint the members and select a Chair from among the members. Each
member shall serve a two-year term.
   (d)   Vacancy. If a vacancy occurs during the term of any member, the County
Executive shall appoint a qualified successor to complete the unexpired balance
of the term.
   (e)   Quorum. At a meeting or hearing conducted by a Board, the presence of
three members constitutes a quorum.
   (f)   Compensation. A member who is also a County employee is not entitled
to remuneration for services except for reimbursement for reasonable and
necessary expenses provided in the budget. Compensation of the member who is a
physician shall be fixed by the Personnel Officer subject to budget
limitations.
   (g)   Board review and evaluation. On application of a participant, a Board
shall review and evaluate the initial denial of a disability retirement pension
claim by the Personnel Officer. The conclusions and recommendations of the
Board shall be transmitted to the Personnel Officer and are advisory only.
Following receipt of the Board's advisory recommendation, the Personnel Officer
shall make a final decision.
   (h)   Board rules and regulations. Each Board shall adopt rules and
regulations governing its review and hearing of cases. Before taking effect the
rules and regulations shall be approved by the Personnel Officer.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-107)
§ 5-1-108. Credited interest rate.
   (a)   Generally. The County Council shall set the rate of credited interest.
A change in the rate of credited interest applies to interest allowed for
months occurring after the effective date of the change compounded annually on
each January 1.
   (b)   Rates. The rate of credited interest is 4.25%for the Employees'
Retirement Plan; 3% for the Fire Service Retirement Plan; 3% for the Police
Service Retirement Plan; and 4.25%for the Detention Officers' and Deputy
Sheriffs' Retirement Plan.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-108) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-109. Actuarial assumptions.
   (a)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the following
actuarial assumptions shall be used to determine actuarially equivalent
amounts:
      (1)   interest, 6% per year;
      (2)   post-retirement cost-of-living-adjustment, 0% per year; and
      (3)   mortality, 1983 group annuity mortality table, blended 50% male and
50% female.
   (b)   No assumption for any guaranteed cash refund amount. To determine
actuarially equivalent amounts of optional forms of pension payments,
consideration may not be given to any guaranteed cash refund amount.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-109) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-110. Status of payments.
   The payments, benefits, and refunds made under this article are for the
support and maintenance of the participants; except as provided in a qualified
domestic relations order, may not be assigned, commuted, or anticipated; and
are free from the claims of creditors to the extent permitted by law.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-110) (Bill No. 90-01)
SUBTITLE 2. PARTICIPATION
§ 5-1-201. Participation – In general.
   Eligibility to be a participant in a plan is determined by the provisions of
the plan. On becoming a participant, an employee shall complete and deliver to
the Personnel Officer the forms required by the Personnel Officer. Once an
employee becomes an active participant, an employee may cease to be an active
participant only as provided in this article.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-201) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-202. Inter-plan transfers.
   (a)   Generally. Each active participant in a plan who transfers to a
position covered by another plan shall cease to be a participant in the former
plan and become a participant in the latter plan on the effective date of the
transfer. An employee may not be an active participant in more than one plan at
the same time.
   (b)   Appointed positions. A participant in a plan who is appointed to the
position of Chief of Police, Fire Chief, or Superintendent of Detention
Facilities may elect to transfer and become a participant in another plan for
which the participant becomes eligible on appointment. The election shall be
made within one year of the appointment.
   (c)   Transfer of assets. On transfer of a participant, the Personnel
Officer shall provide for a transfer of assets as provided in subsection (d)
and the participant's credited service as provided in subsection (e).
   (d)   Amount of assets.
      (1)   The amount of assets transferred shall equal the value of the
employee's benefit under the former plan and shall be calculated using the
projected unit credit basis, with the calculation performed as of the
participant's date of transfer, using the valuation assumptions in effect for
the actuarial valuation immediately preceding the transfer date, and credited
with interest at the valuation interest rate from the participant's date of
transfer to the date the assets are transferred.
      (2)   The amount of assets transferred may not be less than accumulated
contributions to the former plan on the date the assets are transferred.
      (3)   Asset transfers may be calculated as part of the annual actuarial
valuation of a plan.
   (e)   Credited service. A participant's credited service in the former plan
shall be transferred to the latter plan and shall be used for the purposes of
determining the normal retirement date or the early retirement date and for
determining the amount of the pension benefit in the latter plan, in accordance
with the provisions of the latter plan, provided that:
      (1)   transferred service received as credited service in the former plan
shall be considered to be actual plan service transferred to the latter plan in
accordance with §
5-1-101(5)(i); and
      (2)   credited pre-plan military service shall be considered in
accordance with §
5-1-209(b).
   (f)   Adjustments. A participant is not entitled to receive, or required to
make, a payment adjustment for differences in employee contribution rates
between the two plans for the period of participation prior to the transfer.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-202) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 7-03)
§ 5-1-203. Reemployment.
   (a)   Generally. The amount of any retirement benefit earned by a
participant with respect to credited service before the participant's date of
reemployment is not affected by the participant's credited service or annual
basic pay on or after the participant's date of reemployment.
   (b)   Reduction of benefits. Except as provided in subsection (c) or (d),
whenever a retired participant is employed or reemployed by an employer, the
employee's retirement benefit shall be reduced by $1.00 for every $2.00 earned
by the employee. On termination of reemployment, the retirement benefit amount
shall include any new retirement benefit earned based on credited service and
annual basic pay during the period of reemployment. Any retirement benefit
earned during the period of reemployment may be subject to different early
retirement reduction factors and optional forms of payments than the prior
benefit.
   (c)   When benefits not reduced.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
5-1-515, a participant's retirement benefit may not be reduced if:
         (i)   the employee is retired from the County as a classified employee
and is reemployed by the County as:
            1.   an exempt employee under §
802(a)(14) of the Charter, but only for the first 1,500 hours worked in a
calendar year;
            2.   an exempt employee under §
802(a)(17) of the Charter;
            3.   an employee of the Sheriff in a position that requires the
employee to be certified as a Police Officer by the Police Training Commission
if the employee was certified as a Police Officer by the Police Training
Commission at the time the employee retired; or
            4.   an employee of the State's Attorney in a position that
requires the employee to be certified as a Police Officer by the Police
Training Commission if the employee was certified as a Police Officer by the
Police Training Commission at the time the employee retired; or
         (ii)   the employee retired from the County as an exempt employee
under §§
6-2-101,
6-2-104, or
6-2-105 of this Code in a position that is not exempt from the provisions of
the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. §§ 207 et seq. and is reemployed by the
County as an exempt employee under §
802(a)(14) of the Charter; or
         (iii)   the employee is retired from the County as a classified
employee and:
            1.   it is at least 90 days between the date of retirement and the
date of reemployment if reemployed as a classified employee; and
            2.   the retiree is reemployed in a different job classification
than that which the retiree held at the time of retirement; and
            3.   if the retiree was a uniformed officer as defined in §
6-1-101(22), the retiree is reemployed as a non-uniformed officer or in a
different department from which the retiree retired.
      (2)   An employee under subsection (c)(1) does not accrue a new pension
benefit during the period of reemployment.
   (d)   Disability benefits terminated. Whenever a disabled participant is
reemployed by an employer, disability retirement pension benefits shall be
terminated. When the employee reaches the employee’s normal retirement date or
early retirement date, as applicable, the benefit amount shall be based on
credited service and annual basic pay during all periods of employment.
Credited service may not be granted for the period of disability. The employee
is subject to all plan requirements for vesting and retirement eligibility.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-203) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 66-05; Bill No. 78-17;
Bill No. 100-21; Bill No. 31-24)
§ 5-1-204. Reinstatement.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "reinstated employee" means an employee
who has employment terminated by the employer; successfully appeals to have
employment reinstated; and withdraws accumulated contributions between the
dates of termination and reinstatement.
   (b)   Repayment of withdrawn contributions. Within 90 days of reinstatement,
a reinstated employee may repay withdrawn accumulated contributions and, if
credited service is granted for the period of absence, make payment of employee
contributions for that period.
   (c)   Interest. Interest may not be charged for the period of time between
the withdrawal of funds and payment or repayment.
   (d)   Loss of prior credited service. Except as otherwise provided in a
plan, if a participant does not make payment or repayment within 90 days, the
participant shall lose all credit for prior credited service.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-204) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-205. Credited service.
   (a)   Generally. A participant shall receive credited service for actual
plan service in accordance with §
5-1-206; credited pre-plan military service in accordance with §
5-1-209; disability leave service in accordance with §
5-1-210; purchased service in accordance with §
5-1-211 or §
5-1-212; and transferred service in accordance with §§
5-1-301 et seq.
   (b)   Types of credited service. The following types of credited service
shall be computed individually based on full calendar months, with any
remainder amount of days numbering at least 15 days in any calendar month for
any individual type of credited service counted as one full calendar month of
credited service: actual plan service; credited pre-plan military service;
purchased service; and transferred service.
   (c)   Disability leave service computation. Disability leave service shall
be computed based on each unit of 22 days of accrued unused disability leave
and any remainder amount of days of accrued unused disability leave numbering
at least 11 days but less than 22 days, counted as one full calendar month of
credited service. The number of hours of disability leave that equal one day is
based on a participant’s scheduled hours per day at the date of termination of
employment.
   (d)   Time periods not counted more than once. A period of time may not be
counted more than once for purposes of computing the credited service to which
a participant is entitled, and the same period
of credited service may not be used more than once for purposes of vesting in
the benefits of a plan and for determining the eligibility for and the amount
of monthly pension benefits under a plan or for purposes of vesting in the
benefits of more than one plan and for determining the eligibility for or the
amount of monthly pension benefits under more than one plan.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-205) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 59-25)
§ 5-1-206. Actual plan service – In general.
   A participant may receive actual plan service for the total period of
employment during which an employee is a participant in a plan and in an active
pay status or on an authorized leave of absence, as provided in §
5-1-207, provided that the period of employment is continuous or, if not
continuous, separated only by a period of time that began with the employee
leaving service as a terminated vested participant in a plan, and for credited
in-plan military service as provided in §
5-1-208.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-206) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-207. Actual plan service – Authorized leave of absence.
   Absence from employment on account of leave of absence authorized by the
employer is counted as actual plan service with the employer if the leave of
absence is for not more than one year; the participant returns to active
service with the employer at the end of the leave of absence; and the
participant contributes the employee contributions missed during the leave of
absence within 90 days of return to active service.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-207) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-208. Actual plan service – Credited in-plan military service.
   (a)   Generally. A participant may receive credited in-plan military service
for absence from employment on account of active in-plan military service if
the participant applies to return to active service with the employer within 90
days of the completion of the period of military service, or within up to two
years if a participant is hospitalized or convalescing from an injury caused by
active duty or if the participant is entitled to credit for such service under
applicable law.
   (b)   Official documentation. To receive credited in-plan military service,
the participant shall submit official documentation satisfactory to the
Personnel Officer.
   (c)   Death of a participant in military service. Notwithstanding any other
provision of the plan to the contrary, in the case of a participant who dies
while performing qualified military service as defined in § 414(u) of the
Internal Revenue Code, the survivors of the participant shall be entitled to
any additional service credit provided under the plan as if the participant had
resumed employment on the day preceding death and then terminated employment on
account of death on the actual date of death. The death benefits of a
participant who dies while performing qualified military service shall be
determined under the applicable plan's provisions for active participant's
death benefits – non-line of duty.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-208) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 2-14)
§ 5-1-209. Credited pre-plan military service.
   (a)   Generally. A participant may receive a maximum of three years of
credited pre-plan military service for active duty pre-plan military service
honorably completed before employment with an employer if:
      (1)   for a participant in the Fire Service Retirement Plan or the Police
Service Retirement Plan, the participant completes actual plan service plus
transferred service under §
5-1-304 totaling 20 years;
      (2)   for a category I participant or a category II participant hired
before July 1, 2015, in the Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement
Plan, the participant completes actual plan service plus transferred service
under §
5-1-302 totaling five years;
      (3)   for a category II participant in the Detention Officers' and Deputy
Sheriffs' Retirement Plan hired on or after July 1, 2015, the participant
completes actual plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling 10 years;
      (4)   except as otherwise provided for in this subsection, for a
participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan hired before July 1, 2015, the
participant completes actual plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling five years;
      (5)   except as otherwise provided for in this subsection, for a
participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan hired on or after July 1, 2015,
the participant completes actual plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling 10 years;
      (6)   for a participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan who is an
elected official whose first term begins on or after December 1, 2014, the
participant completes actual plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling 10 years; or
      (7)   for a participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan who is an
exempt employee hired under §
6-2-101 or §
6-2-103 of this Code and is hired on or after December 1, 2014, the participant
completes actual plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling eight years.
   (b)   Inter-plan transfer. For an inter-plan transfer under §
5-1-202, credited pre-plan military service for active duty pre-plan military
service shall be based on the provisions of the plan into which the employee
transfers.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-209) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 97-13)
§ 5-1-210. Disability leave service.
   This section does not apply to a participant employed by an employer other
than the County unless the employer grants and administers disability leave at
the same rate and in the same manner as the County. A participant may receive
disability leave service for accrued unused disability leave.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-210) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-211. Purchased service – Employees' Retirement Plan and Detention
Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan.
   (a)   Generally. As provided in this section, at the time of retirement, a
participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan or the Detention Officers' and
Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan may obtain purchased service under this title
for prior actual plan service that has not previously been credited to the
participant under this title and for any period of membership in the retirement
or pension system of the State, any political subdivision of the State, or any
multi-County agency established under State law that has not previously been
credited to the participant under this title.
   (b)   Payment.
      (1)   To obtain purchased service, a participant shall pay a lump sum
amount equal to the reserves actuarially determined necessary to fund the
benefits attributable to the purchased service.
      (2)   A category I participant and a category II participant hired before
July 1, 2015, in the Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan
may not obtain and pay for any purchased service until the participant has
completed actual plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling five years.
      (3)   A category II participant in the Detention Officers' and Deputy
Sheriffs' Retirement Plan hired on or after July 1, 2015 may not obtain and pay
for any purchased service until the participant has completed actual plan
service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling 10 years.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided for in this subsection, a participant
in the Employees' Retirement Plan hired before July 1, 2015, may not obtain and
pay for any purchased service until the participant has completed actual plan
service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling five years.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided for in this subsection, a participant
in the Employees' Retirement Plan hired on or after July 1, 2015 may not obtain
and pay for any purchased service until the participant has completed actual
plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling 10 years.
      (6)   A participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan who is an elected
official whose first term begins on or after December 1, 2014 may not obtain
and pay for any purchased service until the participant has completed actual
plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling 10 years.
      (7)   A participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan who is an exempt
employee hired under §
6-2-101 or §
6-2-103 of this Code and is hired on or after December 1, 2014 may not obtain
and pay for any purchased service until the participant has completed actual
plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling eight years.
      (8)   Purchased service may not be counted as credited service until paid
for in full.
   (c)   Determination of retirement date. If the purchased service is used in
whole or in part to establish a participant's normal retirement date or early
retirement date, the amount paid by the participant
as determined under subsection (b) shall be sufficient to fund the difference
between what would have been the cost to the plan if the participant had
retired without the purchased service and the cost to the plan resulting from
the addition of the purchased service.
   (d)   Forfeiture of other retirement plans. Before obtaining the purchased
service, the participant shall forfeit all benefits under any retirement plans
for which the participant is entitled to receive credit for the same service,
other than Social Security, and submit official documentation of the forfeiture
satisfactory to the Personnel Officer.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-211) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 97-13)
§ 5-1-212. Purchased service credits – fire service retirement plan and police
service retirement plan.
   (a)   Conditions for purchasing service credits. Participants in the fire
service retirement plan and the police service retirement plan hired on or
after January 11, 2025 may purchase service credits from prior employment if:
      (1)   the service credits are from the employer immediately prior to the
County;
      (2)   any break in service with the immediately prior employer does not
exceed 30 days;
      (3)   the participant participated in a fire or police defined benefit
retirement plan with the immediately prior employer; and
      (4)   the immediately prior employer was the State of Maryland or a
political subdivision of the State of Maryland.
   (b)   Methods of purchasing service credits.
      (1)   The participant may purchase service credits for up to five years
of prior service at the rate of two times the contribution rate for the
participant’s County fire or police plan, as applicable, multiplied by the
participant’s annual basic pay at the time of hire multiplied by the number of
years of service credits to be purchased.
      (2)   The participant must request to purchase the prior service credits
within 45 days of the date of hire, and the request must be approved by the
Personnel Officer.
      (3)   At the election of the participant, the amount calculated under
paragraph (1) may be paid:
         (i)   in a lump sum within 90 days of the approval of the request to
purchase prior service credits;
         (ii)   through bi-weekly after-tax payroll deductions over a period of
up to three years; or
         (iii)   through a combination of a partial lump sum payment made
within 90 days of the approval of the request to purchase prior service credits
and payroll deductions, as approved by the Personnel Officer.
      (4)   Payments toward prior service credits shall be treated as employee
contributions to the plan.
   (c)   Effect of purchased service credits.
      (1)   Prior service credits are not actual plan service or transferred
service and are not used to calculate a participant’s vesting in a plan or
retirement date.
      (2)   Prior service credits are calculated as an additional retirement
benefit at the rate of 2% per year even if the resulting pension benefit
exceeds 70% of the final average basic pay.
(Bill No. 85-24)
SUBTITLE 3. TRANSFERRED SERVICE
§ 5-1-301. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Previous system" means the retirement or pension system from which
an employee transfers.
      (2)   "State or local retirement or pension system" means any retirement
or pension system operated under the laws of the State or any political
subdivision of the State other than the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-301) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-302. Employees' Retirement Plan and Detention Officers' and Deputy
Sheriffs' Retirement Plan.
   A participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan or the Detention Officers'
and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan may receive transferred service for
service transferred from another state or local retirement or pension system in
accordance with the State Personnel and Pensions Article, Title 37, of the
State Code. The participant shall make application for credited service no
later than one year from the date of hire with the County, but in any event
before the date of termination of employment.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-302) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-303. Fire Service Retirement Plan and Police Service Retirement Plan.
   A participant in the Fire Service Retirement Plan or the Police Service
Retirement Plan may receive transferred service for service transferred from
another state or local retirement or pension system only in accordance with §
5-1-304 or §
5-1-305.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-303) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-304. Fire Service Retirement Plan and Police Service Retirement Plan
transfers before July 1, 1991.
   A participant in the Fire Service Retirement Plan or the Police Service
Retirement Plan who was hired by the County before July 1, 1990 may receive
transferred service for service transferred from another state or local
retirement or pension system under the provisions of the State Personnel and
Pensions Article, Title 37, of the State Code, or its predecessor statutes as
in existence on the date of transfer or under 1990 Md. Laws, Ch. 595, § 2, only
if the transfer of service occurred before July 1, 1991.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-304) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-305. Transferred service "window".
   (a)   Transfer not allowed on or after March 5, 2001. Except as otherwise
provided in this section, a participant in the Fire Service Retirement Plan or
Police Service Retirement Plan may not transfer service credit to the plan
under the State Personnel and Pensions Article, Title 37, of the State Code, on
or after March 5, 2001.
   (b)   Transfer allowed if employed from July 1, 1990 to December 3, 1996. A
participant in the Fire Service Retirement Plan or the Police Service
Retirement Plan who began employment with the County in a position covered by
the Fire Service Retirement Plan or the Police Service Retirement Plan at any
time during the period from July 1, 1990 to December 31, 1996 may receive
transferred service for service transferred from another state or local
retirement or pension system for a period of employment by the State or a
political subdivision of the State other than this County, provided:
      (1)   the previous system was operated on an actuarial basis, with
contributions to the System that were computed to be sufficient to provide the
reserves needed to cover the benefits payable on account of the System's
members and made during the employment of the members;
      (2)   the participant did not incur a break in employment between the
employment by the State or a political subdivision of the State other than this
County for which credited service is claimed and the employment by the County
in a position covered by the plan;
      (3)   the participant previously has not received credited service under
the plan for the service to be transferred;
      (4)   the participant is actively employed by this County in a position
covered by the plan at the time of making a claim for the credited service;
      (5)   the participant makes a claim for the credited service no later
than 45 days after receiving the notice described in subsection (c);
      (6)   if the transfer is from a contributory plan, the participant
deposits into the pension fund the total accumulated contributions to the
participant's credit in the fund of the previous system no later than 30 days
after receiving notice from the Personnel Officer that the transfer has been
approved; and
      (7)   except as otherwise provided in this section, the transfer of
credited service satisfies the requirements of the State Personnel and Pensions
Article, Title 37, of the State Code.
   (c)   Notice of right to make claims. The Personnel Officer shall notify all
participants in the Fire Service Retirement Plan or the Police Service
Retirement Plan of their right to make claims for transferred service under
this section.
   (d)   No transfers on or after January 1, 1997. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this subtitle, a participant in the Fire Service Retirement Plan
or the Police Service Retirement Plan may not transfer service credit to the
plan under the State Personnel and Pensions Article, Title 37, of the State
Code, for service with the State or a political subdivision of the State that
occurred on or after January 1, 1997.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-305) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-306. Effect on benefits.
   (a)   Timely transfers. The timely transfer of employee contributions shall
be made where allowed under State law.
   (b)   State law governs. The State Personnel and Pensions Article, Title 37,
of the State Code, governs benefits based in whole or in part on credited
service for transferred service, provided:
      (1)   if a participant transfers from a noncontributory system, the
participant's annual basic pay with the County on the date the participant
began employment in a position covered by the plan shall be used as described
in subsection (c) to calculate the reduction in benefits under the State
Personnel and Pensions Article, § 37-203(f)(2), of the State Code; and
      (2)   for purposes of the limitation on benefits under the State
Personnel and Pensions Article, § 37-203(f)(3), of the State Code, applicable
to a participant who retires within five years of a transfer of service credit,
the date of transfer to the plan shall be construed to be the date the
participant began employment by the County in a position covered by the plan.
   (c)   Reduction of benefits. For employees transferring service after
February 25, 2002, a reduction in benefits under the State Personnel and
Pensions Article, § 37-203(f)(2), of the State Code, shall be based on the
actuarially equivalent amount of the employee contributions that were not made
while the participant was in the noncontributory plan, provided that:
      (1)   the employee contributions which were not made shall be calculated
as a percentage of the participant's annual basic pay on the date of transfer,
multiplied by the number of years of service being transferred and then
accumulated with interest, computed to the nearest one-twelfth of a year, from
the date of transfer to the actual date of retirement at the rate of 6% per
year; and
      (2)   the percentage of the participant's annual basic pay used as the
basis for the calculation is 4% for participants in the Employees' Retirement
Plan; 5% for participants in the Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs'
Retirement Plan and the Fire Service Retirement Plan; and 6% for participants
in the Police Service Retirement Plan.
   (d)   Military service credit. Transferred service shall include credit for
military service given by the previous system, provided that an employee may
not receive additional credited service or benefits in a County plan for the
same period of military service for which credit was given in the previous
system.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-306) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 23-04)
SUBTITLE 4. BENEFITS
§ 5-1-401. Payment of benefits.
   (a)   Monthly payment. A participant's annual pension, including a
disability retirement pension, shall be paid monthly, with each monthly payment
equal to one-twelfth of the annual amount. Payment shall be made on the first
day of each month commencing on the first day of the month coinciding with or
next following the retirement date elected by the participant for a normal
retirement pension or early retirement pension and, for a disability retirement
pension, on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the
disability retirement date. For a disability retirement pension, the initial
payment shall be prorated for the portion of the month from the disability
retirement date to the first day of the month when the initial payment is due.
   (b)   Quarterly payment. If the monthly pension payable to a retired
participant is less than $50, payment may be made quarterly at one-fourth the
annual rate.
   (c)   Lump sum payment. If the actuarially equivalent lump sum value of a
participant's pension benefit is less than $5,000, the lump sum amount may be
paid instead of the benefit otherwise payable to the participant under this
article, with the consent of the participant.
   (d)   Locating persons entitled to benefits. The Personnel Officer shall
make a reasonable effort to locate all persons entitled to benefits under a
plan. Should the Personnel Officer be unable to locate any person entitled to a
benefit, such benefit will remain in the pension fund and shall be payable to
such person at any future date that such person is located by the Personnel
Officer. Before the Personnel Officer can deem a person unlocatable, the
Personnel Officer shall send a certified letter to such person at his or her
last known address advising the person that benefit payments shall be suspended
until the person responds to such certified letter.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-401) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 2-14)
§ 5-1-402. Limitation on calculation of annual basic pay.
   The amount of annual basic pay utilized to compute a pension benefit shall
not exceed the dollar limit under § 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code as
adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with § 401(a)(17) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-402) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 92-08)
§ 5-1-403. Limitation on benefits.
   (a)   Federal limits not to be exceeded. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this article to the contrary, no benefit shall be payable under any of the
plans if such benefit would cause the plan, or any other plan maintained by the
employer, to violate the limitations of § 415 of the Internal Revenue Code and
the regulations thereunder. For purposes of applying the limits under § 415 of
the Internal Revenue Code, the annual increase of the § 415 limitations applies
to a participant for increases that are effective after the participant's
severance from employment. The limitation year shall be the calendar year.
Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code and the final Treasury Regulations are
specifically incorporated by reference effective for limitation years beginning
on or after July 1, 2007, except where an earlier effective date is otherwise
provided in the final Treasury Regulations.
   (b)   Reduction of benefits. If the annual additions, within the meaning of
§ 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, are exceeded for any participant, then the
plan may only correct such excess in accordance with the Employee Plans
Compliance Resolution System (EPCRS) as set forth in Revenue Procedure 2006-27
or any superseding guidance, including, but not limited to, the preamble of the
final § 415 Treasury Regulations.
   (c)   Recovery of benefits paid in excess of limitations. In the event that
the limitations of § 415 of the Internal Revenue Code are exceeded, the
Personnel Officer may take any action necessary which is allowed under § 415 of
the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder to seek recovery of
benefits paid in excess of the limitations.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-403) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 92-08; Bill No. 2-14)
§ 5-1-404. Form of payment – Compliance with federal law.
   (a)   Generally. To the extent that there is a conflict between the
provisions of § 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code, and the regulations
thereunder, and any provision in the plans, the provisions of § 401(a)(9) of
the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder will control. The
plans will apply the minimum distribution requirements of § 401(a)(9) of the
Internal Revenue Code in accordance with the temporary and final regulations
under § 401(a)(9) that were released in April 2002, notwithstanding any
provision of this article to the contrary.
   (b)   Commencement of benefits.
      (1)   The distribution of benefits to a participant who continues
employment with the employer beyond the participant's normal retirement date
shall begin by the first day of April following the later of: (1) the calendar
year in which the participant attains age seventy and one-half (70-1/2) or (2)
the calendar year in which the participant's employment is terminated.
      (2)   In the case of a participant whose distributions commence or
recommence later than the first day of April of the calendar year following the
calendar year in which such participant attains age seventy and one-half (70-1/
2), such participant's accrued benefit shall be adjusted actuarially, in
accordance with §
5-1-101(6), to take into account the period after age seventy and one-half (70-
1/2) during which such participant did not receive any distributions hereunder.
   (c)   Death distribution provisions.
      (1)   Death after distribution. If the participant dies after
distribution of his or her interest has begun, the remaining portion of the
participant's interest, if any, will be distributed in the same form as the
participant's interest was being paid prior to the participant's death.
      (2)   Death before distribution. If the participant dies before
distribution of his or her interest has begun, any benefits payable because of
the participant's death will be distributed pursuant to the death benefit
provisions of the applicable plan. If the participant's spouse is not the
beneficiary, the method of distribution shall satisfy the incidental death
benefit requirements specified in § 401(a)(9)(G) of the Internal Revenue Code
and the regulations thereunder.
   (d)   Controlling authority. The provisions of Internal Revenue Code § 401
(a)(9) and the regulations issued under that section shall control over any
other inconsistent provisions in this article.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-404) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 92-08)
§ 5-1-405. Rollover distribution.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following terms have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Eligible rollover distribution" has the meaning stated in § 401(a)
(31)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code and means any distribution of all or any
portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except:
         (i)   any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal
periodic payments, not less frequent than annual, made for the life or life
expectancy of the distributee or the joint lives or joint life expectancies of
the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a
specified period of ten (10) years or more;
         (ii)   any distribution to the extent such distribution is required
under § 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (iii)   the portion of any distribution that is not includible in
gross income; and
         (iv)   any portion of a distribution which is a hardship distribution.
      (2)   "Eligible retirement plan" has the meaning stated in § 401(a)(31)
(D) of the Internal Revenue Code and means:
         (i)   an individual retirement account described in § 408(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code;
         (ii)   an individual retirement annuity described in § 408(b) of the
Internal Revenue Code other than an endowment contract;
         (iii)   an annuity plan described in § 403(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code;
         (iv)   an annuity contract described in § 403(b) of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         (v)   an eligible plan described in § 457(b) of the Internal Revenue
Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any
agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and
which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from
this plan;
         (vi)   a qualified trust that is a defined contribution plan described
in § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, the terms of which permit the
acceptance of direct rollovers; and
         (vii)   a Roth IRA described in § 408A of the Internal Revenue Code,
provided that the requirements of § 408A and the Treasury Regulations issued
thereunder are satisfied.
      (3)   "Distributee" includes the participant and the participant's
surviving spouse. In addition, "distributee" includes the participant's spouse
or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a domestic relations order,
which meets the requirements of § 414(p)(1)(A)(i) of the Internal Revenue Code,
with respect to the payee's interest under the plan. For distributions to
eligible retirement plans described in paragraph (2)(i) and (ii) of this
subsection. The term "distributee" also includes the participant's surviving
non-spouse beneficiary who is a designated beneficiary within the meaning of §
401(a)(9)(E) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   (b)   Generally. Notwithstanding any other provision in this article to the
contrary, a distributee who is to receive an eligible rollover distribution may
elect a direct trustee-to-trustee rollover of the distribution to an eligible
retirement plan. A direct rollover election shall be made pursuant to the
procedures established by the personnel officer and shall specify the eligible
retirement plan to which the direct rollover is to be made. If the participant
or beneficiary elects a direct rollover in accordance with the procedures
established by the personnel officer, the personnel officer shall make the
rollover as elected.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-405) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 92-08; Bill No. 2-14)
§ 5-1-406. Cost-of-living adjustment.
   If a plan has not been terminated, and if a cost-of-living adjustment is
generated under the calculation in
Title 7, a cost-of-living adjustment is payable as of each July 1 following the
commencement of benefit payments.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-406) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-407. Beneficiaries.
   (a)   Generally. A participant may designate a primary beneficiary and a
contingent beneficiary, and may change a designation of beneficiary.
   (b)   Form to be filed with Personnel Officer. A designation or change of
designation of beneficiary shall be filed with the Personnel Officer on a form
required by the Personnel Officer and take effect as of the date of execution
of the form whether or not the participant is living at the time of the filing.
   (c)   Benefits paid to most recent beneficiary on file. In case of death,
benefits payable under this article to a beneficiary shall be paid to the
beneficiary most recently designated by the participant and on file with the
Personnel Officer.
   (d)   Pension fund released from liability. If payment is made to a
beneficiary in accordance with the most recent form on file with the Personnel
Officer, the pension fund is released from liability for the payments made.
   (e)   No beneficiary designated. If there is no beneficiary designated by a
participant, the beneficiary is the participant's estate.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-407) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-408. Contingent annuitant.
   (a)   Exempt employees. This section does not apply to employees hired on or
after February 25, 2002 or to tier two employees in the Employees' Retirement
Plan.
   (b)   Written notice of option. If, at the time of retirement, a participant
does not have an eligible spouse or minor child, the participant may elect to
receive pension benefits of actuarially equivalent value under the contingent
annuitant option by filing written notice with the Personnel Officer prior to
the retirement date.
   (c)   Fire Service Retirement Plan, Police Service Retirement Plan,
Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan. For the Fire Service
Retirement Plan, the Police Service Retirement Plan, and the Detention
Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan, if at the participant's
retirement date, a contingent annuitant option election is in effect:
      (1)   the participant shall receive a reduced amount of pension benefits
during the participant's lifetime; and
      (2)   following the participant's death, pension benefits shall be
continued and paid for life to the participant's surviving contingent
annuitant:
         (i)   in the same reduced amount, or 66 2/3% or 50% of the benefit as
specified in the election; or
         (ii)   if the participant dies during the five-year period immediately
following the participant's retirement date, in the same yearly amount as the
pension benefits that would have been payable to the participant had there been
no election of the contingent annuitant option.
   (d)   Employee's Retirement Plan. For the Employees' Retirement Plan, if at
the participant's retirement date a contingent annuitant option is in effect,
the participant shall receive a reduced amount of pension benefits during the
participant's life time and, following the participant's death, pension
benefits shall be continued and paid for life to the participant's surviving
contingent annuitant in the same reduced amount or at 66 2/3% or 50% of the
benefit as specified in the election.
   (e)   Death of participant or contingent annuitant. If either the
participant or the contingent annuitant dies before the earlier of the
participant's early retirement date or normal retirement date, the election of
the contingent annuitant option shall be void. If the contingent annuitant dies
on or after the participant's normal retirement date, but before the
participant actually retires, the pension payable to the participant upon
actual retirement shall be in the same amount as it would have been had there
been no election of the contingent annuitant option.
   (f)   Same sex marriage to contingent annuitant. If a participant in the
Fire Service Retirement Plan or the Police Service Retirement Plan retired
before January 1, 2013, and elected the contingent annuitant option naming a
member of the same sex as the contingent annuitant, resulting in a reduction of
the participant’s pension benefit, and, on or after January 1, 2013, the
participant married the named contingent annuitant, then:
      (1)   the participant’s pension benefit shall be restored to the full
benefit; and
      (2)   the participant shall be entitled to a lump sum payment of the
amount by which benefits were reduced between the date of retirement and
January 1, 2023.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-408) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 27-22)
SUBTITLE 5. DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PROGRAM – FIRE SERVICE RETIREMENT PLAN,
POLICE SERVICE RETIREMENT PLAN AND DETENTION OFFICERS' AND DEPUTY SHERIFFS'
RETIREMENT PLAN
§ 5-1-501. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "DROP" means the Deferred Retirement Option Program.
      (2)   "DROP account" means the account established under §
5-1-508(a).
      (3)   "DROP participant" means a participant who is eligible to
participate in the DROP under §
5-1-503 and who elects to participate in the DROP under §
5-1-504.
      (4)   "DROP participation period" means the time that an employee
participates in the DROP while actively employed by the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-501) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-502. Applicability.
   There is a Deferred Retirement Option Program in the Fire Service Retirement
Plan, the Police Service Retirement Plan, and the Detention Officers' and
Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-502) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 50-15)
§ 5-1-503. Eligibility.
   (a)   Fire Service Retirement Plan. A participant in the Fire Service
Retirement Plan is eligible to participate in the DROP if the participant is
actively employed by the County in a position covered by the plan and has
completed 20 years of actual plan service.
   (b)   Police Service Retirement Plan. A participant in the Police Service
Retirement Plan is eligible to participate in the DROP if the participant is
actively employed by the County in a position covered by this plan and has
completed 20 years of actual plan service.
   (c)   Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan. A
participant in the Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan is
eligible to participate in the DROP if the participant is actively employed by
the County in a position covered by the Detention Officers' and Deputy
Sheriffs' Retirement Plan and has completed 20 years of actual plan service.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-503) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 45-11; Bill No. 64-13;
Bill No. 50-15; Bill No. 54-20)
§ 5-1-504. Applications.
   (a)   Application required. An employee who wants to participate in the DROP
shall complete an application on the form required by the Personnel Officer.
   (b)   Beginning date. In addition to providing the other information
requested by the Personnel Officer, the employee shall specify a beginning date
of the employee's DROP participation period that corresponds to the
requirements of §
5-1-506.
   (c)   When submitted. An application shall be submitted to the Personnel
Officer no sooner than 90 days and no later than 30 days before the beginning
date of the employee's DROP participation period. An application may be
submitted before an employee is eligible to participate in the DROP, provided
that the employee is eligible as of the beginning date of the DROP
participation period.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-504) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-505. Limitation on the number of participants.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d), the
number of employees who may begin participating in the DROP in a plan shall be
limited to four new employees participating in each DROP plan as of the first
day of any month.
   (b)   Police Officers, Police Officers First Class, and Police Corporals.
The number of employees in the classification of Police Officer, Police Officer
First Class or Police Corporal who may begin participating in the DROP shall be
limited to 20 per calendar quarter up to a limit of 64 participants in each
fiscal year.
   (c)   Police Sergeants. Employees in the classification of Police Sergeant
who may begin participating in the DROP shall have no limit on the number of
new participants who may begin participating on the first day of any month.
   (d)   Fire Fighters, Fire Fighters/EMT-Paramedic, Fire Lieutenants, Fire
Lieutenants/EMT-Paramedic, Fire Captains, and Fire Captains/EMT-Paramedic. The
number of employees in the classification of Fire Fighter, Fire Fighter/EMT-
Paramedic, Fire Lieutenant, Fire Lieutenant/EMT-Paramedic, Fire Captain or Fire
Captain/EMT-Paramedic who may begin participating in the DROP shall be limited
to 20 per calendar quarter up to a limit of 72 participants in each fiscal
year.
   (e)   Correctional Program Specialists and Criminal Justice Program
Supervisors. In addition to the employees described in subsection (a), a
combined total of two new employees in the classifications of Correctional
Program Specialist and Criminal Justice Program Supervisor may begin
participating in the DROP as of the first day of any month.
   (f)   Selection by seniority. If the application of this section requires
the number of participants to be limited, participants shall be selected by
seniority as determined by the Personnel Officer on the basis of the amount of
actual plan service of the applicants; the Personnel Officer shall establish a
waiting list for participation in the DROP; and the applicants who are not
selected shall be placed on a waiting list without having to reapply to
participate in the DROP.
   (g)   Waiting list. Applicants on the waiting list described in subsection
(f) have the right of “first refusal” for DROP participation in subsequent
months in the order of their seniority, provided:
      (1)   applicants who refuse participation if offered in subsequent months
shall be removed from the waiting list and must reapply in order to participate
in the DROP; and
      (2)   in subsequent months, applicants not on the waiting list shall be
selected ahead of applicants on the waiting list who have less seniority.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-505) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 32-04; Bill No. 74-09;
Bill No. 50-15; Bill No. 54-20; Bill No. 59-25)
§ 5-1-506. Participation period; mandatory retirement upon expiration.
   (a)   Generally. A DROP participation period begins on the first day of a
month and expires on the last day of a month.
   (b)   Term of participation period; extension.
      (1)   The initial term of a DROP participation period is three years.
Except as otherwise provided in paragraphs (5), (6), and (7), the DROP
participation period may be extended by no more than three additional one-year
terms for all participants who qualify for participation in DROP under §
5-1-503. A DROP participant shall file an election for each extension on the
form required by the Personnel Officer no fewer than 30 days before the end of
the current term. Failure of a DROP participant to file a timely election for
an extension results in the expiration of the DROP participation period at the
end of the current term.
      (2)   A participant who is a member of the Detention Officers’ and Deputy
Sheriffs’ Retirement Plan must have the approval of the appointing authority to
extend the DROP participation period beyond the initial term and to continue
employment with the County.
      (3)   A participant who is a member of the Fire Service Retirement Plan,
who is in the classification of Fire Division Chief, Fire Deputy Chief, Fire
Assistant Chief or Fire Chief must have the approval of the appointing
authority to extend the DROP participation period beyond the fifth year.
      (4)   A participant who is a member of the Fire Service Retirement Plan
in the classification of Fire Fighter (all levels), Fire Lieutenant, Fire
Captain, or Fire Battalion Chief must have the approval of the appointing
authority to extend the DROP participation period beyond the sixth year.
      (5)   Effective July 1, 2023, for a participant who is a member of the
Police Service Retirement Plan, the DROP participation period may be extended
for an additional one-year term, for a total of seven years, subject to the
following:
         (i)   A DROP participant in the classification of Police Captain,
Police Major, Police Deputy Chief, Assistant Chief of Police, or Police Chief
must have the approval of the appointing authority to extend the DROP
participation period beyond the fifth year; and
         (ii)   A DROP participant in the classification of Police Officer
First Class, Police Corporal, Police Sergeant, or Police Lieutenant must have
the approval of the appointing authority to extend the DROP participation
period beyond the sixth year.
      (6)   Effective July 1, 2024, for a participant who is a member of the
Fire Service Retirement Plan in the classification of Fire Fighter (all
levels), Fire Lieutenant, Fire Captain, Fire Battalion Chief, Fire Division
Chief, Fire Deputy Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, or Fire Chief, the DROP
participation period may be extended for an additional one-year term, for a
total of seven years.
      (7)   (i)   Effective July 1, 2024, for a participant who is a member of
the Detention Officers’ and Deputy Sheriffs’ Retirement Plan in the
classification of Detention Officer, Detention Corporal, Detention Sergeant,
Detention Lieutenant, or Detention Captain, or in the classification of
Assistant Correctional Facility Administrator or Correctional Facility
Administrator hired before October 29, 2020, the DROP participation period may
be extended for an additional one-year term, for a total of seven years.
         (ii)   Effective July 1, 2025, for a participant who is a member of
the Detention Officers’ and Deputy Sheriffs’ Retirement Plan in the
classification of Correctional Program Specialist I or II or Criminal Justice
Program Supervisor hired before October 29, 2020, the DROP participation period
may be extended for an additional one-year term, for a total of seven years.
   (c)   Expiration before end of term. A DROP participation period expires
before the end of the current term if the DROP participant dies; voluntarily
terminates or is involuntarily terminated from employment; becomes ineligible
to participate in the plan for any reason, including a transfer to a position
not covered by the plan; or elects to withdraw from participation in the DROP
under §
5-1-509(b).
   (d)   Expiration of DROP participation. Except as otherwise provided in this
subtitle, a DROP participant shall terminate County service and begin receiving
a retirement benefit under §
5-1-512 as of the first day of the month following expiration of the DROP
participation period. A participant who fails to submit the documents
requesting termination and retirement shall be involuntarily terminated and
retired as provided in subsection (c).
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-506) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 64-13; Bill No. 50-15;
Bill No. 56-16; Bill No. 66-18; Bill No. 55-20; Bill No. 79-21; Bill No. 61-22;
Bill No. 58-23; Bill No. 67-23; Bill No. 50-24; Bill No. 59-25)
§ 5-1-507. Status during participation.
   (a)   Active employee. A DROP participant is an active employee of the
County and, except as provided in this subtitle, is entitled to the benefits of
that employment and is subject to the laws, regulations, and policies governing
that employment.
   (b)   Fire Service Retirement Plan, Police Service Retirement Plan or
Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan. A DROP participant is
a participant in the Fire Service Retirement Plan, the Police Service
Retirement Plan, or the Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement
Plan under the conditions described in the respective plan, except that a DROP
participant is not required to make the employee contributions required under §
5-4-103(b), §
5-5-103(b), or §
5-6-103(b) during the DROP participation period.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-507) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 50-15)
§ 5-1-508. DROP account.
   (a)   Account established. The Personnel Officer shall establish an account
in the pension fund for recording the actions required by this section and is
not required to establish an individual account for each DROP participant.
   (b)   Retirement benefits. The Personnel Officer shall determine the annual
retirement benefit under §
5-4-203, §
5-5-203, or §
5-6-203 to which a DROP participant is entitled as of the first day of the DROP
participation period. The retirement benefit includes adjustments for any
changes under Title 7 applicable to the retirement benefit and excludes service
and salary during the DROP participation period for purposes of calculating the
entitlement to and amount of the retirement benefit.
   (c)   Account balance. The account balance credited to a DROP participant
includes:
      (1)   the amount of the retirement benefit determined under subsection
(b); and
      (2)   interest compounded on the account balance as of the first day of
each month, at the following rates:
         (i)   for members of the Detention Officers’ and Deputy Sheriffs’
Service Plan, .34745%, which provides an effective annual yield of 4.25%;
         (ii)   for members of the Police Service Plan whose DROP participation
began prior to July 1, 2025, .34745%, which provides an effective annual yield
of 4.25%;
         (iii)   for members of the Police Service Plan whose DROP
participation began on or after July 1, 2025, .40741%, which provides an
effective annual yield of 5.00%;
         (iv)   for members of the Fire Service Plan whose DROP participation
began before July 1, 2025, .34745%, which provides an effective annual yield of
4.25%;
         (v)   for members of the Fire Service Plan in the classification of
Fire Fighter, Fire Fighter/EMT-Paramedic, Fire Lieutenant, Fire Lieutenant/EMT-
Paramedic, Fire Captain or Fire Captain/EMT-Paramedic whose DROP participation
began on or after July 1, 2025, .40741%, which provides an effective annual
yield of 5.00%; and
         (vi)   for members of the Fire Service Plan in the classification of
Fire Battalion Chief, Fire Division Chief, Fire Deputy Chief, Fire Assistant
Chief, or Fire Chief, whose DROP participation began on or after July 1, 2025,
.38747%, which provides an effective annual yield of 4.75%.
   (d)   Limitations on interest. No interest will be earned or credited after
the expiration of any DROP participation period.
   (e)   Statement of account balance. At least once a year, the Personnel
Officer shall provide to a DROP participant a statement of the account balance
credited to the DROP participant as described in subsection (c).
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-508) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 66-05; Bill No. 74-09;
Bill No. 40-10; Bill No. 64-13; Bill No. 50-15; Bill No. 56-16; Bill No. 66-18;
Bill No. 55-20; Bill No. 58-23; Bill No. 59-25)
§ 5-1-509. Early withdrawal from participation.
   (a)   Election to withdraw. Except as provided in subsection (b), a DROP
participant may elect to withdraw from participation in the DROP only by
terminating employment with the County.
   (b)   Withdrawal form. A DROP participant may withdraw from participation at
any time before the end of the initial DROP participation period by filing a
request to withdraw on the form required by the Personnel Officer no later than
30 days before the end of the term.
   (c)   Prohibition from participating after withdrawal. A DROP participant
who elects to withdraw under subsection (b) may remain employed by the County
and is prohibited from participating in the DROP during the remainder of the
participant’s employment with the County.
   (d)   Withdrawal before end of participation period. A DROP participant
whose participation ends prior to the end of the DROP participation period
because of a termination of employment, ineligibility to participate in the
plan for any reason, or an election to withdraw under subsection (b):
      (1)   forfeits any entitlement to the DROP benefit under §
5-1-512(b); and
      (2)   if otherwise eligible, shall have a retirement benefit determined
under §
5-4-203, §
5-5-203, or §
5-6-203 that includes service and salary during the DROP participation period
for purposes of calculating the entitlement to and amount of the retirement
benefit:
         (i)    that is reduced by an amount actuarially equivalent to the
employee contributions not made during the DROP participation period until the
reductions equal the amount actuarially equivalent to the employee
contributions not made during DROP participation;
         (ii)   if the participant remains a County employee, that is reduced
by an amount actuarially equivalent to the employee contributions not made
during the DROP participation period until the participant pays to the pension
system an amount that is equal to the employee contributions not made during
the DROP participation period through payroll deductions over a period not to
exceed three years; or
         (iii)   that is not reduced if, within 30 days of DROP withdrawal or
within 30 days of leaving County employment, whichever is later, the
participant deposits into the pension system an amount equal to the employee
contributions not made during the DROP participation period.
   (e)   DROP benefit only for each full completed year. A DROP participant who
terminates employment with the County after the first three-year term of the
DROP participation period, and before the completion of any additional one-year
term, is entitled to a DROP benefit only for each fully completed year of DROP
participation. Interest may not accrue on an account balance for any period of
DROP participation that is less than a full year.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-509) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 66-05; Bill No. 50-15;
Bill No. 58-23)
§ 5-1-510. Disability during participation.
   (a)   Permitted. A DROP participant may apply for a disability pension under
§
5-4-206, §
5-5-205, or §
5-6-207 during the DROP participation period.
   (b)   Effect of disability pension. If a DROP participant receives a
disability pension:
      (1)   the benefit under §
5-4-206, §
5-5-205, or §
5-6-207 includes service and salary during the DROP participation period for
purposes of calculating the amount of the benefit:
         (i)    that is reduced by an amount actuarially equivalent to the
employee contributions not made during the DROP participation period\ until the
reductions equal the amount actuarially equivalent to the employee
contributions not made during DROP participation; or
         (ii)   that is not reduced if, within 30 days of DROP withdrawal, the
participant deposits into the pension system an amount equal to the employee
contributions not made during the DROP participation period; and
      (2)   the participant forfeits any entitlement to the DROP benefit under
§
5-1-512(b).
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-510) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 50-15; Bill No. 58-23)
§ 5-1-511. Death during participation.
   (a)   Generally. If a DROP participant dies during the DROP participation
period, the beneficiary or beneficiaries of the participant as described in §
5-1-514 are entitled to a death benefit under §
5-4-207, §
5-5-206, §
5-6-208, or §
5-6-209.
   (b)   Death result of active duty. If the death occurs as the direct result
of the active performance of duties as described in §
5-4-207(a), §
5-5-206(a), or §
5-6-208, the death benefit includes service and salary during the DROP
participation period for purposes of calculating the amount of the benefit and
is reduced by the actuarial equivalent of the employee contributions not made
during the DROP participation period.
   (c)   Death not result of active duty. If the death does not occur as a
direct result of the active performance of duties, the death benefit under §
5-4-207(b), §
5-5-206(b), or §
5-6-209 excludes service and salary during the DROP participation period for
purposes of calculating the amount of the benefit and is not reduced by an
amount actuarially equivalent to the employee contributions not made during the
DROP participation period.
   (d)   Beneficiaries. If a DROP participant dies during the DROP
participation period, the beneficiary or beneficiaries of the participant as
described in §
5-1-514 are entitled to a lump sum payment in cash of the account balance
credited to the DROP participant as described by §
5-1-508(c) as of the date of the death of the participant.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-511) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 50-15)
§ 5-1-512. Retirement benefits of participants.
   (a)   Generally. On the first day of the month following expiration of the
DROP participation period and the DROP participant's termination from County
employment, the participant is entitled to receive the first payment of an
annual retirement benefit under §
5-4-203, §
5-5-203, or §
5-6-203:
      (1)   determined as if the participant had retired on the first day of
the DROP participation period, using final average basic pay and credited
service as of that day, except that credited service from disability leave
accrued or used during the DROP participation period shall be included in the
determination of the benefit; and
      (2)   adjusted by any changes under
Title 7 that would have been applicable to the benefit since the first day of
the DROP participation period.
   (b)   Payment. The participant shall receive payment of the account balance
credited to the DROP participant as described by §
5-1-508(c) in the manner elected under §
5-1-513.
   (c)   Section not applicable. This section does not apply to a DROP
participant whose DROP participation expires under §
5-1-506(c).
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-512) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 66-05; Bill No. 50-15)
§ 5-1-513. Manner of payment.
   (a)   Lump sum payment. Unless elected otherwise by a DROP participant,
payment of the account balance under §
5-1-512(b) shall be made in a lump sum to the participant within 30 days of the
first day of the month following expiration of the DROP participation period
and the DROP participant's termination from County employment.
   (b)   One-time deferral of the lump sum payment. The participant may elect a
one-time deferral of the lump sum payment of the account balance on the form
required by the Personnel Officer, provided the election is submitted no later
than the expiration of the DROP participation period; the participant is not
entitled to interest on the account balance because of the deferral; and
payment is made within 30 days after a request is submitted to the Personnel
Officer on the form required by the Personnel Officer and on or before the
participant is 70½ years of age.
   (c)   Payment in cash; exception. Unless otherwise elected by a DROP
participant, a lump sum payment under subsection (a) or subsection (b) shall be
made in cash. If permitted by federal law at the time of the payment, payment
may be made by transfer or direct rollover to an eligible retirement plan as
defined in the Internal Revenue Code.
   (d)   Sole responsibilities of participant. Selection of the retirement
account, plan, or annuity and the tax consequences of a transfer or direct
rollover under subsection (c) are the sole responsibility of the participant
and, upon transfer or direct rollover of the account balance to the retirement
account, plan, or annuity, the County has no further obligation regarding the
account balance credited to the participant as described by §
5-1-508(c).
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-513) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-514. Beneficiaries.
   (a)   Generally. Unless otherwise designated by a DROP participant, a DROP
participant's beneficiary, for purposes of this subtitle, is the surviving
spouse of the DROP participant; if there is no surviving spouse, the surviving
unmarried minor children of the participant; or if there is no surviving spouse
or surviving unmarried minor children, the estate of the participant.
   (b)   Designating other beneficiaries. A DROP participant may designate
other beneficiaries on the form required by the Personnel Officer.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-514) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-1-515. Reemployment of participant.
   (a)   Reduction in benefit. A former DROP participant in the Fire Service
Retirement Plan who retired from a position classification covered by a
collective bargaining agreement, who is receiving a retirement benefit under §
5-1-512, and who is reemployed in any capacity by the County shall have a
reduction in their retirement benefit under §
5-1-512(a) during the period of reemployment by $1.00 for each $2.00 received
in salary or wages from the County.
   (b)   Adjustments. The reduced benefit described in subsection (a) shall be
adjusted by any changes under Title 7 applicable to benefits under the plan
during the period of reemployment.
   (c)   Termination of reemployment for any reason other than death. If the
reemployment of the former DROP participant is terminated for any reason other
than the death of the former participant, including voluntary termination or
disability, the reduction in benefits described in subsection (a) shall cease,
provided service and salary during the period of reemployment may not be used
to change the amount of the benefit and the participant's benefit under §
5-1-512(a) shall be adjusted by any changes under Title 7 that would have been
applicable to the benefit during the period of reemployment.
   (d)   Reemployment terminated because of death. If the reemployment of the
former DROP participant is terminated because of the death of the former
participant, the death shall be considered to have occurred after the date of
retirement of the former DROP participant and death benefits shall be paid
under §
5-4-207, §
5-5-206, §
5-6-208, or §
5-6-209, as appropriate, provided service and salary during the period of
reemployment may not be used to change the amount of the death benefits and the
death benefits shall be adjusted by any changes under Title 7 that would have
been applicable to the retirement benefit of the former participant during the
period of reemployment.
   (e)   DROP benefit payment not affected. The reemployment may not affect the
payment of the DROP benefit under §
5-1-512(b).
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 1-515) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 50-15; Bill No. 56-16;
Bill No. 78-17)
TITLE 2. COUNTY RETIREMENT AND PENSION SYSTEM
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; Administration
   
5-2-101.   Definitions.
   
5-2-102.   System established; purpose; status.
   
5-2-103.   Composition of system.
   
5-2-104.   Board of Trustees – Established.
   
5-2-105.   Board of Trustees – Membership.
   
5-2-106.   Board of Trustees – Officers.
   
5-2-107.   Board of Trustees – Quorum; meetings; expenses.
   
5-2-108.   Board of Trustees – Management of system.
   
5-2-109.   Board of Trustees – Establishment of committees.
   
5-2-110.   Budget.
   
5-2-111.   Execution of documents.
Subtitle 2. Ownership and Investment of Assets
   
5-2-201.   Trust established – In general.
   
5-2-202.   Investment operations manual.
   
5-2-203.   Investment managers and advisors.
   
5-2-204.   Investment committee – Established.
   
5-2-205.   Investment committee – Membership.
   
5-2-206.   Investment committee – Duties.
   
5-2-207.   Custody of assets.
   
5-2-208.   Actuary.
   
5-2-209.   Nondisclosure of financial information.
Subtitle 3. Miscellaneous Powers and Duties
   
5-2-301.   Annual report and statement.
   
5-2-302.   Records and information.
   
5-2-303.   Regulations.
Subtitle 4. Fiduciary Responsibilities
   
5-2-401.   Purposes of assets of system.
   
5-2-402.   Standards of care.
   
5-2-403.   Duties and responsibilities of Trustees.
   
5-2-404.   Prohibited transactions involving system assets.
   
5-2-405.   Liability of fiduciary for breach of duty.
   
5-2-406.   Indemnification of fiduciaries.
   
5-2-407.   Insurance for fiduciaries.
   
5-2-408.   Agreement relieving fiduciary from liability.
   
5-2-409.   Disqualification of fiduciary.
   
5-2-410.   Bond.
Subtitle 5. Funding
   
5-2-501.   In general.
   
5-2-502.   Employer contributions.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; ADMINISTRATION
§ 5-2-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Assets of the System" means the assets of the Anne Arundel County
Retirement and Pension System and the term includes the assets of each of the
pension funds.
      (2)   "Fiduciary" means a member of the Board and an employee of the
County who exercises any discretionary authority or control over the management
or administration of the plans or the management or disposition of the assets
of the System.
      (3)   "System" means the Anne Arundel County Retirement and Pension
System.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-101) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-102. System established; purpose; status.
   (a)   Established. There is an Anne Arundel County Retirement and Pension
System.
   (b)   Purpose. The System shall provide benefits for participants in the
plans of which it consists.
   (c)   Status. The System is an agency in the executive branch of County
government and has the powers and privileges of a corporation to the extent
permitted by law.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-102) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-103. Composition of system.
   The System consists of the Employees' Retirement Plan; the Fire Service
Retirement Plan; the Police Service Retirement Plan; and the Detention
Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-103) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 92-08)
§ 5-2-104. Board of Trustees – Established.
   There is a Board of Trustees for the System.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-104) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-105. Board of Trustees – Membership.
   (a)   Generally. The Board consists of the following 13 Trustees:
      (1)   the Chief Administrative Officer, ex officio;
      (2)   the Controller, ex officio;
      (3)   the Personnel Officer, ex officio;
      (4)   the Budget Officer, ex officio;
      (5)   the Director of Public Works, or other appointed official of the
County as appointed by the County Executive, ex officio;
      (6)   five Trustees:
         (i)   one of whom is a participant in the Fire Service Retirement
Plan;
         (ii)   one of whom is a participant in the Police Service Retirement
Plan and a member of FOP Lodge 70;
         (iii)   one of whom is a participant in the Detention Officers' and
Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan;
         (iv)   one of whom is a participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan
and a member of either Local 582 or Local 2563 of the American Federation of
State, County, and Municipal Employees AFL-CIO (affiliated with Maryland Public
Employees' Council 67); and
         (v)   one of whom is a participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan
and is not a member of a certified employee organization; and
      (7)   three Trustees who are residents of the County, are not employees
of the County or participants in any of the plans, and are knowledgeable in the
administration and operation of pension systems and trust funds.
   (b)   Trustee not to be member of Pension Oversight Commission. A Trustee
may not serve simultaneously as a member of the Board and a member of the
Pension Oversight Commission.
   (c)   Election of Trustees. The Trustees who are described in subsection (a)
(6)(i), (ii), and (iii) shall be elected severally by the employees who are
included within the plan that each Trustee represents. The Trustee who is
described in subsection (a)(6)(iv) shall be elected by the employees of the
County who are members of either (1) Local 582 or Local 2563 of the American
Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees AFL-CIO (affiliated with
Maryland Public Employees' Council 67) or (2) another certified employee
organization, and who are not participants in the Fire Service Retirement Plan,
the Police Service Retirement Plan, or the Detention Officers' and Deputy
Sheriffs' Retirement Plan. The Trustee who is described in subsection (a)(6)(v)
shall be elected severally by the employees of the County who are not
represented by a certified employee organization, and the election shall be by
secret ballot and supervised by the Personnel Officer. The Trustees who are
described in subsection (a)(7) shall be appointed by the County Executive with
the approval of the County Council, given by resolution.
   (d)   Oath of office. Within 10 days after the appointment or election of an
individual as a Trustee, or, in the case of a Trustee who serves ex officio,
within 10 days after the effective date of Bill No. 88-96, the individual shall
take and subscribe to an oath of office that, so far as it devolves on an
individual as a Trustee, the individual will diligently and honestly administer
the affairs of the Board and will not knowingly violate or willingly allow a
violation of the law applicable to the plans. The oath shall be taken before a
notary public who shall certify the oath and submit the certified oath to the
Chief of Staff to the County Executive for filing in that office.
   (e)   Terms. The terms of the Trustees described in subsections (a)(6) and
(a)(7) are three years. A Trustee described in subsection (a)(6) who becomes a
retiree during the Trustee's term of office may complete that term of office.
At the end of a term, a Trustee continues to serve until a successor is
appointed or elected and a Trustee described in subsections (a)(6) and (a)(7)
who is newly appointed or elected shall serve a new three-year term that
commences with the Trustee's qualification under subsection (d).
   (f)   Removal by County Executive. As provided in subsection (g), the County
Executive may remove a Trustee for neglect of duty, misconduct in office, any
other conduct that renders the Trustee unfit for office as described by
ordinance, or any change in status that renders the person ineligible under
this section.
   (g)   Removal for cause. The County Executive may remove for cause a Trustee
who is described in subsection (a)(6) or (a)(7).
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-105) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 90-01;
Bill No. 7-09)
§ 5-2-106. Board of Trustees – Officers.
   The County Executive shall appoint a Chair annually from the membership of
the Board. Neither the Personnel Officer nor the Controller may serve as Chair
of the Board. The Personnel Officer shall serve as Secretary of the Board.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-106) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-107. Board of Trustees – Quorum; meetings; expenses.
   (a)   Trustees allowed one vote. Each Trustee is entitled to one vote on the
Board. Except as provided in §
5-2-201(e)(2), a Trustee may not vote by proxy.
   (b)   Quorum. A majority of the Trustees then serving on the Board is a
quorum for the transaction of any business; the exercise of any power; or the
performance of any duty authorized or imposed by law. The affirmative vote of
seven of the Trustees then serving on the Board is sufficient for the taking of
any action.
   (c)   Meetings. The Board shall set the times and places for, and give
notice of, its meetings.
   (d)   Compensation. A Trustee may not receive compensation from any source
for service as a Trustee and is entitled to reimbursement for expenses the
Board authorizes. This subsection does not prevent a Trustee who is a County
employee from receiving the employee's wages from the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-107) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-108. Board of Trustees – Management of system.
   (a)   Board responsibility. The Board is responsible for the management and
proper operation of the System. The Board has the power to do all acts that it
considers necessary and to exercise any and all powers under this article with
respect to the management of the System, including the power to advise the
Personnel Officer with respect to the performance of the Personnel Officer's
duties and to review and comment on any proposed ordinance to modify any
provision of this article.
   (b)   Administrative duties. Except for those duties assigned to the
Controller under this title or other law, the Personnel Officer shall carry out
the administrative duties of the System.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-108) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-109. Board of Trustees – Establishment of committees.
   In addition to the investment committee established under §
5-2-204, the Board may establish other committees.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-109) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-110. Budget.
   The Personnel Officer annually shall prepare a proposed budget for the
System and submit it to the Board for its review and approval. The Personnel
Officer shall include in the proposed budget submitted to the Board all
anticipated expenses of the System, including supplies and equipment and the
costs of County and other personnel providing services to the System.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-110) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-111. Execution of documents.
   A document that must be executed by or for the Board shall be signed by the
Personnel Officer or, in the absence or disability of the Personnel Officer, by
another employee of the Personnel Office whom the Personnel Officer, with the
approval of the Chair of the Board, designates in writing. If a
countersignature is required, the Personnel Officer, with the approval of the
Chair of the Board, shall designate those employees of the Personnel Office who
may sign.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-111) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
SUBTITLE 2. OWNERSHIP AND INVESTMENT OF ASSETS
§ 5-2-201. Trust established – In general.
   (a)   Generally. The County establishes a trust, that is part of the System,
for the benefit of the participants in the plans.
   (b)   Assets of System. The Board holds the assets of the System in trust
for the benefit of the participants in the plans. The Board has legal title to
all the assets of the System, but the Board may delegate some or all incidents
of ownership as provided in this article.
   (c)   Assets of pensions funds. As of the effective date of Bill No. 88-96,
the assets of each of the pension funds of the plans become part of the assets
of the System.
   (d)   Investment of assets.
      (1)   The Board may invest the assets of the System or permit one or more
investment managers to invest the assets of the System as provided in §
5-2-203, subject to any conditions that it has established in the investment
policy adopted under §
5-2-202.
      (2)   If the assets of the System are invested through any combined,
common, or commingled trust fund, the declaration of trust of that fund is
adopted as part of the trust.
      (3)   The assets of the System may not be directly invested in any bonds,
notes, or debt instruments issued by the County, any political subdivision
within the County, any agency supported or financed wholly or partly by taxes
levied by the County Council, or any agency supported by bond issues
underwritten by the County, if the investment would be a prohibited transaction
under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code applicable to the System.
   (e)   Powers of Board. The Board has the power to do all acts that it
considers necessary and exercise any and all powers of this article with
respect to the management of the assets of the System. The Board's powers in
connection with the management of the assets of the System include the power
to:
      (1)   sell, exchange, convey, transfer, lease for any period, pledge,
mortgage, grant options, contract with respect to, or otherwise encumber or
dispose, at public or private sale, for cash or credit or both, any part of the
assets of the System;
      (2)   vote, in person or by any proxy, at any election of any corporation
in whose stock the assets of the System are invested, and exercise, personally
or by a power of attorney, any right appurtenant to any investment held in the
assets of the System; and give general or specific proxies or powers of
attorney with or without power of substitution; and
      (3)   retain uninvested cash in an amount it considers prudent to pay
benefits, expenses, and other payments.
   (f)   Commingled assets. The assets of the pension funds of the plans shall
be commingled for investment purposes. For the commingled assets, the Board
shall keep separate sets of records, one for each of the plans, that show: (1)
the percent of participation of each pension fund; (2) the percentage of
income, gains, and losses applicable to each pension fund; and (3) the total
contributions and disbursements applicable to each pension fund. Disbursements
from each pension fund shall be charged against that fund's portion of the
assets of the System.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-201) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-202. Investment operations manual.
   With the recommendation of the investment committee, the Board shall adopt
an investment operations manual that details the goals and objectives of the
several investment programs and the policies that govern the selection and
retention of investments.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-202) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-203. Investment managers and advisers.
   (a)   Generally. The Board may retain external investment managers and
advisers.
   (b)   Selection by Board. The external investment managers and advisers
shall be selected by the Board on the recommendation of the investment
committee, and shall perform such duties as are assigned by the investment
committee, subject to the approval of the Board.
   (c)   Real estate as investment. Any directly-owned real estate purchased as
an investment by the Board for the System shall be managed by an external
investment manager.
   (d)   Standard of conduct imposed on a fiduciary. An external investment
manager or adviser must certify in writing that it will adhere to the standard
of conduct imposed on a fiduciary under §§
5-2-401 et seq. and must be registered as an investment adviser under the
Investment Advisers Act of 1940, as amended; a bank, as defined in the
Investment Advisers Act of 1940, as amended; or an insurance company qualified
to perform investment management services under the laws of more than one
State.
   (e)   Removal by Board. An external investment manager or adviser may be
removed by the Board.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-203) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-204. Investment committee – Established.
   There is an investment committee of the Board.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-204) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-205. Investment committee – Membership.
   (a)   Generally. The investment committee consists of the following five
members:
      (1)   the Chief Administrative Officer, ex officio;
      (2)   the Budget Officer, ex officio; and
      (3)   three members of the Board, appointed by resolution of the Board,
one of whom is a Trustee under §
5-2-105(a)(7) and one of whom is a Trustee under §
5-2-105(a)(6).
   (b)   Chair. The Budget Officer is the Chair of the investment committee.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-205) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-206. Investment committee – Duties.
   (a)   Investment policy. The investment committee shall prepare and submit a
proposed investment policy, and any proposed amendments to the investment
policy, to the Board for approval.
   (b)   Committee to advise and make recommendations to Board. The investment
committee shall advise the Board and make recommendations on the investment
program of the assets of the System; compliance of the investment programs with
the investment policy; and external investment managers and advisers and their
duties.
   (c)   Other duties. By resolution, the Board shall specify the other duties
of the investment committee.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-206) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-207. Custody of assets of system.
   (a)   Appointment of custodian. Until the Board appoints a custodian of the
assets of the System, the Controller appoints the custodian of the assets of
the System.
   (b)   Permitted custodians. The Board may make arrangements with one or more
duly qualified banks, trust companies, insurance companies, or investment
companies authorized to do business in any state for safe custody of
investments; banking services; and any other function that the Board considers
necessary to safeguard physically the assets of the System.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-207) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-208. Actuary.
   (a)   Selection. The Board shall select an actuary who shall give technical
advice to the Board on the operation of the funds of the System and perform
other related duties that the Board requires.
   (b)   Valuation of assets and liabilities. On the basis of actuarial
assumptions that the Board adopts, each year the actuary shall make a valuation
of the assets and liabilities of the pension fund of each plan. Each year no
later than April 15 the Board shall recommend to the County Executive and the
County Council the amounts of employer contributions. For purposes of actuarial
valuation, the Board shall adopt a generally accepted method for determining
the value of the assets held by the System. For general ledger accounting and
financial reporting, the Board shall use generally accepted accounting
principles.
   (c)   Study of plans. At least once in each five-year period, the actuary
shall make a study of the compensation, mortality, and service experience of
the participants of each of the plans and provide recommendations for any
changes in actuarial assumptions and funding methods that shall include
estimates of the effects such changes would have on the County's contributions
to the pension fund of each plan. The Board shall review the results of the
studies and valuations of the actuary and adopt the actuarial assumptions and
funding methods for each of the plans as the Board considers necessary.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-208) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-209. Nondisclosure of financial information.
   Unless disclosure is otherwise required by law, the Board may keep all
analyses, forecasts, negotiations, papers, records, recommendations, and
reports closed to public inspection until:
      (1)   the release of the information would not adversely affect the
negotiation for or market price of a security; and
      (2)   completion of a proposed purchase or program of purchases leading
to a cumulative position in a security; the making, sale, or prepayment of a
loan; any proposed sale or program of sales leading to the elimination of a
position in a security; or the purchase or sale of real estate.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-209) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
SUBTITLE 3. MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND DUTIES
§ 5-2-301. Annual report and statement.
   Each year the Board shall publish audited financial statements of the
System, prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
As the Board considers it necessary, the Board may prepare a report according
to related guidelines of a nationally recognized body such as the Government
Finance Officer's Association.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-301) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-302. Records and information.
   As the Board considers it necessary to manage and operate the System
properly, the Board may require any officer or agency of the County to furnish
the Board with a certified copy of any record or paper in the official custody
of the officer or agency and require any officer or employee of the County to
appear before the Board to provide information relevant to the management and
operation of the System.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-302) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-303. Regulations.
   The Board shall adopt rules and regulations providing for the administration
of the System; the management of the assets of the System; and the transaction
of its business, including provisions for notice of its meetings.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-303) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
SUBTITLE 4. FIDUCIARY RESPONSIBILITIES
§ 5-2-401. Purposes of assets of system.
   The Board shall hold the assets of the System for the exclusive purposes of
providing benefits to participants and paying the reasonable expenses of
administering the System.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-401) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-402. Standards of care.
   A fiduciary shall discharge the fiduciary's duties with respect to the
System solely in the interest of the participants and as follows:
      (1)   for the exclusive purposes of providing benefits to the
participants and for paying the reasonable expenses of administering the
System;
      (2)   with the care, skill, prudence, and diligence, under the
circumstances then prevailing, that a prudent person acting in a like capacity
and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a
like character and with like aims;
      (3)   by diversifying the investments of the System to minimize the risk
of large losses, unless under the circumstances it is clearly not prudent to do
so;
      (4)   in accordance with the laws governing the plans; and
      (5)   in accordance with the documents and instruments governing the
plans to the extent that the documents and instruments are consistent with this
subtitle.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-402) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-403. Duties and responsibilities of Trustees.
   (a)   Joint management and control of assets. Except as otherwise provided
in subsections (b) and (c), the Trustees jointly shall manage and control the
assets of the System and each Trustee, when acting as a fiduciary, shall use
reasonable care to prevent another Trustee from committing a breach of
fiduciary responsibility.
   (b)   Responsibilities. The Board may allocate specific responsibilities,
obligations, and duties among the Trustees and designate any other person to
carry out the responsibilities of a fiduciary.
   (c)   Limitation on liability.
      (1)   If the Board makes an allocation or designation to a person under
subsection (b), the Board is not liable for an act or omission of that person
except to the extent that the Board violates §
5-2-402 with respect to the allocation or designation; the establishment or
implementation of a procedure to allocate or designate; or the continuance or
review of the allocation or designation.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(1), a Trustee to
whom certain responsibilities, obligations, or duties have not been allocated
is not liable, either individually or as a Trustee, for any loss resulting to
the System arising from an act or omission of another person to whom the
responsibilities, obligations, or duties have been allocated.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-403) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-404. Prohibited transactions involving system assets.
   (a)   Generally. In exercising authority, control, or discretion with
respect to the System, a fiduciary may not:
      (1)   use the assets of the System for the fiduciary's own interest or
account;
      (2)   act in a transaction involving the System on behalf of a person, or
represent a person, if the interests of the person are adverse to the interests
of the System or the interests of participants;
      (3)   receive any consideration for the fiduciary's own account from a
person dealing with the System in connection with a transaction involving the
assets of the System; or
      (4)   become an endorser or surety or, in any manner, an obligor for
money lent to or borrowed from the assets of the System.
   (b)   Participation in plans. Nothing in this section prohibits a Trustee or
employee of the County from being a participant in a plan or receiving any
benefit to which the Trustee or employee is entitled under a plan.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-404) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-405. Liability of fiduciary for breach of duty.
   (a)   Generally. Subject to §
5-2-406, a fiduciary who breaches any of the responsibilities, obligations, or
duties imposed on a fiduciary by this subtitle is personally liable to the
System for any losses to the System resulting from a breach; shall restore to
the System any profits of the fiduciary made through use of assets of the
System by the fiduciary; and is subject to any equitable or remedial relief,
including removal of the fiduciary, that a court considers appropriate.
   (b)   Limitation on liability. A fiduciary is not liable with respect to a
breach of fiduciary duty under this subtitle if the breach was committed before
the fiduciary became a fiduciary or after the fiduciary ceased to be a
fiduciary.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-405) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-406. Indemnification of fiduciaries.
   (a)   County to indemnify fiduciary. Subject to the provisions of this
section, the County shall indemnify a fiduciary who is, or is threatened to be
made, a party to an action or proceeding, including an administrative or
investigative proceeding, by reason of the fiduciary's service as a fiduciary.
   (b)   Scope of indemnification.
      (1)   With respect to a civil, administrative, or investigative action or
proceeding, the County shall indemnify a fiduciary for the expenses of the
action or proceeding if the fiduciary acted in good faith and in a manner the
fiduciary reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interest of
the System.
      (2)   With respect to a criminal action or proceeding, the County shall
indemnify a fiduciary for the expenses of the action or proceeding if the
fiduciary acted in good faith, acted in a manner the fiduciary reasonably
believed to be in or not opposed to the best interest of the System, and did
not have reasonable cause to believe that the fiduciary's conduct was unlawful.
      (3)   The expenses to which a fiduciary is entitled under this subsection
include reasonable attorney's fees, judgments, fines, and other expenses that
were actually and reasonably incurred by the fiduciary in connection with the
action or proceeding.
   (c)   Termination of action or proceeding. Any termination of an action or
proceeding does not, of itself, create a presumption that the fiduciary did not
meet the standards for indemnification described in subsection (b)(1) and (b)
(2).
   (d)   Restrictions on indemnification. The County may not indemnify a
fiduciary with respect to an action or proceeding in which the fiduciary was
held liable for gross negligence or willful misconduct in the performance of
the fiduciary's duty to the System.
   (e)   Limitation on fiduciary's liability. A fiduciary may not be required
to pay amounts attributable to liability that is indemnified as described in
this section if the County does not provide insurance coverage as required in §
5-2-407 or otherwise fails to indemnify the fiduciary as required under this
section.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-406) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-407. Insurance for fiduciaries.
   The County shall provide insurance for a fiduciary eligible for
indemnification under §
5-2-406. The County may provide the insurance through self-insurance under
terms and conditions satisfactory to the County's self-insurance fund
committee.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-407) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-408. Agreement relieving fiduciary from liability.
   Except as provided in §
5-2-403(b) and (c), a provision in an agreement that purports to relieve a
fiduciary from a responsibility, obligation, or duty, or liability for a
responsibility, obligation, or duty under this subtitle is against public
policy and is void. This section does not preclude indemnification of or
insurance for a fiduciary in accordance with §
5-2-406 or §
5-2-407.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-408) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-409. Disqualification of fiduciary.
   (a)   Generally. Notwithstanding any other law, a person may not serve as a
fiduciary if the person has been convicted of a felony; a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude; a violation of this subtitle; or a conspiracy or attempt to
commit a crime described under this subsection.
   (b)   Restrictions on recommendation, appointment or approval. A person may
not knowingly recommend, appoint, or approve another person to serve as a
fiduciary who is prohibited from serving as a fiduciary under subsection (a).
   (c)   Date of conviction. For purposes of this section, a person is deemed
to be convicted on the later of the date of judgment of the trial court or the
date of the final sustaining of judgment on appeal.
   (d)   Removal. A fiduciary may be removed for a violation of subsection (a)
or subsection (b).
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-409) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-2-410. Bond.
   (a)   County to purchase bond for each fiduciary. The County shall purchase
a bond for each fiduciary who is not otherwise bonded by the County. The bond
shall be in the amount set forth in § 1-9-102 of this Code. This bond is the
only bond required for a fiduciary to exercise custody or control of any assets
of the System.
   (b)   Bond required to exercise custody or control of assets. Unless a
fiduciary is bonded as required by subsection (a), the fiduciary may not
exercise custody or control of any assets of the System.
   (c)   Violation. A fiduciary may not allow another fiduciary to act in
violation of subsection (b).
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-410)
SUBTITLE 5. FUNDING
§ 5-2-501. In general.
   In each plan there is a separate pension fund. The Board shall credit the
assets of the System to the appropriate pension fund.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-501) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 92-08)
§ 5-2-502. Employer contributions.
   For purposes of determining the amount of employer contributions to each of
the pension funds, the Board shall adopt rules and regulations that specify the
actuarial cost methods and assumptions to be used and the number of years over
which any unfunded accrued liability of a plan is to be amortized.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 2-502) (Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 90-01)
TITLE 3. EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT PLAN
Editor's note – Former 1985 County Code, Title 3, §§ 3-101 to 3-107 and §§ 3-
201 to 3-219, pertained to a retirement plan for appointed and elected
officials. Such provisions were transferred to the Laws of Anne Arundel County,
Maryland, by Bill No. 90-01, § 3.
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; General Provisions
   
5-3-101.   Definitions.
   
5-3-102.   Plan established.
   
5-3-103.   Participants.
   
5-3-104.   Pension fund established; contributions.
   
5-3-105.   Former participants in the Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected
Officials.
   
5-3-106.   Former participants in Defined Contribution Plan for Appointed and
Elected Officials.
Subtitle 2. Participation and Service
   
5-3-201.   Participation.
   
5-3-202.   Reemployment.
   
5-3-203.   Election by tier two employees.
   
5-3-204.   Inter-plan transfers.
   
5-3-205.   Part-time employees and temporary employees.
Subtitle 3. Benefits
   
5-3-301.   Vesting; termination of service before retirement.
   
5-3-302.   Determination of normal retirement date and early retirement date.
   
5-3-303.   Computation of pension – Normal retirement.
   
5-3-304.   Computation of pension – Early retirement.
   
5-3-305.   Pension payment – Election.
   
5-3-306.   Pension payment – Options.
   
5-3-307.   Disability pension.
   
5-3-308.   Active participant's death benefits – Line of duty.
   
5-3-309.   Active participant's death benefits – Non-line of duty.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 5-3-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Appointed official" means a County official or employee who serves
in a position listed in the exempt pay and benefit plan.
      (2)   "Elected official" means the County Executive; the members of the
County council; and the State's Attorney for Anne Arundel County.
      (3)   (i)   "Tier one employee" means:
            1.   except for an employee who makes an election to be a tier two
employee under §
5-3-203, an employee hired before December 4, 1996;
            2.   an employee hired on or after December 4, 1996 who makes an
election to be a tier one employee under §
5-3-201; and
            3.   an employee who makes an election to be a tier one employee
under §
5-3-204.
         (ii)   "Tier one employee" includes an employee who has been laid off
and reemployed under the provisions of §
6-1-109 of this Code who did not receive a refund of participant contributions
prior to reemployment and who makes an election to be a tier one employee at
the time of reemployment under §
5-3-202.
      (4)   (i)   "Tier two employee" means an employee:
            1.   hired on or after December 4, 1996 who does not make an
election to be a tier one employee under §
5-3-201; or
            2.   hired before December 4, 1996 who makes an election to be a
tier two employee under §
5-3-203.
         (ii)   "Tier two employee" includes an employee who has been laid off
and reemployed under the provisions of §
6-1-109 of this Code who did not receive a refund of participant contributions
prior to reemployment and who does not make an election to be a tier one
employee at the time of reemployment under §
5-3-202.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-101) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-3-102. Plan established.
   There is an Employees' Retirement Plan. The plan provisions include the
provisions of this title and
Titles 1 and
7.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-102) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-3-103. Participants.
   (a)   Generally. The participants in the plan are the following permanent
full-time and permanent part-time employees who work at least 50% of the amount
of time specified for the position:
      (1)   classified employees, except for employees who are participants
under the Police Service Retirement Plan, the Fire Service Retirement Plan, or
the Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan;
      (2)   appointed officials and elected officials, except for:
         (i)   a Chief of Police, an Assistant Chief of Police, a Deputy Police
Chief, exempt service, or a Police Major who elects to be a participant in the
Police Service Retirement Plan;
         (ii)   a Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief who elects to be a
participant in the Fire Service Retirement Plan; and
         (iii)   a Superintendent of Detention Facilities employed by the
County before October 29, 2020, who elects to be a participant in the Detention
Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan;
      (3)   employees of the Anne Arundel County Credit Union;
      (4)   employees of the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District;
      (5)   employees of the Anne Arundel Economic Development Corporation;
      (6)   employees of the Resilience Authority of Annapolis and Anne Arundel
County, Inc.;
      (7)   employees of the Public Library Association of Annapolis and Anne
Arundel County, Inc. in positions that are not eligible for any State pension
or retirement plan;
      (8)   employees of the Maryland Association of Counties and the Housing
Commission of Anne Arundel County who were participants of the plan on the
effective dates of Bill No. 17-98 and Bill No. 51-00, respectively, and who
made an election to continue as participants in this plan; and
      (9)   after July 1, 2002, employees of the Domestic Relations Division of
the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County who were transferred into the State
Personnel Management System as employees of the Child Support Enforcement
Administration of the State Department of Human Resources and who elected to
remain participants in the Employees’ Retirement Plan under the provisions of
the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, § 2-510, of the State Code.
   (b)   One-time irrevocable option. The following employees have a one-time
irrevocable option at their date of hire to elect to become participants in the
plan:
      (1)   employees of the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County in positions
that are not eligible for any State pension or retirement plan;
      (2)   employees of the Anne Arundel County Office of the State's
Attorney; and
      (3)   school crossing guards; and
      (4)   employees of the Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners
in the positions of full-time administrator and full-time secretary authorized
by § 11-204 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of State Code.
   (c)   Employees not eligible. The following employees are not eligible to be
participants in the plan:
      (1)   employees hired on a part-time basis with scheduled hours less than
50% of the amount of time specified for the position;
      (2)   employees hired on a temporary basis; and
      (3)   employees hired under the provisions of §
802(a)(14) or §
802(a)(17) of the Charter or §
6-2-103(b) of this Code.
   (d)   Freeze of participation. Notwithstanding anything in this title to the
contrary, in the event a participant elects to participate in the Employee
Retirement Savings Plan as permitted by §
6-6-103 of this Code, such participant shall not be entitled to any benefit
under this plan, whether based on service or compensation.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-103) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 7-03; Bill No. 60-09;
Bill No. 72-13; Bill No. 98-13; Bill No. 36-14; Bill No. 47-15; Bill No. 95-17;
Bill No. 54-20; Bill No. 67-23; Bill No. 93-23)
§ 5-3-104. Pension fund established; contributions.
   (a)   Established. There is a pension fund for the Employees' Retirement
Plan.
   (b)   Employee contributions. Each participant shall contribute to the
pension fund through payroll deductions as follows:
      (1)   for a tier one employee, 4% of the participant's annual basic pay
in each calendar year or portion of a calendar year while an active
participant; and
      (2)   for a tier two employee, no contribution is required.
   (c)   Employer contributions. The employer will "pick-up" the employee
contributions described in subsection (b)(1) in accordance with 26 U.S.C. § 414
(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and a participant will have no option of
receiving the "picked-up" contributions directly so that for tax purposes these
contributions will be treated as employer contributions.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-104) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 66-05)
§ 5-3-105. Former participants in the Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected
Officials.
   (a)   Generally. The pension fund includes the assets and liabilities of the
Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials, including the obligation
to pay the benefits and costs of administering that plan. Accrued benefits
under the Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials shall be paid
from the pension fund.
   (b)   Plan to determine benefits. The provisions of the Retirement Plan for
Appointed and Elected Officials as it existed on February 1, 1997 shall
continue to apply to determine the benefits of participants and beneficiaries
accrued under that plan, except as follows:
      (1)   those participants may elect to receive their accrued benefits in
accordance with the provisions of §
5-3-306(e); and
      (2)   those participants and beneficiaries shall be subject to the cost-
of-living adjustment provisions of §
5-1-406.
   (c)   Vested benefits. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title:
      (1)   for a participant who had not accrued a vested benefit under the
Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials, credited service under
this plan includes service credited under the Retirement Plan for Appointed and
Elected Officials;
      (2)   for a participant who had accrued a vested benefit and was a vested
participant under the Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials,
credited service under this plan includes service credited under the Retirement
Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials, except for the purpose of determining
the amount of the participant's retirement benefit or disability benefit under
this plan; and
      (3)   the total benefit paid from this plan to a participant who had
accrued a vested benefit under the Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected
Officials may not exceed the greater of: (i) 60% of final average basic pay as
determined under the Employees' Retirement Plan; or (ii) the benefit that has
accrued under the Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-105) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-3-106. Former participants in Defined Contribution Plan for Appointed and
Elected Officials.
   (a)   Successor. This plan is a successor to the Defined Contribution Plan
for Appointed and Elected Officials.
   (b)   Credited service. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
credited service under this plan includes service on or after February 2, 1994
and before February 1, 1997 credited to a former participant under the Defined
Contribution Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials.
   (c)   Distribution of account balance. If a participant received a
distribution of the participant's account balance under the Defined
Contribution Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials instead of the transfer
of that account balance to this plan, credited service under this plan does not
include service on or after February 2, 1994 and before February 1, 1997
credited to the participant under the Defined Contribution Plan for Appointed
and Elected Officials.
   (d)   Lump sum payment. If the account balance of a former participant in
the Defined Contribution Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials has been
transferred to this plan, the participant may elect to receive a lump sum
payment equal to that participant's vested account balance under the Defined
Contribution Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials determined as of February
1, 1997, plus interest for the number of full months from February 1, 1997 to
the date of payment, at 4.25% annually compounded on each January 1. This
payment shall be in lieu of any benefit otherwise provided under this plan or
under the Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials.
   (e)   Tier one employees. Subject to §
5-1-203, each participant in the Defined Contribution Plan for Appointed and
Elected Officials is treated as a tier one employee with respect to credited
service on or after February 2, 1994, except that no such participant may make
an election to transfer to tier two.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-106) (Bill No. 90-01)
SUBTITLE 2. PARTICIPATION AND SERVICE
§ 5-3-201. Participation.
   (a)   Election. An employee shall make an irrevocable election on the date
of hire or, if later, on the date of attaining eligibility to be a participant,
to be either a tier one employee or a tier two employee. On the failure of an
employee to make an election, the employee shall be a tier two employee.
   (b)   Employees hired prior to February 25, 2002. An employee hired before
February 25, 2002, who had the opportunity to make an election to be a
participant in this plan but did not do so may elect to become a participant at
any time and, as provided by this plan, receive purchased service for any
eligible employment.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-201) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 86-16)
§ 5-3-202. Reemployment.
   A tier one employee who terminates employment and is rehired shall make an
election on the date of reemployment under §
5-3-201(a).
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-202) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-3-203. Election by tier two employees.
   (a)   Election to become tier one employee. A participant who is a tier two
employee may elect to transfer and become a tier one employee, subject to all
provisions of this title applicable to tier one employees.
   (b)   Election date. The election shall be made by the fifth anniversary of
the date of hire for an employee hired on or before December 31, 2016.
   (c)   No elections after December 31, 2016. A participant who is hired after
December 31, 2016 and elects to become a tier two employee may not make an
election under this section to transfer and become a tier one employee.
   (d)   Election form and manner. The election shall be made in the form and
manner required by the Personnel Officer. The transfer shall take effect at the
beginning of the next pay period following receipt by the Personnel Officer of
the employee's completed election form.
   (e)   Election regarding service. A participant who makes an election under
this section shall also make an election regarding treatment of the
participant's service as a tier two employee. The participant may elect to
take:
      (1)   a full tier one retirement benefit as provided in subsection (f);
or
      (2)   an actuarial reduction of a full tier one retirement benefit as
provided in subsection (g).
   (f)   Repayment of contributions.
      (1)   A participant who elects a full tier one retirement benefit under
subsection (e)(1) shall repay the employee contributions that were not made
while the participant was a tier two employee. The amount of the repayment
shall be determined as of the date of transfer from tier two to tier one and be
equal to 4% of the participant's annual basic pay on the date of transfer
multiplied by the number of years of service as a tier two employee on the date
of transfer, computed to the nearest one-twelfth of a year.
      (2)   The participant may elect to make the repayment by making a lump
sum payment or by making installment payments through payroll deductions,
including 6% interest per year on the unpaid balance, for a period not to
exceed five years.
      (3)   The election as to method of repayment shall be made at the time
the participant elects to transfer from tier two to tier one.
      (4)   The participant shall complete all repayments by the date of
termination of employment. If not repaid in full, any retirement benefit to
which the participant is entitled shall be reduced by an amount actuarially
equivalent to the remaining unpaid employee contributions, plus interest from
the date of transfer to the actual date of retirement at the rate of 6% per
year.
      (5)   The actuarially equivalent amount of the remaining unpaid employee
contributions shall be determined based on the following factors:
         (i)   an actuarially assumed rate of interest of 6% per year, less a
2.1% actuarial adjustment for cost-of-living; and
         (ii)   the 1983 Group Annuity Mortality Table (blended 50% male and
50% female).
   (g)   Actuarial reduction.
      (1)   A participant who elects to take an actuarial reduction under
subsection (e)(2) shall receive a reduced retirement benefit, with the
reduction equal to the actuarially equivalent amount of the employee
contributions that were not made while the participant was a tier two employee.
      (2)   The employee contributions shall be calculated as 4% of the
participant's annual basic pay on the date of transfer multiplied by the number
of years of service as a tier two employee on the date of transfer, computed to
the nearest one-twelfth of a year, plus interest from the date of transfer to
the actual date of retirement at the rate of 6% per year.
      (3)   The actuarially equivalent amount of the employee contributions
shall be determined based on the following factors:
         (i)   an actuarially assumed rate of interest of 6% per year, less a
2.1% actuarial adjustment for cost-of-living; and
         (ii)   the 1983 Group Annuity Mortality Table (blended 50% male and
50% female).
   (h)   Transfer irrevocable. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
title, an election made by a tier two employee to transfer and become a tier
one employee under this section is irrevocable and may not be changed.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-204) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 86-16)
§ 5-3-204. Inter-plan transfers.
   An employee who makes an inter-plan transfer to the plan established by this
title is a tier one employee.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-205) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 86-16)
§ 5-3-205. Part-time employees and temporary employees.
   (a)   Ineligible employees. An ineligible part-time employee or an
ineligible temporary employee who becomes either a permanent full-time employee
or a permanent part-time employee who works at least 50% of the amount of time
specified for the position shall begin to earn actual plan service from the
date the employee becomes a participant.
   (b)   Permanent part-time employees. For any participant who has been a
participant as a permanent part-time employee, the employee's part-time service
earned after February 25, 2002, shall be prorated, based on scheduled hours
divided by 2,080 hours per year, for the purpose of determining credited
service for the amount of the pension benefit, but not for the purpose of
determining credited service for the normal retirement date or the early
retirement date.
   (c)   Rate of pay. For any participant who has been a participant as a
permanent part-time employee, the employee's rate of pay for any year shall be
converted to a full-time equivalent for the year, based upon the employee's
rate of pay for the year divided by the ratio determined under subsection (b)
for the year, for the purpose of determining the employee's annual basic pay
for the period of part-time service.
   (d)   Part-time service prior to February 25, 2002. For any employee who is
a participant as of February 25, 2002, in no event will the application of the
provisions of subsections (b) and (c) reduce the participant's pension benefit
from what the pension benefit would have been without prorating credited
service and annual basic pay for part-time service prior to February 25, 2002.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-206) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 86-16)
SUBTITLE 3. BENEFITS
§ 5-3-301. Vesting; termination of service before retirement.
   (a)   Generally. A participant vests in the benefits of the plan upon
completion of actual plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 as set forth in this subsection.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided for in this subsection, a participant
in the Employees' Retirement Plan hired before July 1, 2015 vests in the
benefits of the plan upon completion of actual plan service plus transferred
service under §
5-1-302 totaling five years.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided for in this subsection, a participant
in the Employees' Retirement Plan hired on or after July 1, 2015 vests in the
benefits of the plan upon completion of actual plan service plus transferred
service under §
5-1-302 totaling 10 years.
      (3)   A participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan who is a County
Councilmember whose first term begins on or after December 1, 2014 vests in the
benefits of the plan upon completion of actual plan service plus transferred
service under §
5-1-302 totaling 10 years.
      (4)   A participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan who is an exempt
employee hired under §
6-2-101 or §
6-2-103 of this Code, or a County Executive, who is hired on or after December
1, 2014 vests in the benefits of the plan upon completion of actual plan
service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling eight years.
   (b)   County's rights. The rights in which a participant vests under
subsection (a) are subject to the County's rights to amend or terminate the
plan under §
5-1-103.
   (c)   Termination of service before normal retirement date.
      (1)   A participant who vests and who terminates service before the
participant’s normal retirement date, as calculated under §
5-3-302(a), must leave any accumulated contributions in the pension fund to
become a terminated vested participant and to be eligible to receive retirement
benefits.
      (2)   A participant who vests and who terminates service before the
participant’s normal retirement date, as calculated under §
5-3-302(a), but after the participant’s early retirement date, as calculated
under §
5-3-302(b), may retire on an early retirement date and receive an annual
pension as calculated under §
5-3-304, or may become a terminated vested participant under paragraph (1).
   (d)   Annual pension on 60th birthday. On the first day of the month
coincident with or next following a terminated vested participant's 60th
birthday, the participant shall receive an annual pension equal to the amount
of the participant's normal retirement pension that had accrued to the
participant's date of termination, without reduction by an early retirement
reduction factor.
   (e)   Refund of accumulated contributions. Accumulated contributions shall
be refunded if:
      (1)   before a participant vests, the participant's service with an
employer terminates; or
      (2)   after a participant vests, the participant's service with an
employer terminates, and the participant voluntarily elects to withdraw from
the plan, ceasing to be a participant.
   (f)   Death of participant. If a terminated vested participant dies before
the participant's normal retirement date, a lump sum death benefit equal to
accumulated contributions shall be paid to the beneficiary or, if there is no
living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
   (g)   Transfer of contributions. If a participant elects to cease
participation in the plan and participate in the Employee Retirement Savings
Plan as permitted in §
6-6-103, the amounts set forth in §
6-6-201(f) shall be transferred out of the plan and into the Employee
Retirement Savings Plan as employee and employer contributions under the
Employee Retirement Savings Plan.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-301) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 97-13; Bill No. 95-17;
Bill No. 93-23)
§ 5-3-302. Determination of normal retirement date and early retirement date.
   (a)   Normal retirement date. A participant's normal retirement date is the
first day of the month coinciding with or next following the earlier of:
      (1)   for a participant hired before July 1, 1999, the participant's 60th
birthday or the completion of 30 years of credited service;
      (2)   except as otherwise provided in this subsection, for a participant
hired on or after July 1, 1999 and before July 1, 2015:
         (i)   the participant's 60th birthday and completion of actual plan
service plus transferred service under § 5-1-302 totaling five years; or
         (ii)   the completion of 30 years of credited service;
      (3)   except as otherwise provided in this subsection, for a participant
hired on or after July 1, 2015:
         (i)   the participant's 60th birthday and completion of actual plan
service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling 10 years; or
         (ii)   the completion of 30 years of credited service;
      (4)   for a participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan who is a County
Councilmember whose first term begins on or after December 1, 2014:
         (i)   the participant's 60th birthday and completion of actual plan
service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling 10 years; or
         (ii)   the completion of 30 years of credited service; or
      (5)   for a participant in the Employees' Retirement Plan who is an
exempt employee hired under §
6-2-101 or §
6-2-103 of this Code, or a County Executive, who is hired on or after December
1, 2014:
         (i)   the participant's 60th birthday and completion of actual plan
service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling eight years; or
         (ii)   the completion of 30 years of credited service.
   (b)   Early retirement date. A participant's early retirement date is the
first day of the month coinciding with or next following the participant's 50th
birthday and the completion of 20 years of credited service.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-302) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 97-13)
§ 5-3-303. Computation of pension – Normal retirement.
   Each participant, other than one who is receiving a disability retirement
pension in accordance with §
5-3-307, who retires on or after the participant's normal retirement date, is
entitled to receive an annual pension equal to:
      (1)   for a tier one employee:
         (i)   2% of the participant's final average basic pay multiplied by
each year of credited service, excluding disability leave service and credited
pre-plan military service, not exceeding 60% of final average basic pay; plus
         (ii)   2% of final average basic pay multiplied by the sum of
disability leave service and credited pre-plan military service; and
      (2)   for a tier two employee, 1% of the participant's final average
basic pay multiplied by each year of credited service.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-303) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-3-304. Computation of pension – Early retirement.
   (a)   Generally. Each participant who retires on an early retirement date is
entitled to receive an annual pension equal to the normal retirement pension
that would have been paid based on years of credited service reduced by an
early retirement reduction factor.
   (b)   Reduction factors. The early retirement reduction factors are:
Years Early Reduction Factor Percentage of Normal Retirement Benefit
Years Early Reduction Factor Percentage of Normal Retirement Benefit
1           2%               98%
2           5%               95%
3           9%               91%
4           14%              86%
5           20%              80%
6           28%              72%
7           36%              64%
8           44%              56%
9           52%              48%
10          60%              40%
 
   (c)   Reduction factor applied for 10 years. The early retirement reduction
factor shall be applied for each year that a participant's date of retirement
precedes the normal retirement date to a maximum of 10 years.
   (d)   Normal retirement date determined by Personnel Officer. The Personnel
Officer shall determine the normal retirement date by assuming that the
participant had continued to earn credited service and the early retirement
reduction factor by prorating to the nearest one-twelfth of a year.
   (e)   Participants as of February 25, 2002. For any employee who is a
participant as of February 25, 2002, in no event will the application of the
early retirement reduction factors in subsection (b) reduce the participant's
pension benefit from what the pension benefit would have been under the early
retirement reduction factors in effect immediately prior to February 25, 2002.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-304) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-3-305. Pension payment – Election.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided in subsection (b), a participant may
elect an optional form of pension described in §
5-3-306 that is actuarially equivalent to the normal form of pension otherwise
payable.
   (b)   Disabled participants. This subsection applies to a disabled
participant.
      (1)   A participant who qualifies for a service-connected disability
retirement pension is eligible to elect an optional form of pension, regardless
of age and credited service.
      (2)   A participant who qualifies for a non-service-connected disability
retirement pension on or after reaching the participant's early retirement date
is eligible to elect an optional form of pension.
      (3)   A participant who qualifies for a non-service-connected disability
retirement pension before reaching the participant's early retirement date or
normal retirement date is eligible to elect an optional form of pension on
attaining age 60. An election takes effect only if the participant survives to
age 60.
   (c)   Filing form with Personnel Officer. To elect a pension payment option,
a participant shall file the appropriate form with the Personnel Officer at
least 30 days before the date of retirement or, for a participant who qualifies
for a non-service-connected disability retirement before reaching the
participant's early retirement date or normal retirement date, at least 30 days
before the date the participant is eligible to receive payment in accordance
with the option.
   (d)   Effective date.
      (1)   The pension payment option is effective on the participant's
retirement date, or, for a participant who qualifies for a non-service-
connected disability retirement before reaching the participant's early
retirement date or normal retirement date, the first day of the month following
the date that the participant attains age 60.
      (2)   The pension payment option is void if the participant, the
beneficiary, or the joint annuitant dies before the date set forth in
subsection (d)(1).
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-305) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-3-306. Pension payment – Options.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   A participant may elect one of the following pension options:
         (i)   option 1, modified cash refund annuity;
         (ii)   option 2, joint and survivor option;
         (iii)   option 3, Social Security adjustment option; and
         (iv)   option 4, for tier one employees only, joint and survivor pop-
up option.
      (2)   The benefits provided under options 2, 3, and 4 shall be
actuarially equivalent to the benefits provided under option 1.
   (b)   Modified cash refund annuity. The modified cash refund annuity is the
normal form of pension. Under the modified cash refund annuity, pension
benefits shall be paid to the participant during the participant's lifetime.
   (c)   Joint and survivor option. Under the joint and survivor option, the
participant may designate one joint annuitant, either a spouse or a child.
Pension benefits shall be paid as follows:
      (1)   pension benefits in an amount determined to be actuarially
equivalent to the modified cash refund annuity, without regard to any guarantee
of accumulated contributions, shall be paid to the participant during the
participant's lifetime; and
      (2)   at the participant's death, 100% of pension benefits payable to the
participant, or 80%, 66 2/3%, or 50% of that amount, as elected by the
participant, shall be paid to the joint annuitant during the joint annuitant's
lifetime.
   (d)   Social Security adjustment option. Under the Social Security
adjustment option, a participant may elect a voluntary adjustment of pension
benefits before qualifying to receive Social Security benefits, electing to
receive a benefit actuarially equivalent to the modified cash refund annuity
without regard to any guarantee of accumulated contributions, with larger
payments until the participant attains age 62, and smaller payments thereafter.
   (e)   Joint and survivor pop-up option.
      (1)   Under the joint and survivor pop-up option, a participant may
designate one joint annuitant, either a spouse or a child. Pension benefits
shall be paid as follows:
         (i)   pension benefits in an amount determined to be actuarially
equivalent to the modified cash refund annuity, without regard to any guarantee
of accumulated contributions, shall be paid to the participant during the
participant's lifetime; and
         (ii)   at the participant's death, 100% of pension benefits payable to
the participant, or 80%, 66 2/3%, or 50% of that amount, as elected by the
participant, shall be paid to the joint annuitant during the joint annuitant's
lifetime.
      (2)   If the joint annuitant predeceases the participant, the pension
benefits payable to the participant shall be adjusted, as of the first day of
the month coinciding with or next following the death of the joint annuitant,
to the same amount as would have been payable to the participant if the joint
and survivor pop-up option had not been elected.
      (3)   A tier two employee is not eligible for the joint and survivor pop-
up option.
   (f)   Cessation of benefit payments. At the cessation of benefit payments
under this section, if benefits in an amount equal to accumulated contributions
have not been paid, the difference shall be paid in a lump sum to the
beneficiary or, if there is no living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-306) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-3-307. Disability pension.
   (a)   Total and permanent disability. In this section, "total and permanent
disability" does not include disability resulting from or consisting of the
participant currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs or narcotics; a
willful effort on the participant's part to bring about injury or illness to
the participant or another person, while the participant is sane or insane; the
participant engaging in any illegal or criminal enterprise or activity;
injuries incurred on the job while under the influence of alcohol; or injuries
incurred as a result of military service, other than as set forth in subsection
(d).
   (b)   Non-service-connected disability retirement pension. A participant who
is not eligible to retire on a normal retirement pension may be retired by the
Personnel Officer on a non-service-connected disability retirement pension
beginning on the date the following conditions are met:
      (1)   the Personnel Officer determines, on the basis of a medical
examination by one or more physicians selected by the Personnel Officer, that
the participant has a total and permanent disability in that the participant is
wholly and permanently prevented, as a result of bodily injury or disease, but
not as a result of bodily injury or occupational disease incurred in the
performance of duty, from engaging in an occupation or employment for
remuneration or profit or continuing in the capacity of an employee;
      (2)   the participant has exhausted all accrued disability leave and all
accident and sickness benefits from programs, exclusive of federal Social
Security, to which the County makes contributions;
      (3)   for a tier one employee, the participant was making employee
contributions under this title immediately prior to the participant's date of
disability;
      (4)   the participant has vested in accordance with §
5-3-301;
      (5)   the participant is not eligible for a service-connected disability
retirement; and
      (6)   the participant is eligible for disability benefits under the
Social Security Act.
   (c)   Service-connected disability retirement pension. A participant may be
retired by the Personnel Officer on a service-connected disability retirement
pension beginning on the date the following conditions are met:
      (1)   the Personnel Officer determines on the basis of a medical
examination by one or more physicians selected by the Personnel Officer that:
         (i)   the participant has a total and permanent disability as the
natural and proximate result of bodily injury in the performance of the
participant's regular occupation or occupational disease incurred in the
performance of the participant's regular occupation at some definite time or
place without willful negligence on the participant's part; and
         (ii)   is unable to engage in the participant's regular occupation as
an employee;
      (2)   the participant has exhausted sick leave and accident and sickness
benefits from programs, exclusive of federal Social Security, to which the
County makes contributions;
      (3)   for a tier one employee, the participant was making employee
contributions under this title immediately prior to the participant's date of
disability; and
      (4)   the disability is the result of injury compensable under the State
Workers' Compensation Law and a claim is filed with the State Workers'
Compensation Commission.
   (d)   Military service disability retirement pension. A participant who is
not eligible to retire on a normal retirement pension may be retired by the
Personnel Officer with a disability pension beginning on the date following a
determination by the Personnel Officer that the participant:
      (1)   has a total and permanent disability as a direct result of
qualified military service based on a medical examination by one or more
physicians selected by the Personnel Officer;
      (2)   was injured while performing military service that qualifies as
credited in-plan military service;
      (3)   has been discharged and awarded a monthly military disability
pension by the United States Government; and
      (4)   is unable to perform the duties of the participant's regular
assignment or any other assignment that is suitable based on the participant's
training and experience.
   (e)   Annual amount of disability retirement pension.
      (1)   The annual amount of disability retirement pension payable to each
eligible participant shall be determined as provided in this subsection.
      (2)   If a participant is determined to have a total and permanent
disability under subsection (b), the participant is entitled to receive an
annual disability retirement pension equal to A minus B, where:
         (i)   A is the greater of:
            1.   the annual pension that the participant would have been
entitled to receive upon retirement determined under §
5-3-303(1) or (2) based upon the participant's credited service; or
            2.   25% of final average basic pay; and
         (ii)    B is the amount of earnings received by the participant during
the year in a gainful occupation, to the extent that the earnings exceed the
current earnings of an employee similarly classified.
      (3)   If a participant is determined to have a total and permanent
disability under subsection (c), the participant is entitled to receive an
annual disability retirement pension equal to 66 2/3% of the participant's
final average basic pay.
      (4)   If a participant is eligible for retirement under subsection (d),
the participant is entitled to receive an annual military disability pension
benefit equal to the greater of:
         (i)   the participant's accrued pension as of the date of disability,
computed in accordance with the provisions of §
5-3-303;
         (ii)   66 2/3% of the participant's final average basic pay less the
monthly amount of the military disability payment being received by the
participant from the United States Government at the time of retirement
calculated on an annualized basis; or
         (iii)   25% of the participant's final average basic pay.
   (f)   Limitations on eligibility.
      (1)   This subsection does not apply to a participant whose disability
retirement pension has been in effect for at least five years.
      (2)   A participant ceases to qualify for a non-service-connected
disability retirement pension when the participant is no longer eligible for
disability benefits under the provisions of the Social Security Act, or when
the participant refuses to submit a report of total earnings when requested by
the Personnel Officer in accordance with subsection (g).
      (3)   A participant ceases to qualify for a service-connected disability
retirement pension if:
         (i)   the Personnel Officer determines on the basis of a medical
examination by one or more physicians selected by the Personnel Officer that
the participant no longer has a total and permanent disability that
incapacitates the participant for duty or has sufficiently recovered but
refuses to resume the participant's regular occupation as an employee; or
         (ii)   the participant refuses to undergo a medical examination
requested by the Personnel Officer, provided the participant may not be
required to undergo a medical examination more than once a year; or
         (iii)   the participant refuses to submit a report of total earnings
when requested by the Personnel Officer in accordance with subsection (g).
   (g)   Gainful employment.
      (1)   In this subsection, "earnings" includes salary, wages, commissions,
or fees, but the term excludes income from investments or savings for which the
participant is contributing neither time nor talent.
      (2)   If a participant who is found to have a total and permanent
disability subsequently engages in an occupation or employment for remuneration
or profit, other than for purposes of rehabilitation as approved by the
Personnel Officer, the occupation or employment shall be considered as gainful
employment.
      (3)   In order for a disability retirement pension to be paid under this
title when a participant is engaged in gainful employment, the participant
shall report total earnings from the gainful employment received during the
preceding calendar year and provide the Personnel Officer with documents
satisfactory to the Personnel Officer that substantiate the earnings being
reported.
      (4)   The documentation shall be provided to the Personnel Officer during
the month of January but in the event of delay, the Personnel Officer shall
give consideration to the continued payment of a disability retirement pension
through April 15, and adjustments shall be absorbed in the payments expected to
be paid during the balance of the calendar year.
   (h)   Normal retirement age. Disability retirement benefits payable to a
disabled participant shall continue notwithstanding the fact that the
participant reaches the participant's normal retirement age.
   (i)   Benefits received under State law. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this section to the contrary, benefits received under this section are not
affected by benefits received under the Labor and Employment Article, Title 9,
of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-307) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 6-10; Bill No. 97-13;
Bill No. 70-20; Bill No. 93-23)
§ 5-3-308. Active participant's death benefits – Line of duty.
   (a)   Generally. This section applies to active participants whose deaths
occur as a direct result of the active performance of duties.
   (b)   Death benefit to surviving spouse or unmarried minor child.
      (1)   On the death of an active participant, a death benefit is payable
to the surviving spouse or, if there is no spouse, the unmarried minor
children, in an annual amount equal to the greater of the participant's accrued
benefit as of the date of death or 50% of the participant's final average basic
pay.
      (2)   The death benefit shall be paid to the surviving spouse on a
monthly basis commencing on the first day of the month coinciding with or next
following the participant's death and ceasing as of the spouse's date of death.
      (3)   If the surviving spouse dies, or if there is no surviving spouse
but there are one or more surviving unmarried minor children, the death benefit
shall be paid to the children in equal shares, on a monthly basis, commencing
on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the spouse's
death, or the participant's death, as applicable, with the benefit to each
child ceasing when the child attains the age of 18 years or marries, whichever
occurs first.
      (4)   At the cessation of benefit payments under this subsection, if
benefit payments in an amount equal to accumulated contributions have not been
made, the difference shall be paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary or, if
there is no living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
   (c)   When no surviving spouse or unmarried minor children. On the death of
an active participant who does not have a surviving spouse or unmarried minor
children, there shall be refunded to the beneficiary or, if there is no living
beneficiary, to the participant's estate an amount equal to accumulated
contributions and a lump sum equal to 50% of the participant's final average
basic pay.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-308) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-3-309. Active participant's death benefits – Non-line of duty.
   (a)   Generally. This section applies to active participants whose deaths do
not occur as a direct result of the active performance of duties, including a
participant whose death occurs as a result of performing military service that
qualifies as credited in-plan military service.
   (b)   Non-vested active participant. On the death of a non-vested active
participant, the surviving spouse or, if there is no spouse, the unmarried
minor children, shall receive a lump sum death benefit equal to accumulated
contributions plus 50% of the participant's final average basic pay.
   (c)   Vested active participant.
      (1)   Subject to the election permitted in subsection (c)(2), on the
death of an active vested participant, the surviving spouse or, if there is no
spouse, the unmarried minor children, shall receive a lump sum death benefit
equal to accumulated contributions plus 50% of the participant's final average
basic pay.
      (2)   Instead of the lump sum death benefit, the surviving spouse or, if
there is no spouse, the unmarried minor children, may elect to receive a death
benefit in an annual amount equal to the normal retirement pension or early
retirement pension that would have been payable annually to the participant if
the participant had retired on the applicable date in subsection (c)(3) and
elected a 100% joint and survivor option.
      (3)   Benefit payments under subsection (c)(2) shall be made on a monthly
basis and shall commence:
         (i)   if the participant was not yet eligible for normal or early
retirement, on the participant's normal retirement date or early retirement
date, as elected; or
         (ii)   if the participant was eligible for normal or early retirement,
on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the
participant's death.
      (4)   Benefit payments to the spouse under subsection (c)(2) shall cease
as of the spouse's date of death.
      (5)   Benefit payments to the unmarried minor children under subsection
(c)(2) shall be paid to the unmarried minor children in equal shares, with the
benefit to each child ceasing when the child attains the age of 18 years or
marries, whichever occurs first.
      (6)   If the spouse or minor children who are to receive a deferred
benefit under subsection (c)(3)(i) die before the participant's early
retirement date or normal retirement date, as elected, accumulated
contributions shall be paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary or, if there is no
living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
      (7)   At the cessation of benefit payments under this subsection, if
benefit payments in an amount equal to accumulated contributions have not been
made the difference shall be paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary or, if there
is no living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
   (d)   Active participant who does not have surviving spouse or unmarried
minor children. On the death of an active participant who does not have a
surviving spouse or unmarried minor children, there shall be refunded to the
beneficiary or, if there is no living beneficiary, to the participant's estate:
      (1)   an amount equal to accumulated contributions; and
      (2)   if the participant has one or more years of credited service, a
lump sum equal to 50% of the participant's final average basic pay.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 3-309) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 6-10)
TITLE 4. FIRE SERVICE RETIREMENT PLAN
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; General Provisions
   
5-4-101.   Plan established.
   
5-4-102.   Participants.
   
5-4-103.   Pension fund established; contributions.
Subtitle 2. Benefits
   
5-4-201.   Termination of service before retirement.
   
5-4-202.   Determination of normal retirement date and early retirement date.
   
5-4-203.   Computation of pension – Normal retirement.
   
5-4-204.   Computation of pension – Early retirement.
   
5-4-205.   Normal form of pension payment.
   
5-4-206.   Disability pension.
   
5-4-207.   Active participant's death benefits.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 5-4-101. Plan established.
   There is a Fire Service Retirement Plan. The plan provisions include the
provisions of this title and
Titles 1 and
7.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 4-101) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-4-102. Participants.
   The participants in the plan are the following paid employees of the County
who are making contributions to the plan and are classified as:
      (1)   Fire Fighter II;
      (2)   Fire Fighter III;
      (3)   Fire Fighter/Cardiac Rescue Technician;
      (4)   Fire Fighter/Emergency Medical Technician  –  Paramedic;
      (5)   Fire Lieutenant;
      (6)   Fire Lieutenant/Emergency Medical Technician – Paramedic;
      (7)   Fire Captain;
      (8)   Fire Captain/Emergency Medical Technician – Paramedic;
      (9)   Fire Battalion Chief;
      (10)   Fire Battalion Chief/Emergency Medical Technician – Paramedic;
      (11)   Fire Division Chief;
      (12)   Deputy Fire Chief;
      (13)   by election, Assistant Fire Chief; and
      (14)   by election, the Fire Chief.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 4-102) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 7-03; Bill No. 98-13;
Bill No. 93-23)
§ 5-4-103. Pension fund established; contributions.
   (a)   Established. There is a pension fund for the Fire Service Retirement
Plan.
   (b)   Employee contributions.
      (1)   Except as provided in paragraph (2), each participant shall
contribute to the pension fund, through payroll deductions, 7.25% of the
participant’s annual basic pay in each calendar year or portion of a calendar
year while an active participant in the plan.
      (2)   Effective January 1, 2026, a participant in the classification of
Fire Fighter, Fire Fighter/EMT-Paramedic, Fire Lieutenant, Fire Lieutenant/EMT-
Paramedic, Fire Captain or Fire Captain/EMT-Paramedic shall contribute to the
pension fund, through payroll deductions, 8.00% of the participant’s annual
basic pay in each calendar year or portion of a calendar year while an active
participant in the plan.
   (c)   Employer contributions. The employer will “pick-up” the employee
contributions described in subsection (b) in accordance with 26 U.S.C. § 414(h)
(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and a participant will have no option of
receiving the “picked-up” contributions directly so that for tax purposes these
contributions will be treated as employer contributions.
   (d)   Contributions after termination. A participant is not required to make
contributions on or after the participant’s date of death, date of termination
of employment, date of disability, or date of retirement, whichever date is
earliest.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 4-103) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 66-05; Bill No. 40-10;
Bill No. 30-12; Bill No. 59-25)
SUBTITLE 2. BENEFITS
§ 5-4-201. Termination of service before retirement.
   (a)   Refund of contributions. Except as provided in subsection (b), a
participant whose employment is terminated before the participant becomes
eligible for a retirement benefit is entitled to receive a refund of
accumulated contributions, and the refund shall be instead of other rights and
benefits of the participant under this title.
   (b)   Reemployment less than 12 months after termination. A participant who
terminates employment before the participant’s normal retirement date may
return to participation in the plan and be entitled to the rights and benefits
of a participant under this title, including credit for years of service prior
to termination, if:
         (1)   the former participant is reemployed in a classification that is
eligible to participate in the plan less than 12 months from the date of
termination; and
         (2)   (i)   if the former participant terminated employment and was
reemployed on or after April 13, 2024, the former participant repays the refund
of accumulated contributions under subsection (a) within 30 days of
reemployment; or
            (ii)   if the former participant terminated employment and was
reemployed prior to April 13, 2024, the former participant repays the
actuarially equivalent amount of the refunded contributions received when
employment was terminated, at the election of the former participant: in a lump
sum within 60 days of April 13, 2024; through bi-weekly after-tax payroll
deductions over a period of up to three years; or through a combination of a
partial lump sum payment within 60 days of April 13, 2024 and payroll
deductions, as approved by the Personnel Officer.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 4-201) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 93-23)
§ 5-4-202. Determination of normal retirement date and early retirement date.
   (a)   Normal retirement date through June 30, 2002. Through June 30, 2002, a
participant's normal retirement date is the first day of the month coinciding
with or next following the participant's 50th birthday and the completion of
actual plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-304 totaling five years.
   (b)   Normal retirement date on or after July 1, 2002. On and after July 1,
2002, a participant's normal retirement date is the first day of the month
coinciding with or next following the earlier of:
      (1)   the participant's 50th birthday and the completion of actual plan
service plus transferred service under §
5-1-304 totaling five years; or
      (2)   the participant's completion of actual plan service plus
transferred service under §
5-1-304 and disability leave service totaling 20 years.
   (c)   Early retirement date. Through June 30, 2002, a participant's early
retirement date is the first day of the month coinciding with or next following
the participant's completion of actual plan service plus transferred service
under §
5-1-304 and disability leave service totaling 20 years.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 4-202) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-4-203. Computation of pension – Normal retirement.
   (a)   Annual pension. Each participant, other than one who is receiving a
disability retirement pension in accordance with §
5-4-206, who retires on or after the participant's normal retirement date, is
entitled to receive an annual pension equal to:
      (1)   2.5% of the participant's final average basic pay multiplied by
each year of credited service (excluding credited pre-plan military service),
not exceeding 20 years; plus
      (2)   2% of the participant's final average basic pay multiplied by each
year of credited service (excluding credited pre-plan military service),
exceeding 20 years; plus
      (3)   2% of the participant's final average basic pay multiplied by each
year of credited pre-plan military service.
   (b)   Maximum benefit. The maximum benefit is 70% of final average basic
pay, except that a participant's maximum benefit may exceed 70% of the
participant's final average basic pay to the extent that the amount of the
pension in excess of 70% is based on disability leave service and credited pre-
plan military service.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 4-203) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-4-204. Computation of pension – Early retirement.
   (a)   Annual pension. Each participant who retires on an early retirement
date is entitled to receive an annual pension equal to the normal retirement
pension that would have been paid, reduced by the early retirement adjustment
factor.
   (b)   Adjustment factor. The early retirement adjustment factor is 2.4% For
each year that a participant's date of retirement precedes the normal
retirement date to a maximum of 10 years.
   (c)   Personnel Officer to determine normal retirement date. The Personnel
Officer shall determine the normal retirement date by assuming that the
participant had continued to earn credited service and the early retirement
reduction factor by prorating to the nearest one-twelfth of a year.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 4-203.1) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-4-205. Normal form of pension payment.
   (a)   Surviving spouse. This subsection applies to a participant who has a
surviving spouse at the time of the participant's death. Pension benefits shall
be paid:
      (1)   to the participant during the participant's lifetime;
      (2)   on the participant's death, if the spouse survives, to the spouse
commencing on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the
participant's death and ceasing as of the spouse's date of death; and
      (3)   on the death of the surviving spouse, if there are surviving
unmarried minor children of the participant, to those children commencing on
the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the spouse's
death.
   (b)   No surviving spouse. This subsection applies to a participant who does
not have a surviving spouse at the time of the participant's death. Pension
benefits shall be paid:
      (1)   to the participant during the participant's lifetime; and
      (2)   on the participant's death, if there are surviving unmarried minor
children of the participant, to those children commencing on the first day of
the month coinciding with or next following the participant's death.
   (c)   Children. Benefits shall be paid to a participant's children under
this section as a group, with the benefit to each child ceasing when the child
attains the age of 18 years or marries, whichever occurs first.
   (d)   Cessation of benefits. At the cessation of benefit payments under this
section, if a total of 60 payments has not been made, benefit payments in the
amount payable shall be continued and paid, until a total of 60 payments has
been made to the beneficiary or, if there is no living beneficiary, the
participant's estate.
   (e)   Lump sum payment. After any payments made under subsection (d), if
benefits in an amount equal to accumulated contributions have not been paid,
the difference shall be paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary or, if there is
no living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 4-204) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-4-206. Disability pension.
   (a)   Limitations on "total and permanent disability". In this section,
"total and permanent disability" does not include disability resulting from or
consisting of the participant currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs or
narcotics; a willful effort on the participant's part to bring about injury or
illness to the participant or another person, while the participant is sane or
insane; the participant engaging in any illegal or criminal enterprise or
activity; injuries incurred on the job while under the influence of alcohol; or
injuries incurred as a result of military service, other than as set forth in
subsection (d)(4).
   (b)   Scope of "total and permanent disability". A participant has a total
and permanent disability if the Personnel Officer determines, on the basis of a
medical examination by one or more physicians selected by the Personnel
Officer, that the participant is wholly and permanently prevented as a result
of bodily injury or disease from engaging in any occupation or employment for
remuneration or profit or continuing as an employee in the participant's
regular assignment.
   (c)   Eligibility.
      (1)   A participant is eligible for a disability retirement pension under
this title on the first day of the month that the participant is determined to
have a total and permanent disability and was making employee contributions to
the plan immediately prior to the date of disability.
      (2)   A participant is not eligible to commence receiving a disability
retirement pension on and after the participant's normal retirement date unless
the disability is the result of a bodily injury or disease arising out of and
occurring in the course of the participant's active performance of duties.
   (d)   Annual disability retirement pension.
      (1)   The annual amount of a disability retirement pension payable to
each eligible participant shall be determined as provided in this subsection.
      (2)   If a participant has a total and permanent disability that is the
result of bodily injury or disease arising out of and occurring in the course
of the participant's employment, the participant is entitled to receive an
annual disability retirement pension equal to the greater of the participant's
accrued benefit or 66 2/3% of:
         (i)   the participant's final average basic pay; or
         (ii)   if the participant is assigned to a higher classification and
is disabled while acting in the higher classification, the final average basic
pay that the participant would have received had the participant been promoted
to the higher classification under §
6-1-208 of this Code.
      (3)   (i)   If a participant has a total and permanent disability solely
because the participant is prevented from engaging in any occupation or
employment for remuneration or profit as a result of a non- duty related cause,
the participant is entitled to receive an annual disability retirement pension
equal to the participant's accrued pension as of the participant's date of
disability computed in accordance with the provisions of §
5-4-203 or 66 2/3% of the participant's final average basic pay, whichever is
greater.
         (ii)   If a participant has a total and permanent disability solely
because the participant is prevented from continuing as an employee in the
participant's regular assignment as a result of a non-duty related cause, the
participant is entitled to receive an annual disability retirement pension
equal to the participant's accrued pension as of the participant's date of
disability, computed in accordance with the provisions of §
5-4-203 or 20% of the participant's final average basic pay, whichever is
greater.
      (4)   If a participant has a total and permanent disability as a direct
result of performing military service that qualifies as credited in-plan
military service, has been discharged from the military and awarded a monthly
military disability pension, and is prevented from continuing in the
participant's regular assignment within the Fire Department as a result of this
disability, the participant is entitled to receive an annual disability
retirement payment equal to the participant's accrued pension as of the date of
disability, computed in accordance with the provisions of §
5-4-203, or 66% of the participant's final average basic pay less the monthly
amount of the military disability payment being received by the participant
from the United States Government at the time of retirement calculated on an
annualized basis, or 20% of the participant's final average basic pay,
whichever is greater.
   (e)   Disqualification.
      (1)   This subsection does not apply to a participant whose disability
retirement pension has been in effect for at least five years.
      (2)   A participant ceases to qualify for a disability retirement pension
when:
         (i)   the Personnel Officer determines, on the basis of a medical
examination by one or more physicians selected by the Personnel Officer, that
the participant no longer has a total and permanent disability or has
sufficiently recovered but refuses to resume the participant's regular
occupation as an employee;
         (ii)   the participant refuses to undergo a medical examination
requested by the Personnel Officer, provided the participant may not be
required to undergo a medical examination more than once a year; or
         (iii)   the participant is employed in a position with the same
requirements as the participant's regular assignment.
   (f)   Normal retirement date. Disability retirement pension benefits payable
to a disabled participant shall continue notwithstanding the fact that the
participant reaches the participant's normal retirement date.
   (g)   Benefits received under State law. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this section to the contrary, benefits received under this section are not
affected by benefits received under the Labor and Employment Article, Title 9,
of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 4-205) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 58-07; Bill No. 6-10;
Bill No. 70-20)
§ 5-4-207. Active participant's death benefits.
   (a)   Death as a result of active duty. This subsection applies to active
participants whose deaths occur as a direct result of the active performance of
duties. On the death of an active participant, a death benefit is payable to
the surviving spouse or, if there is no spouse, the unmarried minor children,
in an annual amount equal to the greater of the participant's accrued benefit
or 66 2/3% of:
      (1)   the participant's final average basic pay; or
      (2)   if the participant is assigned to a higher classification and death
occurs while acting in the higher classification, the annual basic pay the
participant would have received had the participant been promoted to the higher
classification under §
6-1-208 of this Code.
   (b)   Death not a result of active duty. This subsection applies to active
participants whose deaths do not occur as a direct result of the active
performance of duties, including a participant whose death occurs as a result
of performing military service that qualifies as credited in-plan military
service period. On the death of an active participant, a death benefit is
payable to the surviving spouse or, if there is no spouse, the unmarried minor
children, in an annual amount equal to the participant's accrued benefit,
computed in accordance with §
5-4-203, as of the participant's date of death.
   (c)   Payment of death benefit. The death benefit shall be paid to the
surviving spouse on a monthly basis commencing on the first day of the month
coinciding with or next following the participant's death and ceasing as of the
spouse's date of death. If the surviving spouse dies, or if there is no
surviving spouse but there are one or more surviving unmarried minor children,
the death benefit shall be paid to the children in equal shares, on a monthly
basis, commencing on the first day of the month coinciding with or next
following the spouse's death, or the participant's death, as applicable, with
the benefit to each child ceasing when the child attains the age of 18 years or
marries, whichever occurs first.
   (d)   Cessation of benefit payments. At the cessation of benefit payments
under this section, if a total of 60 payments has not been made, benefit
payments in the amount payable shall be continued and paid, until a total of 60
payments has been made to the beneficiary or, if there is no living
beneficiary, the participant's estate.
   (e)   Lump sum payment. After any payments made under subsection (d), if
benefit payments in an amount equal to accumulated contributions have not been
made, the difference shall be paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary or, if
there is no living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
   (f)   No surviving spouse or unmarried minor children. On the death of an
active participant who does not have a surviving spouse or unmarried minor
children, there shall be refunded to the beneficiary, or if there is no living
beneficiary, to the participant's estate an amount equal to accumulated
contributions plus, if the participant has one or more years of credited
service, a lump sum equal to 50% of the participant's final average basic pay.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 4-206) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 6-10)
TITLE 5. POLICE SERVICE RETIREMENT PLAN
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; General Provisions
   
5-5-101.   Plan established.
   
5-5-102.   Participants.
   
5-5-103.   Pension fund established; contributions.
Subtitle 2. Benefits
   
5-5-201.   Termination of service before retirement.
   
5-5-202.   Determination of normal retirement date.
   
5-5-203.   Computation of pension – Normal retirement.
   
5-5-204.   Normal form of pension payment.
   
5-5-205.   Disability pension.
   
5-5-206.   Active participants death benefits.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 5-5-101. Plan established.
   There is a Police Service Retirement Plan. The plan provisions include the
provisions of this title and
Titles 1 and
7.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 5-101) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-5-102. Participants.
   The participants in the plan are the following paid employees of the County
listed in subsections (1) and (2) who are making contributions to the plan and
are designated as either category I or II participants as follows:
      (1)   Category I participants include:
         (i)   Police Officer;
         (ii)   Police Officer First Class; and
         (iii)   Police Corporal; and
      (2)   Category II participants include:
         (i)   Police Sergeant;
         (ii)   Police Lieutenant;
         (iii)   Police Captain;
         (iv)   Police Major;
         (v)   Deputy Police Chief in the classified service; and
         (vi)   by election, the Chief of Police, an Assistant Chief of Police,
a Deputy Police Chief, exempt service, and a Police Major.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 5-102) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 66-05; Bill No. 72-13;
Bill No. 47-15; Bill No. 67-23)
§ 5-5-103. Pension fund established; contributions.
   (a)   Established. There is a pension fund for the Police Service Retirement
Plan.
   (b)   Employee contributions.
      (1)   Except as provided in paragraph (2), a participant shall contribute
to the pension fund, through payroll deductions, 7.25% of the participant’s
annual basic pay in each calendar year or portion of a calendar year while an
active participant in the plan.
      (2)   Effective January 1, 2026, a participant shall contribute to the
pension fund, through payroll deductions, 8.25% of the participant's annual
basic pay in each calendar year or portion of a calendar year while an active
participant in the plan.
   (c)   Employer contributions. The employer will “pick-up” the employee
contributions described in subsection (b) in accordance with 26 U.S.C. § 414(h)
(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and a participant will have no option of
receiving the “picked-up” contributions directly so that for tax purposes these
contributions will be treated as employer contributions.
   (d)   Contributions after termination. A participant is not required to make
contributions on or after the participant’s date of death, date of termination
of employment, date of disability, or date of retirement, whichever date is
earliest.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 5-103) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 66-05; Bill No. 58-07;
Bill No. 41-10; Bill No. 30-12; Bill No. 67-12; Bill No. 59-25)
SUBTITLE 2. BENEFITS
§ 5-5-201. Termination of service before retirement.
   (a)   Refund of contributions. Except as provided in subsection (b), a
participant whose employment is terminated before the participant becomes
eligible for a retirement benefit is entitled to receive a refund of
accumulated contributions, and the refund shall be instead of other rights and
benefits of the participant under this title.
   (b)   Reemployment less than 12 months after termination. A participant who
terminates employment before the participant’s normal retirement date may
return to participation in the plan and be entitled to the rights and benefits
of a participant under this title, including credit for years of service prior
to termination, if:
      (1)   the former participant is reemployed in a classification that is
eligible to participate in the plan less than 12 months from the date of
termination; and
      (2)   (i)   if the former participant terminated employment and was
reemployed on or after April 13, 2024, the former participant repays the refund
of accumulated contributions under subsection (a) within 30 days of
reemployment; or
         (ii)   if the former participant terminated employment and was
reemployed prior to April 13, 2024, the former participant repays the
actuarially equivalent amount of the refunded contributions received when
employment was terminated, at the election of the former participant: in a lump
sum within 60 days of April 13, 2024; through bi-weekly after-tax payroll
deductions over a period of up to three years; or through a combination of a
partial lump sum payment within 60 days of April 13, 2024 and payroll
deductions, as approved by the Personnel Officer.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 5-201) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 93-23)
§ 5-5-202. Determination of normal retirement date.
   Except as provided in subsection (3), a participant's normal retirement date
is the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the earlier of:
      (1)   for a participant hired on or after February 25, 2002:
         (i)   the participant's 50th birthday and the completion of five years
of actual plan service; or
         (ii)   the participant's completion of actual plan service plus
disability leave service totaling 20 years;
      (2)   for a participant hired before February 25, 2002, the participant's
50th birthday or the completion of actual plan service plus transferred service
under §
5-1-304 and disability leave service totaling 20 years; or
      (3)   for a participant appointed to be the Chief of Police, the first of
the month coinciding with or next following the earlier of:
         (i)   the normal retirement date determined under subsections (1) or
(2); or
         (ii)   in the event that the participant has completed at least 15
years of actual plan service and is terminated by the same County Executive who
appointed the participant without evidence of willful misconduct by the
participant, the date of separation from employment; and
         (iii)   for the purposes of paragraph (3)(ii), "willful misconduct"
means a knowing violation of a law, regulation, or policy; intentional
disregard for the best interests of the County or its citizens, or for the
rights or safety of its employees or citizens; or willful disregard of the
duties and obligations of the position held.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 5-202) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 49-15)
§ 5-5-203. Computation of pension – Normal retirement.
   (a)    Annual pension. Each participant, other than one who is receiving a
disability retirement pension in accordance with §
5-5-205, who retires on or after the participant's normal retirement date, is
entitled to receive an annual pension equal to:
      (1)   2.5% of the participant's final average basic pay multiplied by
each year of credited service (excluding credited pre-plan military service),
not exceeding 20 years; plus
      (2)   2% of the participant's final average basic pay multiplied by each
year of credited service (excluding credited pre-plan military service),
exceeding 20 years; plus
      (3)   2% of the participant's final average basic pay multiplied by each
year of credited pre-plan military service.
   (b)   Maximum benefit. The maximum benefit is 70% of final average basic
pay, except that a participant's maximum benefit may exceed 70% of the
participant's final average basic pay to the extent that the amount of the
pension in excess of 70% is based on disability leave service and credited pre-
plan military service.
   (c)    Tier two employees. Except as otherwise provided in this plan, any
participant who ceased to be an active participant before July 1, 2000 in the
status of a tier two employee shall continue to have pension benefits based on
the provisions of this plan as it existed prior to July 1, 2000, including
provisions pertaining to tier two employees.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 5-203) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-5-204. Normal form of pension payment.
   (a)   Surviving spouse. This subsection applies to a participant who has a
surviving spouse at the time of the participant's death. Pension benefits shall
be paid:
      (1)   to the participant during the participant's lifetime;
      (2)   on the participant's death, if the spouse survives, to the spouse
commencing on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the
participant's death and ceasing as of the spouse's date of death; and
      (3)   on the death of the surviving spouse, if there are surviving
unmarried minor children of the participant, to the children commencing on the
first day of the month coinciding with or next following the spouse's death.
   (b)   No surviving spouse. This subsection applies to a participant who does
not have a surviving spouse at the time of the participant's death. Pension
benefits shall be paid:
      (1)   to the participant during the participant's lifetime; and
      (2)   on the participant's death, if there are surviving unmarried minor
children of the participant, to the children commencing on the first day of the
month coinciding with or next following the participant's death.
   (c)   Children. Benefits shall be paid to a participant's children under
this section as a group, with the benefit to each child ceasing when the child
attains the age of 18 years or marries, whichever occurs first.
   (d)   Cessation of benefit payments. At the cessation of benefit payments
under this section, if a total of 60 payments has not been made, benefit
payments in the amount payable shall be continued and paid, until a total of 60
payments has been made to the beneficiary or, if there is no living
beneficiary, the participant's estate.
   (e)   Lump sum payment. After any payments made under subsection (d), if
benefit payments in an amount equal to accumulated contributions have not been
made, the difference shall be paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary or, if
there is no living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 5-204) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 32-04)
§ 5-5-205. Disability pension.
   (a)   Limitation on "total and permanent disability". In this section,
"total and permanent disability" does not include disability resulting from or
consisting of the participant currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs or
narcotics; a willful effort on the participant's part to bring about injury or
illness to the participant or another person, while the participant is sane or
insane; the participant engaging in any illegal or criminal enterprise or
activity; injuries incurred on the job while under the influence of alcohol; or
injuries incurred as a result of military service, other than as set forth in
subsection (d)(4).
   (b)   Scope of "total and permanent disability". A participant has a total
and permanent disability if the Personnel Officer determines, on the basis of a
medical examination by one or more physicians selected by the Personnel
Officer, that the participant is wholly and permanently prevented as a result
of bodily injury or disease from engaging in any occupation or employment for
remuneration or profit or continuing as an employee in the participant's
regular assignment.
   (c)   Eligibility. A participant is eligible for a disability retirement
pension under this title on the first day of the month that the participant is
determined to have a total and permanent disability and was making employee
contributions to the plan immediately prior to the date of disability. A
participant is not eligible to commence receiving a disability retirement
pension on and after the participant's normal retirement date unless the
disability is the result of a bodily injury or disease arising out of and
occurring in the course of the participant's active performance of duties.
   (d)   Annual disability retirement pension.
      (1)   The annual amount of a disability retirement pension payable to
each eligible participant shall be determined as provided in this subsection.
      (2)   If a participant has a total and permanent disability that is the
result of bodily injury or disease arising out of and occurring in the course
of the participant's employment, the participant is entitled to receive an
annual disability retirement pension equal to the greater of the participant's
accrued benefit or 66 2/3% of:
         (i)   the participant's final average basic pay; or
         (ii)   if the participant is assigned to a higher classification and
is disabled while acting in the higher classification, the final average basic
pay that the participant would have received had the participant been promoted
to the higher classification under §
6-1-208 of this Code.
      (3)   (i)   If a participant has a total and permanent disability solely
because the participant is prevented from engaging in any occupation or
employment for remuneration or profit as a result of a non-duty related cause,
the participant is entitled to receive an annual disability retirement pension
equal to the participant's accrued pension as of the participant's date of
disability computed in accordance with the provisions of §
5-5-203 or 66 2/3% of the participant's final average basic pay, whichever is
greater.
         (ii)   If a participant has a total and permanent disability solely
because the participant is prevented from continuing as an employee in the
participant's regular assignment as a result of a non-duty related cause, the
participant is entitled to receive an annual disability retirement pension
equal to the participant's accrued pension as of the participant's date of
disability, computed in accordance with the provisions of §
5-5-203, or 20% of the participant's final average basic pay, whichever is
greater.
      (4)   If a participant has a total and permanent disability as a direct
result of performing military service that qualifies as credited in-plan
military service, has been discharged from the military and awarded a monthly
military disability pension, and is prevented from continuing in the
participant's regular assignment within the Police Department as a result of
this disability, the participant is entitled to receive an annual disability
retirement payment equal to the participant's accrued pension as of the date of
disability, computed in accordance with the provisions of §
5-5-203, or 66 2/3% of the participant's final average basic pay less the
monthly amount of the military disability payment being received by the
participant from the United States Government at the time of retirement
calculated on an annualized basis, or 20% of the participant's final average
basic pay, whichever is greater.
   (e)   Disqualification.
      (1)   This subsection does not apply to a participant whose disability
retirement pension has been in effect for at least five years.
      (2)   A participant ceases to qualify for a disability retirement pension
when:
         (i)   the Personnel Officer determines, on the basis of a medical
examination by one or more physicians selected by the Personnel Officer, that
the participant no longer has a total and permanent disability or has
sufficiently recovered but refuses to resume the participant's regular
occupation as an employee;
         (ii)   the participant refuses to undergo a medical examination
requested by the Personnel Officer, provided the participant may not be
required to undergo a medical examination more than once a year; or
         (iii)   the participant is employed in a position with the same
requirements as the participant's regular assignment.
   (f)   Normal retirement date. Disability retirement benefits payable to a
disabled participant shall continue notwithstanding the fact that the
participant reaches the participant's normal retirement date.
   (g)   Benefits received under State law. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this section to the contrary, benefits received under this section are not
affected by benefits received under the Labor and Employment Article, Title 9,
of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 5-205) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 58-07;
Bill No. 6-10; Bill No. 70-20)
§ 5-5-206. Active participants death benefits.
   (a)   Death as a result of active duty. This subsection applies to active
participants whose deaths occur as a direct result of the active performance of
duties. On the death of an active participant, a death benefit is payable to
the surviving spouse or, if there is no spouse, the unmarried minor children,
in an annual amount equal to the greater of the participant's accrued benefit
or 66 2/3% of:
      (1)   the participant's final average basic pay; or
      (2)   if a participant is assigned to a higher classification and death
occurs while acting in the higher classification, the final average basic pay
the participant would have received had the participant been promoted to the
higher classification under §
6-1-208 of this Code.
   (b)   Death not a result of active duty. This subsection applies to active
participants whose deaths do not occur as a direct result of the active
performance of duties, including a participant whose death occurs as a result
of performing military service that qualifies as credited in-plan military
service. On the death of an active participant, a death benefit is payable to
the surviving spouse or, if there is no spouse, the unmarried minor children,
in an annual amount equal to the participant's accrued benefit, computed in
accordance with §
5-5-203, as of the participant's date of death.
   (c)   Payment of death benefit. The death benefit shall be paid to the
surviving spouse on a monthly basis commencing on the first day of the month
coinciding with or next following the participant's death and ceasing as of the
spouse's date of death. If the surviving spouse dies, or if there is no
surviving spouse but there are one or more surviving unmarried minor children,
the death benefit shall be paid to the children in equal shares, on a monthly
basis, commencing on the first day of the month coinciding with or next
following the spouse's death, or the participant's death, as applicable, with
the benefit to each child ceasing when the child attains the age of 18 years or
marries, whichever occurs first.
   (d)   Cessation of benefit payments. At the cessation of benefit payments
under this section, if a total of 60 payments has not been made, benefit
payments in the amount payable shall be continued and paid, until a total of 60
payments has been made to the beneficiary or, if there is no living
beneficiary, the participant's estate.
   (e)   Lump sum payment. After any payments made under subsection (d), if
benefit payments in an amount equal to accumulated contributions have not been
made, the difference shall be paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary or, if
there is no living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
   (f)   No surviving spouse or unmarried minor children. On the death of an
active participant who does not have a surviving spouse or unmarried minor
children, there shall be refunded to the beneficiary, or if there is no living
beneficiary, to the participant's estate:
      (1)   an amount equal to accumulated contributions; plus
      (2)   if the participant has one or more years of credited service, a
lump sum equal to 50% of the participant's final average basic pay.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 5-206) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 32-04;
Bill No. 6-10)
TITLE 6. DETENTION OFFICERS' AND DEPUTY SHERIFFS' RETIREMENT PLAN
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; General Provisions
   
5-6-101.   Plan established.
   
5-6-102.   Participants.
   
5-6-103.   Pension fund established; contributions.
Subtitle 2. Benefits
   
5-6-201.   Vesting; termination of service before retirement.
   
5-6-202.   Determination of normal retirement date and early retirement date.
   
5-6-203.   Computation of pension – Normal retirement.
   
5-6-204.   Computation of pension – Early retirement.
   
5-6-205.   Pension payment – Election.
   
5-6-206.   Pension payment – Options.
   
5-6-207.   Disability pension.
   
5-6-208.   Active participant's death benefits – Line of duty.
   
5-6-209.   Active participant's death benefits – Non-line of duty.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 5-6-101. Plan established.
   There is a Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan. The
plan provisions include the provisions of this title and
Titles 1 and
7.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 6-101) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-6-102. Participants.
   (a)   Permanent employees. The participants in the plan are permanent
employees who:
      (1)   work at least 50% of the time specified for their positions; and
      (2)   (i)   are in job classifications in category I as designated in
this section; or
         (ii)   are in job classifications in category II as designated in this
section before October 29, 2020.
   (b)   Category I participants. The following participants are category I
participants:
      (1)   Detention Officer;
      (2)   Detention Corporal;
      (3)   Detention Sergeant;
      (4)   Detention Lieutenant;
      (5)   Detention Captain;
      (6)   Deputy Sheriff Corporal;
      (7)   Deputy Sheriff I;
      (8)   Deputy Sheriff II;
      (9)   Deputy Sheriff III; and
      (10)   Deputy Sheriff IV.
   (c)   Category II participants. The following participants are category II
participants:
      (1)   Correctional Program Specialist I;
      (2)   Correctional Program Specialist II;
      (3)   Criminal Justice Program Supervisor;
      (4)   Correctional Facility Administrator;
      (5)   Assistant Correctional Facility Administrator; and
      (6)   by election, the Superintendent of Detention Facilities.
   (d)   Promotions and transfers after October 29, 2020. An employee in a job
classification listed in subsection (c) as of October 29, 2020 may continue to
participate in the plan if the employee is promoted or otherwise transferred
directly to a job classification listed in subsection (c) after October 29,
2020.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 6-102) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 32-04; Bill No. 54-20)
§ 5-6-103. Pension fund established; contributions.
   (a)   Established. There is a pension fund for the Detention Officers' and
Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan.
   (b)   Employee contributions. A participant shall contribute to the pension
fund through payroll deductions an amount equal to 6.75% of the participant's
annual basic pay in each calendar year or portion of a calendar year while an
active participant in the plan.
   (c)   Contributions not required. A participant is not required to make
contributions:
      (1)   in any calendar year after the calendar year in which the
participant completes actual plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling 30 years; or
      (2)   on or after the participant's date of death, date of termination of
employment, date of disability, or date of retirement, whichever date is
earliest.
   (d)   Employer contributions. The employer will "pick-up" the employee
contributions described in subsection (b) in accordance with 26 U.S.C. § 414(h)
(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and a participant will have no option of
receiving the "picked-up" contributions directly so that for tax purposes these
contributions will be treated as employer contributions.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 6-103) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 32-04; Bill No. 66-05;
Bill No. 41-10; Bill No. 30-12)
SUBTITLE 2. BENEFITS
§ 5-6-201. Vesting; termination of service before retirement.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   A category I participant hired on or after August 9, 2004 vests in
the benefits of the plan upon completion of 20 years of actual plan service.
      (2)   A category I participant hired before August 9, 2004 and a category
II participant hired before July 1, 2015 vest in the benefits of the plan upon
completion of actual plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling five years.
      (3)   A category II participant hired on or after July 1, 2015 vests in
the benefits of the plan upon completion of actual plan service plus
transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling 10 years.
   (b)   County's rights to amend or terminate plan. The rights in which a
participant vests under subsection (a) are subject to the County's rights to
amend or terminate the plan under §
5-1-103.
   (c)   Termination of service before retirement. A participant who vests and
who terminates service before retirement, must leave accumulated contributions
in the pension fund to become a terminated vested participant and to be
eligible to receive retirement benefits.
   (d)   Annual pension on 50th birthday. On the first day of the month
coincident with or next following a terminated vested participant's 50th
birthday, the participant shall receive a retirement benefit equal to the
amount of the participant's normal retirement pension that had accrued to the
participant's date of termination, without reduction by an early retirement
reduction factor.
   (e)   Refund of accumulated contributions. Accumulated contributions shall
be refunded if:
      (1)   before a participant vests, the participant's service with an
employer terminates; or
      (2)   after a participant vests, the participant's service with an
employer terminates, and the participant voluntarily elects to withdraw from
the plan, ceasing to be a participant.
   (f)   Death of participant. If a terminated vested participant dies before
the participant's normal retirement date, a lump sum death benefit equal to
accumulated contributions shall be paid to the beneficiary or, if there is no
living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 6-201) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 32-04; Bill No. 97-13)
§ 5-6-202. Determination of normal retirement date and early retirement date.
   (a)   Normal retirement date for category I participants. The normal
retirement date for a category I participant is the first day of the month
coinciding with or next following the earlier of:
      (1)   the participant's 50th birthday and the completion of actual plan
service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling five years; or
      (2)   the participant's completion of actual plan service plus
transferred service under §
5-1-302 and disability leave service totaling 20 years.
   (b)   Normal retirement date for category II participants. The normal
retirement date for a category II participant is:
      (1)   for a participant hired before July 1, 2015, the first day of the
month coinciding with or next following the participant's 50th birthday and the
completion of actual plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling five years.
      (2)   for a participant hired on or after July 1, 2015, the first day of
the month coinciding with or next following the participant's 50th birthday and
the completion of actual plan service plus transferred service under §
5-1-302 totaling 10 years.
   (c)   Early retirement date. There is no early retirement date for a
category I participant. The early retirement date for a category II participant
is the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the
participant's completion of 20 years of credited service.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 6-202) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 32-04; Bill No. 97-13)
§ 5-6-203. Computation of pension – Normal retirement.
   (a)   Annual pension. Each participant, other than one who is receiving a
disability retirement pension under §
5-6-207, who retires on or after the participant's normal retirement date, is
entitled to receive an annual pension equal to:
      (1)   2.5% of the participant's final average basic pay multiplied by
each year of credited service, excluding credited pre-plan military service,
not exceeding 20 years; plus
      (2)   2% of the participant's final average basic pay multiplied by each
year of credited service, excluding credited pre-plan military service,
exceeding 20 years; plus
      (3)   2% of the participant's final average basic pay multiplied by each
year of credited pre-plan military service.
   (b)   Maximum benefit. The maximum benefit is 70% of final average basic
pay, except that the participant's maximum benefit may exceed 70% of the
participant's final average basic pay to the extent that the amount of the
pension in excess of 70% is based on disability leave service and credited pre-
plan military service.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 6-203) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-6-204. Computation of pension – Early retirement.
   (a)   Annual pension. Each participant who retires on an early retirement
date is entitled to receive an annual pension equal to the normal retirement
pension that would have been paid based on years of credited service reduced by
an early retirement reduction factor.
   (b)   Reduction factors. The early retirement reduction factors are:
Years Early Reduction Factor Percentage of Normal Retirement Benefit
Years Early Reduction Factor Percentage of Normal Retirement Benefit
1           2%               98%
2           5%               95%
3           9%               91%
4           14%              86%
5           20%              80%
6           28%              72%
7           36%              64%
8           44%              56%
9           52%              48%
10          60%              40%
 
The early retirement reduction factors increase by 6% for each year that
retirement precedes 10 years before the normal retirement date.
   (c)   Applied each year. The early retirement reduction factor shall be
applied for each year that a participant's date of retirement precedes the
normal retirement date.
   (d)   Normal retirement date determined by Personnel Officer. The Personnel
Officer shall determine the normal retirement date by assuming that the
participant had continued to earn credited service and the early retirement
reduction factor by prorating to the nearest one-twelfth of a year.
   (e)   Reduction of benefits prior to February 25, 2002. For any employee who
is a participant as of February 25, 2002, in no event will the application of
the early retirement reduction factors in subsection (b) reduce the
participant's pension benefit from what the pension benefit would have been
under the early retirement reduction factors in effect immediately prior to
February 25, 2002.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 6-204) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-6-205. Pension payment – Election.
   (a)   Optional election. Except as provided in subsection (b), a participant
may elect an optional form of pension described in §
5-6-206 that is actuarially equivalent to the normal form of retirement
otherwise payable.
   (b)   Disabled participants. This subsection applies to a disabled
participant. A participant who qualifies for a service-connected disability
retirement is eligible to elect an optional form of pension, regardless of age
and credited service. A participant who qualifies for a non-service-connected
disability retirement pension is eligible to elect an optional form of pension.
   (c)   Filing form with Personnel Officer. To elect a pension payment option,
a participant shall file the appropriate form with the Personnel Officer at
least 30 days before the date of retirement.
   (d)   Effective date. The pension payment option is effective on the
participant's retirement date, but is void if the participant, the beneficiary,
or the joint annuitant dies before the participant's retirement date.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 6-205) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 32-04)
§ 5-6-206. Pension payment – Options.
   (a)   Generally. A participant may elect one of the following pension
options: option 1, five year certain and continuous option; option 2, joint and
survivor with five year certain and continuous option; or, option 3, joint and
survivor pop-up option. The benefits under option 2 shall be actuarially
equivalent to the benefits provided under option 1.
   (b)   Five year certain and continuous option. The five year certain and
continuous option is the normal form of pension. Under this option:
      (1)   pension benefits shall be paid to the participant during the
participant's lifetime; and
      (2)   if a participant dies before receiving 60 monthly payments,
benefits shall be paid until a total of 60 monthly payments have been made to
the beneficiary or, if there is no living beneficiary, the participant's
estate.
   (c)   Joint and survivor option.
      (1)   Under the joint and survivor option, the participant may designate
one joint annuitant, either a spouse or a child. The benefit shall be
determined as follows:
         (i)   pension benefits in an amount determined to be actuarially
equivalent to the five year continuous and certain option, without regard to
any guarantee of accumulated contributions, shall be paid to the participant
during the participant's lifetime; and
         (ii)   at the participant's death, pension benefits in the amount
payable to the participant, or 80%, 66 2/3% or 50% of that amount, as elected
by the participant, shall be paid to the joint annuitant during the joint
annuitant's lifetime.
      (2)   At the cessation of benefit payments under this subsection, if a
total of 60 payments has not been made, benefit payments in the amount payable
shall be continued and paid, until a total of 60 payments has been made to the
beneficiary or, if there is no living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
   (d)   Joint and survivor pop-up option.
      (1)   Under the joint and survivor pop-up option, a participant may
designate one joint annuitant, either a spouse or a child. Pension benefits
shall be paid as follows:
         (i)   pension benefits in an amount determined to be actuarily
equivalent to the modified cash refund annuity, without regard to any guarantee
of accumulated contributions, shall be paid to the participant during the
participant's lifetime; and
         (ii)   at the participant's death, 100% of pension benefits payable to
the participant, or 80%, 66 2/3%, or 50% of that amount, as elected by the
participant, shall be paid to the joint annuitant during the joint annuitant's
lifetime.
      (2)   If the joint annuitant predeceases the participant, the pension
benefit payable to the participant shall be adjusted as of the first day of the
month coinciding with or next following the death of the joint annuitant to the
same amount as would have been payable to the participant if the joint and
survivor pop-up option had not been elected.
      (3)   If a total of 60 payments has not been made at the cessation of
benefit payments under this subsection, benefit payments in the amount payable
shall be continued and paid until a total of 60 payments has been made to the
beneficiary or, if there is no living beneficiary, to the participant's estate.
   (e)   Lump sum payment. After any payments made under subsection (c)(2) or
(d)(3), if benefits in an amount equal to accumulated contributions have not
been paid, the difference shall be paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary or, if
there is no living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 6-206) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 41-10)
§ 5-6-207. Disability pension.
   (a)   Limitation on "total and permanent disability". In this section,
"total and permanent disability" does not include disability resulting from or
consisting of the participant currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs or
narcotics; a willful effort on the participant's part to bring about injury or
illness to the participant or another person, while the participant is sane or
insane; the participant engaging in any illegal or criminal enterprise or
activity; injuries incurred on the job while under the influence of alcohol; or
injuries incurred as a result of military service, other than a disability set
forth in subsection (d)(4).
   (b)   Scope of "total and permanent disability". A participant has a total
and permanent disability if the Personnel Officer determines, on the basis of a
medical examination by one or more physicians selected by the Personnel
Officer, that the participant is wholly and permanently prevented as a result
of bodily injury or disease from engaging in any occupation or employment for
remuneration or profit or continuing as an employee in the participant's
regular assignment.
   (c)   Eligibility. A participant is eligible for a disability retirement
pension under this title on the first day of the month that the participant is
determined to have a total and permanent disability; has exhausted all accrued
disability leave or on the date that the application is approved by the
Personnel Officer, whichever occurs first; and was making employee
contributions, if required, to the plan immediately prior to the date of
disability. A participant is not eligible to commence receiving a disability
retirement pension on or after the participant's normal retirement date, unless
the disability is the result of an injury or disease arising out of and
occurring in the course of the participant's active performance of duties.
   (d)   Annual disability retirement pension.
      (1)   The annual amount of a disability retirement pension payable to
each eligible participant shall be determined as provided in this subsection.
      (2)   If a participant has a total and permanent disability that is the
result of bodily injury or disease arising out of and occurring in the course
of the participant's employment, the participant is entitled to receive an
annual disability retirement pension equal to the greater of the participant's
accrued benefit or 66 2/3% of:
         (i)   the participant's final average basic pay; or
         (ii)   if the participant is assigned to a higher classification and
is disabled while acting in the higher classification, the final average basic
pay that the participant would have received had the participant been promoted
to the higher classification under §
6-1-208 of this Code.
      (3)   (i)   If a participant has a total and permanent disability solely
because the participant is prevented from engaging in any occupation or
employment for remuneration or profit as a result of a non- duty related cause,
the participant is entitled to receive an annual disability retirement pension
equal to the participant's accrued benefit as of the participant's date of
disability computed in accordance with the provisions of §
5-6-203 or 66 2/3% of the participant's final average basic pay, whichever is
greater.
         (ii)   If a participant has a total and permanent disability solely
because the participant is prevented from continuing as an employee in the
participant's regular assignment as a result of a non-duty related cause, the
participant is entitled to receive an annual disability retirement pension
equal to the participant's accrued pension as of the participant's date of
disability, computed in accordance with the provisions of §
5-6-203, or 20% of the participant's final average basic pay, whichever is
greater.
      (4)   If a participant has a total and permanent disability as a direct
result of performing military service that qualifies as credited in-plan
military service, has been discharged from the military and awarded a monthly
military disability pension, and is prevented from continuing in the
participant's regular assignment within the Detention Center or Sheriff's
Office as a result of this disability, the participant is entitled to receive
an annual disability retirement payment equal to the participant's accrued
pension as of the date of disability, computed in accordance with the
provisions of §
5-6-203, or 66 2/3% of the participant's final average basic pay less the
monthly amount of the military disability payment being received by the
participant from the United States Government at the time of retirement
calculated on an annualized basis, or 20% of the participant's final average
basic pay, whichever is greater.
   (e)   Disqualification.
      (1)   This subsection does not apply to a participant whose disability
retirement pension has been in effect for at least five years.
      (2)   A participant ceases to qualify for a disability retirement pension
when:
         (i)   the Personnel Officer determines, on the basis of a medical
examination by one or more physicians selected by the Personnel Officer, that
the participant no longer has a total and permanent disability or has
sufficiently recovered but refuses to resume the participant's regular
occupation as an employee;
         (ii)   the participant refuses to undergo a medical examination
requested by the Personnel Officer, provided the participant may not be
required to undergo a medical examination more than once a year; or
         (iii)   the participant is employed in a position with the same
requirements as the participant's regular assignment.
   (f)   Normal retirement date. Disability retirement benefits payable to a
disabled participant shall continue notwithstanding the fact that the
participant reaches the participant's normal retirement date.
   (g)   Benefits received under State law. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this section to the contrary, benefits received under this section are not
affected by benefits received under the Labor and Employment Article, Title 9,
of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 6-207) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 32-04;
Bill No. 58-07; Bill No. 6-10; Bill No. 70-20)
§ 5-6-208. Active participant's death benefits – Line of duty.
   (a)   Generally. This section applies to active participants whose deaths
occur as a direct result of the active performance of duties.
   (b)   Death benefit to surviving spouse or unmarried children.
      (1)   On the death of an active participant, a death benefit is payable
to the surviving spouse or, if there is no spouse, the unmarried minor
children, in an annual amount equal to the greater of the participant's accrued
benefit as of the date of death or 66 2/3% of:
         (i)   the participant's final average basic pay; or
         (ii)   if the participant is assigned to a higher classification and
death occurs while acting in the higher classification, the final average basic
pay the participant would have received had the participant been promoted to
the higher classification under §
6-1-208 of this Code.
      (2)   The death benefit shall be paid to the surviving spouse on a
monthly basis commencing on the first day of the month coinciding with or next
following the participant's death and ceasing as of the spouse's date of death.
      (3)   If the surviving spouse dies, or if there is no surviving spouse
but there are one or more surviving unmarried minor children, the death benefit
shall be paid to the children in equal shares, on a monthly basis, commencing
on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the spouse's
death, or the participant's death, as applicable, with the benefit to each
child ceasing when the child attains the age of 18 years or marries, whichever
occurs first.
      (4)   At the cessation of benefit payments under this subsection, if a
total of 60 payments has not been made, benefit payments in the amount payable
shall be continued and paid until a total of 60 payments has been made to the
beneficiary, or if there is no living beneficiary, to the participant's estate.
      (5)   After any payments made under subsection (b)(4), if benefit
payments in an amount equal to accumulated contributions have not been made,
the difference shall be paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary, or if there is
no living beneficiary, the participant's estate.
   (c)   No surviving spouse or unmarried minor children. On the death of an
active participant who does not have a surviving spouse or unmarried minor
children, there shall be refunded to the beneficiary, or if there is no living
beneficiary, to the participant's estate an amount equal to accumulated
contributions plus a lump sum equal to 50% of the participant's average basic
pay.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 6-208) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-6-209. Active participant's death benefits – Non-line of duty.
   (a)   Generally. This section applies to participants whose deaths do not
occur as a direct result of the active performance of duties, including a
participant whose death occurs as a result of performing military service that
qualifies as credited in-plan military service.
   (b)   Non-vested active participant. On the death of a non-vested active
participant, the surviving spouse or, if there is no spouse, the unmarried
minor children, shall receive a lump sum death benefit equal to accumulated
contributions plus 50% of the participant's final average basic pay.
   (c)   Vested active participant.
      (1)   Subject to the election permitted in subsection (c)(2), on the
death of an active vested participant, the surviving spouse or, if there is no
spouse, the unmarried minor children, shall receive a lump sum death benefit
equal to accumulated contributions plus 50% of the participant's final average
basic pay.
      (2)   Instead of the lump sum death benefit, the surviving spouse or, if
there is no spouse, the unmarried minor children may elect to receive a death
benefit in an annual amount equal to the normal retirement pension or early
retirement pension that would have been payable annually to the participant if
the participant had retired on the applicable date in subsection (c)(3) and
elected a 100% joint and survivor option.
      (3)   Benefit payments under subsection (c)(2) shall be made on a monthly
basis and shall commence:
         (i)   if the participant was not yet eligible for normal or early
retirement, on the participant's normal retirement date or early retirement
date, as elected; or
         (ii)   if the participant was eligible for normal or early retirement,
the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the participant's
death.
      (4)   Benefit payments to the spouse under subsection (c)(2) shall cease
as of the spouse's date of death.
      (5)   Benefit payments to the unmarried minor children under subsection
(c)(2) shall be paid to the unmarried minor children in equal shares with the
benefit to each child ceasing when the child attains the age of 18 years or
marries, whichever occurs first.
      (6)   If the spouse or minor children who are to receive a deferred
benefit under this subsection die before the participant's early retirement
date or normal retirement date, as elected, accumulated contributions shall be
paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary or, if there is no living beneficiary,
the participant's estate.
      (7)   At the cessation of benefit payments under this subsection, if a
total of 60 payments has not been made, benefit payments in the amount payable
shall be continued and paid, until a total of 60 payments has been made to the
beneficiary or, if there is no beneficiary, the participant's estate.
      (8)   After any payments made under subsection (c)(7), if benefit
payments in an amount equal to accumulated contributions have not been made,
the difference shall be paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary or, if there is
no beneficiary, the participant's estate.
   (d)   Active participant with no surviving spouse or unmarried minor
children. On the death of an active participant who does not have a surviving
spouse or unmarried minor children, there shall be refunded to the beneficiary
or, if there is no living beneficiary, the participant's estate, an amount
equal to accumulated contributions plus, if the participant has one year or
more of credited service, a lump sum equal to 50% of the participant's final
average basic pay.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 6-209) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 6-10)
TITLE 7. POST-RETIREMENT BENEFIT ADJUSTMENTS TO RETIREES AND BENEFICIARIES
Editor's note – Former 1985 County Code, Title 7, § 7-101, pertained to Judges
of the Circuit Court. Such provisions were transferred to the Laws of Anne
Arundel County, Maryland, by Bill No. 90-01, § 3.
Section
Subtitle 1. Benefits Attributable to Credited Service and Final Earnings Before
February 1, 1997
   
5-7-101.   Scope.
   
5-7-102.   Employees' Retirement Plan; Retirement Plan for Appointed and
Elected Officials.
   
5-7-103.   Fire Service Retirement Plan; Police Service Retirement Plan.
   
5-7-104.   Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan.
Subtitle 2. Benefits Attributable to Credited Service and Final Earnings On and
After February 1, 1997
   
5-7-201.   Definitions.
   
5-7-202.   Scope.
   
5-7-203.   In general.
   
5-7-204.   Determination of amount of cost-of-living adjustment.
   
5-7-205.   Determinations made by actuary.
SUBTITLE 1. BENEFITS ATTRIBUTABLE TO CREDITED SERVICE AND FINAL EARNINGS BEFORE
FEBRUARY 1, 1997
§ 5-7-101. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to determine the cost-of-living adjustment applied to
the benefits of:
      (1)   participants who retire before February 1, 1997; and
      (2)   participants who retire on or after February 1, 1997, to the extent
that the benefit is attributable to credited service and final average basic
pay calculated as of February 1, 1997.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 7-101) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-7-102. Employees' Retirement Plan; Retirement Plan for Appointed and
Elected Officials.
   (a)   Benefits generally. This section applies to the benefits of:
      (1)   participants who retire before February 1, 1997 under the
Employees' Retirement Plan and the Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected
Officials; and
      (2)   participants who retire on or after February 1, 1997 under the
Employees' Retirement Plan or the Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected
Officials, to the extent that the benefit is attributable to credited service
and final average basic pay calculated as of February 1, 1997.
   (b)   Cost-of-living adjustment. A cost-of-living adjustment shall be
calculated in accordance with this section commencing each July 1 following:
      (1)   the retirement date of a participant; or
      (2)   the death of a participant whose spouse or minor children are
eligible for monthly death benefit payments as provided in §
5-3-308 or §
5-3-309, or as provided in the Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected
Officials, as appropriate.
   (c)   Monthly amount of benefits. Except as provided in subsection (d), the
monthly amount of benefit payable is subject to cost-of-living adjustments
based on the "Consumer Price Index (Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers)",
published monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The adjustment for each
plan year is determined by dividing the "Consumer Price Index" for the fourth
month preceding July 1 by the "Consumer Price Index" for the fourth month prior
to the immediately preceding July 1 or if later, the fourth month preceding the
participant's retirement date. The monthly amount of benefit payable during the
current plan year equals the sum of:
      (1)   the monthly amount of a participant's benefit as of the
participant's retirement date;
      (2)   the benefit described in subsection (c)(1) adjusted by the
percentage increase in the "Consumer Price Index" to the nearest 0.1%; and
      (3)   the previous cost-of-living or other adjustments applicable to the
participant, as determined by the Personnel Officer.
   (d)   Index used effective July 1, 2002. Effective with the July 1, 2002
cost-of-living adjustment, the index referred to in subsection (c) shall be
replaced with the "Consumer Price Index (All Urban Consumers - U.S. City
Average-All Items)". This index shall be used for all participants, and prior
increases may not be recalculated.
   (e)   Percentage increase. An annual percentage increase of a monthly amount
of benefit may not exceed 3%.
   (f)   Amount not reduced. The monthly amount of benefit may not be reduced
by a negative cost-of- living adjustment to an amount below the monthly amount
of base benefit payable to the participant or the participant's duly named
joint annuitant or beneficiary.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 7-102) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-7-103. Fire Service Retirement Plan; Police Service Retirement Plan.
   (a)   Benefits generally. This section applies to the benefits of:
      (1)   participants who, before February 1, 1997, retire under the Fire
Service Retirement Plan or the Police Service Retirement Plan; and
      (2)   participants who retire on or after February 1, 1997 under the Fire
Service Retirement Plan or the Police Service Retirement Plan, to the extent
that the benefit is attributable to credited service and final average basic
pay calculated as of February 1, 1997.
   (b)   Monthly benefits increased. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, whenever the current average of the 12 most recently published monthly
indices of the "Consumer Price Index (All Urban Consumers - U.S. City Average -
All Items)", increases as of any July 1 after the retirement of a participant,
including retirement due to total and permanent disability, over the
corresponding average index as of the participant's date of retirement, the
amount of the participant's monthly benefit as of the date of retirement
payable after the applicable July 1 shall be increased by the same percentage
by which the current average index exceeds the corresponding average index as
of the participant's date of retirement.
   (c)   Monthly benefits reduced. If the current average Consumer Price Index
on any July 1 is less than the corresponding average index forming the basis
for the participant's monthly benefit immediately prior to July 1, the amount
of the participant's monthly benefit as of the participant's date of retirement
payable after the applicable July 1 shall be reduced so that the reduced amount
shall represent the same percentage of the participant's benefit at retirement
as the percentage that the current average index represents of the
corresponding average index as of the participant's date of retirement.
   (d)   Amount not to be increased or decreased by more than 4%. The total
amount of the participant's monthly benefit may not be increased or decreased
by more than 4%, rounded to the nearest 0.1%, as of any July 1, nor may the
benefit be reduced below the initial amount payable on the participant's
retirement.
   (e)   Change of index. The County may change the index to be used in
adjusting the benefit payments and determine the method of conveying previous
adjustments to the new index.
   (f)   Consumer price index. The monthly benefit payable to an eligible
participant's spouse, minor children, or beneficiary, shall be increased or
decreased to reflect changes in the consumer price index in a manner consistent
with this section. For a payee enumerated in this subsection who was receiving
a monthly benefit prior to November 1, 1973, the monthly benefit shall be
increased as of the July 1 following November 1, 1973 by the percentage that
the current average index exceeds the corresponding average index as of July 1,
1973.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 7-103) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 66-05)
§ 5-7-104. Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan.
   (a)   Benefits generally. This section applies to the benefits of:
      (1)   participants who, before February 1, 1997, retire under the
Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan; and
      (2)   participants who retire on or after February 1, 1997 under the
Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan, to the extent that
the benefit is attributable to credited service and final average basic pay
calculated as of February 1, 1997.
   (b)   Cost-of-living adjustment. A cost-of-living adjustment shall be
calculated in accordance with this section commencing each July 1 following:
      (1)   the retirement date of a participant; or
      (2)   the death of a participant whose spouse or minor children are
eligible for monthly death benefit payments.
   (c)   Monthly benefits. Except as provided in subsection (h), the monthly
amount of benefit payable is subject to cost-of-living adjustments based on the
"Consumer Price Index (Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers)", published
monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The adjustment for each plan year is
determined by dividing the "Consumer Price Index" for the fourth month
preceding July 1 by the "Consumer Price Index" for the fourth month prior to
the immediately preceding July 1.
   (d)   Eligibility for cost-of-living adjustments. The following individuals
are eligible for a cost-of- living adjustment on any July 1:
      (1)   a payee who received a benefit payment during the month of
September immediately preceding that July 1; and
      (2)   the spouse or minor children of a participant who received a
benefit payment during the month of September immediately preceding that July 1
but who dies prior to July 1, if the spouse or minor children are eligible for
a continuation of that benefit payment.
   (e)   Prorated adjustment. The cost-of-living adjustment shall be prorated
by one-twelfth for each month that the payee was receiving benefit payments
prior to and including the month of September, subject to a maximum proration
of 12/12.
   (f)   Amount of monthly benefits. The monthly amount of benefit payable
during any plan year equals the sum of:
      (1)   the monthly amount of a participant's accrued benefit as of the
participant's retirement date; plus
      (2)   the cost-of-living adjustment as determined from subsections (c),
(d), and (e), applied to the benefit under subsection (f)(1) adjusted to the
nearest 0.1%; plus
      (3)   any previous cost-of-living or other adjustments applicable to the
participant, as determined by the Personnel Officer.
   (g)   Limit on annual increase. An annual increase of a monthly amount of
benefit may not exceed 4% of the benefit described in subsection (f)(1).
   (h)   Index used effective July 1, 2002. Effective with the July 1, 2002
cost-of-living adjustment, the index referred to in subsection (c) shall be
replaced with the "Consumer Price Index (All Urban Consumers - U.S. City
Average - All Items)". This index shall be used for all participants, and prior
increases may not be recalculated.
   (i)   Amount not reduced. The monthly amount of a benefit may not be reduced
by a negative cost- of-living adjustment to an amount below the monthly amount
of base benefit payable to the participant or the participant's duly named
joint annuitant or beneficiary.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 7-104) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 23-04)
SUBTITLE 2. BENEFITS ATTRIBUTABLE TO CREDITED SERVICE AND FINAL EARNINGS ON AND
AFTER FEBRUARY 1, 1997
§ 5-7-201. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Actuary" means the actuary described in §
5-2-208.
      (2)   "CPI" means the Consumer Price Index (All Urban Consumers - U.S.
City Average - All items).
      (3)   "Eligible person" means each participant and payee who is eligible
for a cost-of-living increase under this article according to the terms of a
plan and who has begun receiving periodic benefits under the terms of the plan
prior to the effective date of the increase.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 7-201) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-7-202. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to determine the cost-of-living adjustment to the
total benefits earned under a plan established under this article, less the
portion of the benefits described in §
5-7-102(a), §
5-7-103(a), or §
5-7-104(a), as applicable
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 7-202) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 66-05)
§ 5-7-203. In general.
   (a)   Annual cost-of-living adjustment. An annual cost-of-living adjustment
in the amount of periodic benefits payable under a plan shall be determined
under the provisions of this subtitle.
   (b)   Adjustments determined separately for each plan. The amount of any
cost-of-living adjustment shall be determined separately with respect to
eligible persons of each pension plan on the basis of the assets, liabilities,
and reserves allocable to the pension fund of that pension plan, and the
pension fund of each pension plan shall be separately liable for any cost-of-
living increase.
   (c)   No adjustment for single payment or returned accumulated
contributions. An eligible person is not entitled to a cost-of-living
adjustment under this title with respect to benefits paid in a single payment
or as the return of accumulated contributions.
   (d)   Effective date. The amount of the adjustment, if any, shall be
effective as of July 1.
   (e)   Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials. For the purposes
of this subtitle, the Retirement Plan for Appointed and Elected Officials shall
be treated as part of the Employees' Retirement Plan, so that all calculations
of benefits to eligible persons under those plans shall be based on the
combined pension fund established for these plans under §
5-3-102.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 7-203) (Bill No. 90-01)
§ 5-7-204. Determination of amount of cost-of-living adjustment.
   (a)   Formula. The amount of adjustment, if any, of periodic benefit
payments that may be payable under a pension plan to eligible persons as a
cost-of-living adjustment as of each July 1 under this subtitle shall be
determined as of the preceding January 1 in accordance with the following
formula:
      (1)   determine the amount of the periodic benefit payment as of the
January 1 immediately preceding the effective date of the increase;
      (2)   determine the percentage, not to exceed 2.5%, equal to 60% of the
percentage change in the CPI from March of the preceding year to March of the
year in which the change is effective; and
      (3)   determine the amount of the cost-of-living adjustment by
multiplying the amount determined under subsection (a)(1) by the percentage
determined under subsection (a)(2), rounded to the nearest 0.1%.
   (b)   Reduction of payments. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, in no case shall the cost-of-living adjustment reduce the periodic
benefit payment to an amount that is less than the initial periodic benefit
payment upon the commencement of the recipient's benefit payment.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 7-204) (Bill No. 90-01; Bill No. 66-05)
§ 5-7-205. Determinations made by actuary.
   All determinations under §
5-7-204 shall be made by the actuary, subject to the approval of the Board.
(1985 Code, Art. 7, § 7-205) (Bill No. 90-01)
ARTICLE 6. PERSONNEL
   Title
      
1.   CLASSIFIED SERVICE
      
2.   EXEMPT SERVICE
      
3.   DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
      
4.   EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
      
5.   RETIREE HEALTH BENEFITS TRUST
      
6.   EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SAVINGS PLAN
State Code reference – Local Government Article, §§ 10-205, 10-303.
TITLE 1. CLASSIFIED SERVICE
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; General Provisions
   
6-1-101.   Definitions.
   
6-1-102.   Nondiscrimination.
   
6-1-103.   Hours of work.
   
6-1-104.   Powers and duties of Personnel Officer.
   
6-1-105.   Review of employee compensation by Personnel Officer.
   
6-1-106.   Eligibility and certification lists.
   
6-1-107.   Probationary period.
   
6-1-108.   Reclassification of position.
   
6-1-109.   Layoff rights.
   
6-1-110.   Control of positions.
   
6-1-111.   Distinguished service awards.
   
6-1-112.   Disclosure protection.
Subtitle 2. Minimum Qualifications; Pay
   
6-1-201.   Classification plan.
   
6-1-202.   Pay plan.
   
6-1-203.   Pay at hiring – Non-represented employees.
   
6-1-204.   Pay advancement through range, performance pay awards – Non-
represented employees.
   
6-1-205.   Variable pay.
   
6-1-206.   Pay on promotion, demotion, reclassification, or grade reallocation
– Non- represented employees.
   
6-1-207.   Pay at hiring; advancement through steps – Represented employees.
   
6-1-208.   Pay on promotion, demotion, reclassification, or grade reallocation
– Represented employees.
   
6-1-209.   Pay upon movement between pay schedules – Represented and non-
represented employees.
   
6-1-210.   Pay on promotion, demotion, or reclassification on same pay schedule
between represented and non-represented public safety positions.
   
6-1-211.   Overtime pay.
   
6-1-212.   Night shift differential pay.
   
6-1-213.   Call-in pay.
   
6-1-214.   On-call pay.
   
6-1-215.   Out-of-class pay.
   
6-1-216.   Flight pay.
   
6-1-217.   Allowances.
   
6-1-218.   Extra shift – Bonus payment.
   
6-1-219.   Bonus pay.
   
6-1-220.   Stand-by pay.
Subtitle 3. Benefits
   
6-1-301.   Holidays.
   
6-1-302.   Annual leave.
   
6-1-303.   Disability leave.
   
6-1-304.   Leave without pay.
   
6-1-305.   Miscellaneous leave.
   
6-1-306.   Administrative leave.
   
6-1-307.   Education assistance.
   
6-1-308.   County Employee and Retiree Health Benefits Program.
   
6-1-309.   Pooling for group health plan.
   
6-1-310.   Group life insurance.
   
6-1-311.   Employees injured in line of duty – In general.
   
6-1-312.   Employees injured in line of duty – Uniformed officers.
   
6-1-313.   Family and medical leave.
Charter reference – §§
801 et seq.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 6-1-101. Definitions.
   In this article, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Annual leave” means paid leave for religious holiday leave,
vacation, and other personal uses.
      (2)   “Class” means a position or a group of positions that have similar
duties and responsibilities, minimum qualification requirements for education,
knowledge, skill, and ability, and a comparable pay rate.
      (3)   “Class series” means multiple classes in an occupational group that
are allocated to different pay grades because of differences in their levels of
responsibilities and duties.
      (4)   “Compensatory time” means time off instead of monetary payment for
overtime work.
      (5)   “Demotion” means the competitive or non-competitive administrative
movement of an employee to a different classification in a lower grade or to a
different classification with a lower level of job responsibility as determined
by the Personnel Officer.
      (6)   “Disability leave” means paid leave that may be granted to an
eligible employee who is unable to pursue the duties of the employee’s position
because of physical or mental impairment.
      (7)   “Emergency appointment” means an appointment made when an emergency
arises and time does not permit compliance with the appointment procedures
contained in the Charter.
      (8)   “Holiday leave” means paid leave for full-day or part-day official
holidays.
      (9)   “Management, professional, or confidential employee” means a
management employee, a professional employee, and a confidential employee as
defined in §
6-4-101.
      (10)   “Overtime” means time worked by an employee in excess of the
employee’s normal workday.
      (11)   “Position” means a unique group of duties, tasks, and
responsibilities allocated to a class in the classification plan.
      (12)   “Priority employment” means the non-competitive administrative
placement of an employee or former employee on a certification list for a
classification for which the employee or former employee is qualified, at the
same or a lower grade, when an employee is disabled according to §
808(a) of the Charter, demoted as a result of a reclassification or
reallocation, laid off under §
810 of the Charter, or on an approved leave without pay for more than 60 days
in accordance with §
6-1-304(c).
      (13)   “Proficiency advancement” is the reclassification of an occupied
position to a higher-level classification within a proficiency class series.
The employee in the position to be reclassified must meet the minimum
qualifications for the higher-level classification and must have demonstrated
the satisfactory performance of higher-level duties and responsibilities as
defined under a written departmental plan that has been approved in accordance
with Office of Personnel policies and procedures. Proficiency advancements are
not automatic and are based on the recommendation of the appointing authority
in accordance with Office of Personnel policies and procedures.
      (14)   “Proficiency class series” is a set of classifications that form a
natural progression and that have been designated by the appointing authority
for proficiency advancement under a written departmental plan that has been
approved in accordance with Office of Personnel policies and procedures.
      (15)   “Promotion” means the competitive movement or non-competitive
movement through proficiency advancement, reclassification, or reallocation of
an employee to a different classification in a higher grade or to a different
classification with a higher level of job responsibility as determined by the
Personnel Officer.
      (16)   “Prorated” means in proportion to the time worked in the reduced
work week.
      (17)   “Reallocation” means a change in the classification plan that
revises an established class by changing the pay grade assigned to the class.
      (18)   “Reclassification” means a change of a position from one class to
another class with the same or different pay grade.
      (19)   “Temporary appointment” means an appointment made in the absence
of an eligibility list to fill a vacancy or a newly created position in the
classified service.
      (20)   “Transfer” means the competitive or non-competitive administrative
movement of an employee to a different classification in the same grade, to a
different position with the same classification, or to a position on a
different pay scale that has the same level of job responsibility as determined
by the Personnel Officer.
      (21)   “Uniformed officer” means a full-time classified sworn employee of
the Police Department, Fire Department, Sheriff’s Office, or Detention Center.
      (22)   “Workday” means the number of hours an employee is normally
required to work per day.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-101) (Bill No. 74-86; Bill No. 45-89; Bill No. 58-91;
Bill No. 73-92; Bill No. 34-93; Bill No. 58-93; Bill No. 94-93; Bill No. 65-97;
Bill No. 79-98; Bill No. 40-99; Bill No. 94-01; Bill No. 86-04; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-102. Nondiscrimination.
   It is the policy of the County, for the maintenance of business and good
government, to assure persons an equal opportunity in receiving employment with
the County and in receiving promotions and other personnel action within the
County’s merit system, that there will be no discrimination on the basis of
age, ancestry, citizenship, color, creed, disability, familial status, gender
identity or expression, marital status, national origin, occupation, race,
religion, sex, sexual orientation, or source of income.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-102) (Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-103. Hours of work.
   Unless the nature of the work or the service requires otherwise, all County
departments and offices shall remain open for the transaction of business from
8:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-103)
§ 6-1-104. Powers and duties of Personnel Officer.
   The Personnel Officer has the following powers and duties:
      (1)   to supplement the minimum qualifications of the classification plan
with special requirements for individual positions and consistent with the
plan;
      (2)   to substitute an equivalent combination of acceptable education and
experience or licensure for the minimum qualifications of the classification
plan;
      (3)   to allocate and reallocate all positions to classes of the
classification plan, subject to the review by the Personnel Board on appeal by
the appointing authority;
      (4)   to recommend to the County Council the creation of new classes and
grade changes in existing classes;
      (5)   to administer the classification plan;
      (6)   to establish work-related physical agility standards for Police
Department, Fire Department, and Department of Detention Facilities employees
in consultation with the Police Department, Fire Department, and Department of
Detention Facilities; and
      (7)   to provide for the deduction of monies from an employee’s pay on
termination for any overpayment made to the employee for leave, pay, or
benefits, or for the cost to the County to replace any unreturned equipment or
property.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-104) (Bill No. 89-86; Bill No. 45-89; Bill No. 79-98;
Bill No. 70-00; Bill No. 86-04; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-105. Review of employee compensation by Personnel Officer.
   To remain competitive with area employers, the Personnel Officer shall
review employee compensation at least once every two years, including a review
of pay and other employee benefit practices of other public and private
employers in the appropriate labor markets, and shall recommend changes to
employee compensation based on the review.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-105) (Bill No. 28-96; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-106. Eligibility and certification lists.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (b), the Personnel Officer shall
evaluate all timely applications for a position and establish an eligibility
list of those applicants who are qualified for the position.
      (2)   The Personnel Officer may remove persons from an eligibility list
for good cause, shall determine how long an eligibility list remains in effect,
and shall certify from an eligibility list the names of those persons who
appear to be the most qualified for the position.
      (3)   An applicant for a position as a Fire Fighter II or Fire Fighter/
Emergency Medical Technician-Paramedic is entitled to receive preference in
hiring if the applicant is certified as having satisfactorily completed the
Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute basic firefighting course; is a certified
emergency technician; is certified by the Controller as having completed the
two consecutive years immediately preceding the date of application for
employment as an active volunteer member of the Anne Arundel County Fire
Service as defined in §
12-1-301 of this Code; and successfully completes all components of the
selection process. The hiring preference shall not displace any preference or
requirement of any lawful selective certification applicable to the selection
process for the position of Fire Fighter II or Fire Fighter/Emergency Medical
Technician-Paramedic.
      (4)   (i)   “Eligible veteran” means a veteran of any branch of the Armed
Forces of the United States who has received an honorable discharge or a
certificate of satisfactory completion of military service, including the
National Guard, the Coast Guard and the Military Reserves. An eligible veteran
does not include a person who is employed by the County at the time of
application.
         (ii)   An eligible veteran applying for the position of Fire Fighter
II, Fire Fighter/Emergency Medical Technician-Paramedic, Police Officer,
Detention Officer, Deputy Sheriff I, Fire Communications Operator, Sheriff’s
Communications Operator, or Police Communications Operator I or II who
successfully completes all components and lawful requirements of the selection
process shall receive preference in hiring. The hiring preference shall not
displace any preference provided in subsection (a)(3) of this section.
         (iii)   Except for positions referenced in subsection (a)(4)(ii), an
eligible veteran applying for a position in the classified service who meets
all the components and lawful requirements of the position, and meets all the
preferences posted for the position that other certified candidates meet, will
be interviewed for the position.
      (5)   (i)   “County resident preference” means the criteria established
by the Personnel Officer to provide preference in hiring for a County resident.
         (ii)   A County resident applying for the position of Fire Fighter II,
Fire Fighter/Emergency Medical Technician-Paramedic, Police Officer, Detention
Officer, Deputy Sheriff I, Fire Communications Operator, Sheriff’s
Communications Operator, or Police Communications Operator I or II who
successfully completes all components and lawful requirements of the selection
process and is among the best qualified candidates shall receive a County
resident preference and be certified for the position. The hiring preference
shall not displace any preference provided in paragraph (a)(3) of this section.
         (iii)   Except for positions referenced in subparagraph (ii), a County
resident applying for a position for initial appointment in the classified
service who meets all the components and lawful requirements of the position,
and is among the best qualified candidates shall receive County resident
preference and be certified for the position.
   (b)   Eligibility list not established. Without the establishment of an
eligibility list, the Personnel Officer may certify:
      (1)   the names, in order of seniority, of all persons eligible and
currently entitled to priority employment or priority re-employment; or
      (2)   the name of a former employee who was terminated due to an
inability to perform the essential functions of the employee’s position due to
medical restrictions so long as the rehiring occurs within one year of the
employee’s termination date.
   (c)   Administration. The Personnel Officer shall administer this section in
accordance with Office of Personnel policies and procedures.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-106) (Bill No. 62-88; Bill No. 57-90; Bill No. 58-91;
Bill No. 73-92; Bill No. 58-93; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 79-98; Bill No. 40-99;
Bill No. 94-01; Bill No. 80-07; Bill No. 87-09; Bill No. 44-23)
§ 6-1-107. Probationary period.
   Unless otherwise required by law, each individual in the classified service
shall be a probationary employee until the individual satisfactorily completes
a probationary period of six months. The appointing authority shall submit to
the Personnel Officer notice of the appointing authority's decision to retain
or dismiss the employee. An employee dismissed during the probationary period
shall be considered permanently separated from the position without the
privilege of appeal. At the request of the appointing authority, the Personnel
Officer may extend the probationary period for one additional six-month period.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-107) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 57-90)
§ 6-1-108. Reclassification of position.
   When the Personnel Officer has determined that a position in the classified
service should be reclassified and the Controller has certified that funds are
available, the Personnel Officer shall recommend the reclassification to the
Chief Administrative Officer for approval.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-108) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 58-91)
§ 6-1-109. Layoff rights.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Department or office" means a unit of County government under the
authority and supervision of a single appointing authority as that term is
defined in §
804 of the Charter.
      (2)   "Layoff" means:
         (i)   a termination of an individual from County employment caused by
workload reduction, reduced or eliminated appropriations, or abolition of
positions in the budget; or
         (ii)   a permanent reduction in the work hours of an employee from
full-time to part-time.
      (3)   "Order of layoffs" means the sequence in which employees within an
affected classification are terminated from employment.
      (4)   "Recall" means the re-employment of an individual with the County
in the same classification held by the employee at the time of the layoff.
      (5)   "Seniority" means an employee's length of continuous service with
the County since the employee's last date of hire by the County, unless defined
otherwise by a collective bargaining agreement.
      (6)   "Time in grade" means the time that an employee has served in the
classification from which the employee is laid-off.
   (b)   Order of layoffs generally. Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, or memorandum of agreement, negotiated and executed in accordance
with
Title 4:
      (1)   A laid-off employee may displace the least senior employee in the
same classification in another department or office.
      (2)   The order of layoffs among uniformed officers in the Detention
Center, Sheriff's Office, Police Department, or Fire Department shall be as
follows:
         (i)   The employee with the least time in grade occupying the position
subject to layoff shall demote to the preceding classification within the rank
structure. This process shall be repeated in subordinate classifications as may
be necessary to fulfill the requirement for personnel reduction. The employee
with the least seniority in the department shall be laid off.
         (ii)   If two or more employees have the same time in grade, demotion
shall be governed by seniority. If two or more employees have the same
seniority, the order of layoffs shall be determined by the appointing authority
on the basis of the relative qualifications, skills, and abilities of the
employees.
         (iii)   An employee who displaces another uniformed Detention Center,
Sheriff's Office, Fire Department or Police Department employee shall be
recalled to a position within the employee's former classification when such a
position becomes available. An employee with the most time in grade shall have
the first right to be recalled, and an employee with the least time in grade
shall have the last right to be recalled.
      (3)   For employees whose job classifications are included in a
collective bargaining unit certified under the provisions of
Title 4, the order of layoffs shall be governed by the applicable memorandum of
agreement.
   (c)   Seniority. For employees not within the representation of a collective
bargaining unit, and employees within the representation of a collective
bargaining unit for which there is no current, valid collective bargaining
agreement, the order of layoffs shall be governed by seniority. If employees
have the same seniority, the order of layoffs shall be determined by the
appointing authority on the basis of the relative qualifications, skills, and
abilities of the employees.
   (d)   Notice. Unless specified otherwise by a collective bargaining
agreement or by law, an employee shall receive at least 15 calendar days'
written notice of layoff.
   (e)   Benefits. A laid-off employee shall be paid for all annual and
disability leave to which the employee is entitled upon leaving County service
under §§
12-1-402 and
12-1-403 of this Code, and shall be allowed to continue health coverage under
the provisions of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) of
1985, 42 U.S.C. §§ 300bb-1 et seq.
   (f)   Recall. Unless specified otherwise by a collective bargaining
agreement or by law, a laid-off employee has the right to be recalled to the
classification from which the employee was laid off if a position within the
classification becomes available within 18 months after the employee was laid
off, and if the employee retains the qualifications, skill, and ability to
perform the duties of the position. Recall to work shall be in the reverse
order of layoff. A laid-off employee shall be placed on eligibility lists for
priority re-employment with the County in accordance with §
810 of the Charter.
   (g)   Re-employment. A laid-off employee who is re-employed with the County
within 18 months of layoff shall be credited with the length of service accrued
by the employee at the time of the layoff for purposes of calculating
entitlement to annual leave and eligibility for longevity salary increases.
   (h)   Pension plans. A laid-off employee may defer a request for a refund of
participant contributions in the applicable pension plan for up to 18 months
from the time of layoff. A laid-off employee who is re- employed with the
County within 18 months of layoff shall be credited with the service accrued by
the employee at the time of the layoff for purposes of pension eligibility if
the employee did not receive a refund of participant contributions prior to re-
employment.
   (i)   Outplacement program. The Personnel Office shall establish an employee
outplacement program to assist laid-off employees with re-employment and
benefit counseling and other matters relating to the loss of employment with
the County.
   (j)   Rules and regulations. The Personnel Officer may adopt rules and
regulations consistent with the express provisions of this section to implement
the provisions of this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-109) (Bill No. 31-92; Bill No. 34-93; Bill No. 58-93;
Bill No. 35-96; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 94-01)
§ 6-1-110. Control of positions.
   (a)   Ordinance required for change in number or classification. Except as
provided in subsection (b), the number and classification of positions,
including the number of positions in each classification, in an office or
department of County government that are approved as part of the annual budget
and appropriation ordinance, shall not be changed during a fiscal year except
as approved by ordinance of the County Council.
   (b)   Exceptions. The number and classification of positions may be changed
during a fiscal year without the approval of the County Council if a change
results from:
      (1)   reclassifying an occupied position pursuant to §
6-1-108 based on an evaluation by the Personnel Officer of the duties, tasks,
and responsibilities performed by the employee in the position or based on a
proficiency advancement within a proficiency class series;
      (2)   filling an occupied position so that an incoming employee may be
trained to assume a position that is anticipated will become vacant;
      (3)   filling an occupied position within a rank structure when a
promotion is anticipated in the Police Department, Fire Department, Detention
Center, or Sheriff's Office;
      (4)   creating positions to staff a recruit training academy class for
the Police Department, Fire Department, Detention Center, or Sheriff's Office;
      (5)   moving and filling a vacant position in a proficiency
classification series from one classification to another within the series; or
      (6)   moving and filling a vacant position to meet a department’s
recruitment, cost saving, or organizational needs based on the Personnel
Officer’s determination of the duties, tasks, and responsibilities to be
assigned to the position, so long as the base of the pay grade for the new
position does not exceed the base of the pay grade for the existing position by
more than 10%, the position remains in the same County Department as was
approved in the most recent annual budget, and the Controller certifies that
funds are available for the new position.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-110) (Bill No. 58-03; Bill No. 86-04; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-111. Distinguished service awards.
   (a)   Generally. The County Executive may nominate an employee of the County
to receive a distinguished service award. To be eligible for an award, an
employee must have performed an act of extraordinary heroism in the direct line
of duty involving unusual hazard to life and limb.
   (b)   Annual payment. The recipient of a distinguished service award shall
receive, in addition to salary, an annual payment of $500. The payment shall be
made as of the date of the award and continue each year for life. If the
recipient is a uniformed employee, the award shall be signified by an
appropriate insignia to be displayed on the left forearm sleeve of the
recipient's uniform. The insignia may not be used for any other purpose.
   (c)   Ordinance required. The award may be bestowed only on the passage of
an ordinance by the County Council that makes provision for annual payment.
(1985 Code, Art. 2, § 1-106)
§ 6-1-112. Disclosure protection.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, a "personnel action" means an act, a
refusal to act, or an omission by an appointing authority which has a
significant adverse impact on the employee or a change in the employee's
responsibilities that is inconsistent with the employee's grade and salary.
   (b)   Action by appointing authority. Unless a disclosure is specifically
prohibited by law, an employee may not be subject to a personnel action by an
appointing authority as a reprisal for seeking any remedy under this section or
for a disclosure to a federal, State, or County official or employee that the
employee reasonably believes, in good faith, provides evidence of:
      (1)   retaliation for a refusal to obey an instruction of an appointing
authority or supervisor involving an illegal act or a refusal to participate in
an illegal act;
      (2)   an illegal action in County government;
      (3)   an unauthorized use of County funds;
      (4)   a substantial and specific danger to public health or safety; or
      (5)   a violation of the County's policy against discrimination and
harassment based on gender, age, religion, race, national origin, disability,
color, sexual orientation, marital status, genetic information, or veteran
status as set forth in the Anne Arundel County Employee Relations Manual.
   (c)   Other action authorized.  This section does not prohibit a personnel
action that otherwise would have been taken regardless of the disclosure.
   (d)   Grievances. An employee who believes they have been the subject of a
personnel action under subsection (b) may file a grievance pursuant to §
6-4-104 or with the Personnel Board .
   (e)   Disclosures to State officers.  An employee has the same protections
provided in subsection (b) of this section regarding a disclosure that is
specifically prohibited by law, if the disclosure is made to the Office of the
State's Attorney, the Office of the Attorney General of Maryland, or the Office
of the Maryland State Prosecutor.
   (f)   Other remedies. This section does not preclude the aggrieved employee
from seeking any legal action or other remedies available.
(Bill No. 17-11; Bill No. 47-13)
SUBTITLE 2. MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS; PAY
§ 6-1-201. Classification plan.
   (a)   Formulation. In accordance with Charter Section
801, the Personnel Officer shall formulate and maintain a classification plan
for all positions in the classified service.
   (b)   Contents. For each class of position, the classification plan shall
include minimum qualifications and designate a pay grade and work week.
   (c)   Approval and modification.
      (1)   The classification plan shall be annually approved by ordinance of
the County Council.
      (2)   (i)   The Personnel Officer may modify the classification plan
during a year based on review and analysis of job classifications.
         (ii)   Except as provided in paragraph (iii), modifications to the
classification plan shall be effective upon approval of the Chief
Administrative Officer and shall be included in the next plan presented
annually to the County Council for approval by ordinance.
         (iii)   Any change in a pay grade assigned to an existing job
classification for which the base of the new pay grade exceeds the base of the
current pay grade by more than 10% shall be approved by the County Council.
      (3)   Upon approval of the modifications to the classification plan by
the Chief Administrative Officer, the Personnel Officer may assign current
employees to new or modified job classifications and may hire to fill new or
modified job classifications.
      (4)   The County Council may reject modifications made to the
classification plan since the last approval of the plan, but may not otherwise
modify the plan.
      (5)   If the County Council rejects a modification to the classification
plan, the Personnel Officer shall transfer employees affected by the
modification to a job classification for which the employee is qualified and is
similar in scope and pay, with salary adjustments as permitted under
Title 2.
   (d)   Reporting. The Personnel Officer shall submit a quarterly report to
the County Council identifying:
      (1)   each modification to the classification plan made since the last
Council approval of the plan; and
      (2)   the number of vacant and filled positions affected by each
modification to the plan.
   (e)   Posting. The classification plan shall be posted on the County website
and available to County employees and the public.
(Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-202. Pay plan.
   (a)   Formulation. In accordance with Charter Section
801, the Personnel Officer shall formulate and maintain a pay plan for all
positions in the classified service.
   (b)   Approval. The pay plan shall be approved annually by ordinance of the
County Council.
   (c)   Posting. The pay plan shall be posted on the County website and
available to County employees and the public.
   (d)   Office Support, Administrative Aides, and Technical employees.
      (1)   The method of payment for employees in the classification of
Booking Officer shall be as stated in the applicable memorandum of agreement,
negotiated and executed in accordance with
Title 4 of this article.
      (2)   Beginning the first full pay period on or after July 1, 2008 an
employee on the OS pay schedule who completes the following required years of
service is entitled to a longevity award as follows:
         (i)   for completion of seven years of continuous County service, a
total of 5% of the employee’s rate of pay for the grade;
         (ii)   for completion of 11 years of continuous County service, a
total of 10% of the employee’s rate of pay for the grade;
         (iii)   for completion of 16 years of continuous County service, a
total of 15% of the employee’s rate of pay for the grade; and
         (iv)   for completion of 25 yeas of continuous County service, a total
of 18% of the employee’s rate of pay for the grade.
   (e)   Labor, Maintenance, Trades, and Inspection employees. An employee on
the LM or FW pay schedule who completes the following required years of service
is entitled to a longevity award as follows:
      (1)   for completion of seven years of continuous County service, a total
of 5% of the employee’s pay rate for the grade;
      (2)   for completion of 11 years of continuous County service, a total of
10% of the employee’s pay rate for the grade;
      (3)   for completion of 16 years of continuous County service, a total of
15% of the employee’s pay rate for the grade; and
      (4)   for completion of 25 years of continuous County service, a total of
18% of the employee’s pay rate for the grade.
(Bill No. 41-07; Bill No. 42-07; Bill No. 45-07; Bill No. 51-07; Bill No. 32-
08; Bill No. 50-08; Bill No. 51-08; Bill 55-08; Bill No. 33-09; Bill No. 34-09;
Bill No. 78-09; Bill No. 38-10; Bill No. 42-10; Bill No. 52-10; Bill No. 46-11;
Bill No. 53-12; Bill No. 57-13; Bill No. 58-13; Bill No. 60-13; Bill No. 73-13;
Bill No. 35-14; Bill No. 45-15; Bill No. 47-16; Bill No. 58-17; Bill No. 56-18;
Bill No. 58-19; Bill No. 44-20; Bill No. 58-20; Bill No. 45-21; Bill No. 51-22;
Bill No. 8-23; Bill No. 44-23; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-203. Pay at hiring – Non-represented employees.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to all employees in the classified
service who are not represented by a certified employee organization.
   (b)   Hired as minimum pay for the grade. Except as otherwise provided in
this subsection, and in subsection (c), a non-represented employee shall be
hired at the minimum pay for the grade. With documentation justifying the pay
rate, the appointing authority may make initial appointments:
      (1)   at a pay rate not exceeding 15% more than the minimum pay for the
grade;
      (2)   with the approval of the Personnel Officer, and the Chief
Administrative Officer at a pay rate exceeding 15% more than the minimum pay
for the grade but not exceeding more than the minimum pay for the grade; or
      (3)   with the approval of the Personnel Officer, the Chief
Administrative Officer, and the County Executive, at a pay rate exceeding 35%
more than the minimum pay for the grade but not more than the maximum of the
pay for the grade.
   (c)   Hired as minimum pay for the grade – Legislative branch employees. An
employee on the LG pay schedule shall be hired at the minimum pay for the
grade, except that the appointing authority may make initial appointments at a
pay rate exceeding the minimum pay for the grade if the funds are available, or
at a pay rate not lower than 10% less than the minimum pay for the grade.
   (d)   Retention after probationary period. For an employee appointed under
paragraph (b)(2) or subsection (c) at less than the minimum pay for the grade,
if the employee is retained at the conclusion of the probationary period, the
appointing authority shall increase the pay of the employee to at least the
minimum pay for the grade.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-204) (Bill No. 28-96; Bill No. 71-96; Bill No. 65-97;
Bill No. 39-01; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-204. Pay advancement through range, performance pay awards – Non-
represented employees.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to all employees in the classified
service who are not represented by a certified employee organization.
   (b)   Award of increases. The appointing authority may award increases in
pay to an employee at intervals no more frequently than once every fiscal year
if the employee has completed the employee's probationary period, exclusive of
any increase awarded under subsection (e).
   (c)   Maximum increase. For an employee who is not at the maximum pay of the
employee's pay range the amount of the pay increase may not exceed 10% of the
pay that the employee is receiving at the time of the increase, exclusive of
any increase awarded under subsection (e), and may not exceed the maximum pay
for the grade.
   (d)   Performance pay award. An appointing authority may make a performance
pay award to any employee who is at or above the maximum of the employee's pay
range and who has, in the previous rating period, significantly and
consistently exceeded expectations.
   (e)   Legislative Auditors' pay increase. An employee on the LA pay schedule
who obtains a license in the State of Maryland as certified public accountant
and who was not licensed in the State of Maryland or any other state when the
employee was first hired to a position on the LA pay schedule is entitled to a
5% increase in pay beginning the first pay period after obtaining a license as
a certified public accountant in the State of Maryland, not to exceed the
maximum pay for the employee's current grade.
   (f)   Maximum increase with performance pay award. The amount of the
performance pay award and any increases under subsections (c) and (d) combined
may not exceed 10% of the pay that the employee was receiving prior to the time
of the award and increase.
   (g)   Effect on designated base pay. A performance pay award made under
subsection (d) does not increase the designated base pay of an employee.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-204.1) (Bill No. 28-96; Bill No. 71-96; Bill No. 65-97;
Bill No. 32-08 )
§ 6-1-205. Variable pay.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to all employees in the classified
service who are not represented by a certified employee organization, including
employees who are at or above the maximum pay for their grade, and to all
classified employees represented by AFSCME Local 582 and AFSCME Local 2563.
   (b)   Variable pay award. An appointing authority may make a variable pay
award to any employee who makes an extraordinary contribution to the operation
of the County office or department; makes a significant singular effort or
contribution; or performs an action or service that brings credit to the County
or the employee's department or office.
   (c)   Effect on designated base pay. A variable pay award may be monetary or
non- monetary and does not increase the designated annual base pay of an
employee.
   (d)   Procedures for awarding. Subject to available appropriations, one or
more variable pay awards may be made to an employee as follows:
      (1)   one or more awards in the cumulative amount of up to $250 may be
made by the appointing authority in a fiscal year;
      (2)   one or more awards in the cumulative amount of more than $250, up
to and including $1,000, may be made by the appointing authority with the
approval of the Chief Administrative Officer in a fiscal year; and
      (3)   one or more awards in the cumulative amount of more than $1,000 may
be made by the appointing authority with the approval of the Chief
Administrative Officer and the County Executive in a fiscal year.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-204.2) (Bill No. 71-96; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 58-17)
§ 6-1-206. Pay on promotion, demotion, reclassification, or grade reallocation
– Non-represented employees.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to all employees in the classified
service who are not represented by a certified employee organization and move
between non-represented positions.
   (b)   Promotion.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if a non-
represented employee is promoted to a non-represented position that is
classified in a higher grade, the employee’s new pay rate is at least the
minimum pay for the new grade or, without exceeding the maximum pay for the new
grade and with documentation justifying the pay rate:
         (i)   with the approval of the appointing authority, a pay rate that
does not exceed 15% more than the employee was paid in the prior grade;
         (ii)   with the approval of the Personnel Officer and the Chief
Administrative Officer, a pay rate exceeding 15% more but not exceeding 35%
more than the employee was paid in the prior grade; or
         (iii)   with the approval of the Personnel Officer, the Chief
Administrative Officer, and the County Executive a pay rate exceeding 35% more
than the employee was paid in the prior grade, but not more than the maximum of
the pay for the new grade.
      (2)   If the level at which the employee was paid in the former grade is
more than the maximum pay for the new grade, the employee’s new pay shall
remain the same as the employee’s pay in the former grade and the employee is
not eligible for any form of base pay increase until the maximum pay for the
new grade is increased so that it exceeds the employee’s pay.
   (c)   Demotion.
      (1)   A non-represented employee who is demoted to a non-represented
position is entitled to the pay provided in this subsection.
      (2)   If the employee is competitively or non-competitively demoted,
except for a demotion under §
808 of the Charter, the employee’s rate of pay shall be that rate within the
new grade that is equal to the employee’s rate in the former grade, but not
exceeding the maximum pay for the new grade.
      (3)   If the employee is demoted in accordance with §
808(a) of the Charter, the employee’s new rate of pay shall be, as determined
by the appointing authority and approved by the Personnel Officer, a rate of
pay within the new grade or a rate of pay that exceeds the maximum pay of the
new grade, but not exceeding the rate of pay the employee received in the
former grade.
      (4)   If the employee is demoted in accordance with §
808(b), (c), (d), or (e) of the Charter, the employee’s new rate of pay shall
be, as determined by the appointing authority and approved by the Personnel
Officer, a rate of pay within the new grade that is less than the rate of pay
the employee received in the former grade or a rate of pay that exceeds the
maximum pay for the new grade, but less than the rate of pay the employee
received in the former grade.
      (5)   A change in rate of pay under subsection (c)(3) or (c)(4) may not
result in a pay decrease of more than 15%.
   (d)   Reclassification or grade reallocation.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if an employee’s
position is reclassified to a class in a higher grade or the employee’s class
is reallocated to a higher grade, the employee’s new pay shall be at a level
that is a minimum of 5%, but no more than 15% above the level at which the
employee was paid in the former grade, in accordance with Office of Personnel
policies and procedures, but not exceeding the maximum pay for the new grade.
If the employee’s pay in the former grade was more than 5% below the minimum
pay rate of the new grade, the employee’s pay shall be at least the minimum pay
for the new grade.
      (2)   If an employee’s position is reclassified to a class in a lower
grade or the employee’s class is reallocated to a lower grade, the employee’s
new pay shall be at a level within the new grade that is closest to and not
lower than the level at which the employee was paid in the former grade.
      (3)   If the level at which the employee was paid in the former grade is
more than the maximum pay for the new grade, the employee’s new pay shall
remain the same as the employee’s pay in the former grade and the employee is
not eligible for any form of pay increase until the maximum pay in the new
grade is increased to a level that exceeds the employee’s pay.
   (e)   Effective date for pay changes. The effective date for all pay changes
under this section shall be the first day of the normal pay period following
the date that applicable requirements are met.
   (f)   Processing certain pay increases prior to promotion, reclassification,
or grade reallocation. If an employee’s pay increase as provided for in §
6-1-204(c) falls on the same date as the employee’s promotion,
reclassification, or grade reallocation, the pay increase shall be processed
prior to the promotion, reclassification, or grade reallocation.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-204.3) (Bill No. 28-96; Bill No. 71-96; Bill No. 65-97;
Bill No. 79-98; Bill No. 40-99; Bill No. 70-00; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-207. Pay at hiring; advancement through steps – Represented employees.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to all employees in the classified
service who are represented by a certified employee organization.
   (b)   Generally.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection or by an applicable
Memorandum of Agreement:
         (i)   an employee other than an employee hired into a classification
on the FW pay schedule shall be hired at the minimum rate of pay of the grade;
and
         (ii)   an employee hired as a Water/Wastewater Systems Technician I on
the FW pay schedule shall be hired at the FW1 base rate; and
         (iii)   an employee hired into the water/wastewater systems technician
series who holds a current permanent water or wastewater operator's license
issued by the Maryland Department of the Environment may be placed as
proficiency level II, subject to FW-02 base rate of pay and standard internal
position requirements.
      (2)   With the approval of the Personnel Officer, the appointing
authority may make an initial hire for a position at a pay rate not exceeding
15% more than the minimum pay for the grade.
      (3)   With the approval of the Personnel Officer and the Chief
Administrative Officer, the appointing authority may make an initial hire for
the position at a pay rate not exceeding 35% more than the minimum pay for the
grade.
   (c)   Advancement to new rate of pay. Except as provided in subsection (d),
an employee must receive an overall satisfactory performance annual appraisal
rating before advancing to a new rate of pay as follows:
      (1)   except as provided in subsection (c)(2), for represented employees
an increase in pay not to exceed the maximum for the grade as set forth in the
applicable memorandum of agreement negotiated and executed in accordance with
Title 4, between the County and an exclusive representative; and
      (2)   (i)   for represented employees on the LM pay schedule who are
hired at the minimum pay rate for the grade, a 9% increase in pay on the first
full pay period after the successful completion of 12 months of employment.
         (ii)   for represented employees on the LM pay schedule who are hired
above minimum pay rate for the grade, an increase to 9% above the minimum pay
rate on the first full pay period after the successful completion of 12 months
of employment.
   (d)   Memorandum of agreement applicability. Advancement through the pay
schedule for represented employees on the FW pay schedule shall be in
accordance with the applicable memorandum of agreement.
   (e)   Effective date for pay changes. The effective date for any merit pay
or longevity advancements in pay is the first day of the first full bi-weekly
pay period closest to the date that applicable requirements are met.
   (f)   Processing merit pay increases prior to promotion, demotion, or
reclassification. If an employee’s merit pay increase falls on the same date as
the employee’s promotion, demotion, or reclassification, the merit pay increase
will be processed prior to the promotion, demotion, or reclassification.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-205) (Bill No. 71-96; Bill No. 100-96; Bill No. 65-97;
Bill No. 63-99; Bill No. 43-00; Bill No. 46-00; Bill No. 1-01; Bill No. 39-01;
Bill No. 52-02; Bill No. 75-02; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 34-04; Bill No. 86-04;
Bill No. 59-06; Bill No. 41-07; Bill No. 42-07; Bill No. 45-07; Bill No. 33-09;
Bill No. 34-09; Bill No. 78-09; Bill. No. 38-10; Bill No. 46-11; Bill No. 85-
12; Bill No. 58-13; Bill No. 47-16; Bill No. 58-17; Bill No. 56-18; Bill No.
60-19; Bill No. 51-22; Bill No. 51-24)
§ 6-1-208. Pay on promotion, demotion, reclassification, or grade reallocation
– Represented employees.
   (a)   Applicability. Except as provided in §
6-1-210, this section applies to all employees in the classified service who
are represented by a certified employee organization. This section governs pay
as a result of any movement in the classified service between represented
positions.
   (b)   Inclusion of longevity awards. For the purposes of this section, an
employee’s former and new pay rates shall include the appropriate longevity
entitlements as provided for in §
6-1-202.
   (c)   Promotion.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if an employee is
promoted to a position that is classified in a higher grade, the employee's new
pay is the greater of:
         (i)   the minimum pay rate of the new grade; or
         (ii)    that pay rate for those employees within the new grade that is
at least 5% above the level at which the employee was paid in the former grade,
but not exceeding the maximum pay on the applicable pay schedule for the new
grade.
      (2)   If the level at which the employee was paid in the former grade is
more than the maximum pay for the new grade:
         (i)   the employee's new pay shall remain the same as the employee's
pay in the former grade; and
         (ii)   the employee is not eligible for any form of pay increase until
the maximum pay for the new grade is increased so that it exceeds the
employee's pay.
   (d)   Memorandum of agreement applicability for FW pay schedule employees.
Proficiency advancement of an employee between classifications on the FW pay
schedule shall be in accordance with the applicable memorandum of agreement.
   (e)   Demotions. An employee who is demoted shall be entitled to the rate of
pay provided in the applicable memorandum of agreement. If no method of
determining the rate of pay is provided for in the agreement, an employee shall
be entitled to one of the following rates of pay, as applicable:
      (1)   except for a demotion under §
808 of the Charter, the employee's rate of pay shall be as determined by the
appointing authority and approved by the Personnel Officer, but shall not be
more than the employee's former rate of pay or more than the maximum pay for
the new grade; or
      (2)   if the employee is demoted in accordance with §
808(a) of the Charter, the employee's new rate of pay shall be, as determined
by the appointing authority and approved by the Personnel Officer, a rate of
pay within the new grade or a rate of pay that exceeds the maximum pay of the
new grade, but not exceeding the rate of pay the employee received in the
former grade.
      (3)   If the employee is demoted in accordance with §
808(b), (c), (d), or (e) of the Charter, the employee's new rate of pay shall
be, as determined by the appointing authority and approved by the Personnel
Officer, a rate of pay within the new grade that is less than the rate of pay
the employee received in the former grade or a rate of pay which exceeds the
maximum pay for the new grade, but less than the rate of pay the employee
received in the former grade.
      (4)   A change in rate of pay under subsection (e)(2) or (e)(3) may not
result in a pay decrease of more than 15%.
   (f)   Reclassification or grade reallocation.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if an employee's
position is reclassified to a class in a higher grade or the employee's class
is reallocated to a higher grade, the employee's new pay shall be 5% above the
level at which the employee was paid in the former grade, but not exceeding the
maximum pay for the new grade. If the employee's pay in the former grade was
more than 5% below the minimum pay rate of the new grade, the employee's pay
shall be the minimum pay for the new pay grade.
      (2)   If an employee's position is reclassified to a class in a lower
grade, the employee's new pay shall be at a pay rate on the applicable pay
schedule within the new grade that is at the same pay rate and not lower than
the level at which the employee was paid in the former grade.
      (3)   If the level at which the employee was paid in the former grade is
more than the maximum pay on the applicable pay schedule for the new grade, the
employee's new pay shall remain the same as the employee's pay in the former
grade and the employee is not eligible for any form of pay increase until the
maximum pay on the applicable pay schedule in the new grade is increased to a
level that exceeds the employee's pay.
      (4)   Proficiency advancement of an employee shall be in accordance with
the applicable memorandum of agreement or Office of Personnel policies and
procedures.
   (g)   Effective date for pay changes. The effective date for all pay changes
under this section shall be the first day of the normal pay period following
the date that applicable requirements are met.
   (h)   Processing merit pay increases prior to promotion, reclassification,
or grade reallocation. If an employee’s merit pay increase falls on the same
date as the employee’s promotion, reclassification, or grade reallocation, the
merit pay increase shall be processed prior to the promotion, reclassification,
or grade reallocation.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-206) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 32-89; Bill No. 28-96;
Bill No. 71-96; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 79-98; Bill No. 40-99; Bill No. 43-00;
Bill No. 70-00; Bill No. 39-01; Bill No. 52-02; Bill No. 75-02; Bill No. 34-04;
Bill No. 59-06; Bill No. 41-07; Bill No. 56-18; Bill No. 58-19; Bill No. 44-20;
Bill No. 45-21; Bill No. 51-22; Bill No. 44-23; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-209. Pay upon movement between pay schedules – Represented and non-
represented employees.
   (a)   Applicability. Except as provided in §
6-1-210, this section governs pay as a result of any movement between
represented and non-represented pay schedules in the classified service.
   (b)   Inclusion of longevity awards. For the purposes of this section, an
employee’s former and new pay rates shall include the appropriate longevity
awards as provided for in §
6-1-202.
   (c)   Transferred employee. If an employee is transferred between
represented and non- represented positions, the employee’s rate of pay on the
new pay schedule shall be that pay amount, within the new grade that is the
same as the employee’s former rate of pay or the maximum of the new pay
schedule, whichever is less.
   (d)   Demotion. If an employee is demoted between represented and non-
represented positions, the employee is entitled to one of the following rates
of pay as applicable:
      (1)   If the employee is competitively or non-competitively demoted,
except for a demotion under §
808 of the Charter, the employee’s rate of pay shall be that rate within the
new grade that is closest to but not exceeding the employee’s rate of pay in
the former grade, but not exceeding the maximum pay for the new grade; or
      (2)   If the employee is demoted in accordance with §
808(a) of the Charter, the employee’s new rate of pay shall be, as determined
by the appointing authority and approved by the Personnel Officer, a rate of
pay within the new grade or a rate of pay that exceeds the maximum pay of the
new grade, but not exceeding the rate of pay the employee received in the
former grade.
      (3)   If the employee is demoted in accordance with §
808(b), (c), (d), or (e) of the Charter, the employee’s new rate of pay shall
be, as determined by the appointing authority and approved by the Personnel
Officer, a rate of pay within the new grade that is less than the rate of pay
the employee received in the former grade or a rate of pay that exceeds the
maximum pay for the new grade, but less than the rate of pay the employee
received in the former grade.
      (4)   A change in rate of pay under subsection (d)(2) or (d)(3) may not
result in a pay decrease of more than 15%.
   (e)   Promotion.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if an employee is
promoted between represented and non-represented positions, with documentation
justifying the pay rate, the employee’s new pay shall be the greater of:
         (i)   the minimum pay rate of the new grade;
         (ii)   when moving from a represented or non-represented pay schedule
to a represented pay schedule, that pay rate within the new grade that is at
least 5% above the level at which the employee was paid in the former grade,
but not exceeding the maximum pay for the new grade; or
         (iii)   when moving from a represented pay schedule to the non-
represented pay schedule, that pay amount within the new grade that is at least
5% but no more than 15% above the level at which the employee was paid in the
former grade, in accordance with Office of Personnel policies and procedures,
but not exceeding the maximum pay on the applicable pay schedule for the new
grade.
      (2)   If an employee’s position is reclassified to a class with a
comparable or lower level of job responsibility in the judgment of the
Personnel Officer, the employee’s pay shall be at a pay amount within the new
grade that is the same pay rate at which the employee was paid in the former
grade.
      (3)   If the level at which the employee was paid in the former grade is
more than the maximum pay on the applicable pay schedule for the new grade, the
employee’s new pay shall remain the same as the employee’s pay in the former
grade and the employee is not eligible for any form of pay increase until the
maximum pay for the new grade is increased to a level that exceeds the
employee’s pay.
   (f)   Effective date for pay changes. The effective date for all pay changes
shall be the first day of the first full bi-weekly pay period following the
date that applicable requirements are met.
   (g)   Processing certain pay increases prior to increases under this
section. If an employee’s pay increase as provided in §
6-1-204(c) falls on the same date as the employee’s promotion or
reclassification, the pay increase shall be processed prior to any increases
provided under this section.
   (h)   Memorandum of agreement applicability for FW pay schedule employees.
Movement by an employee between a classification on the FW pay schedule and a
classification on another pay schedule shall be in accordance with this section
and any applicable memorandum of agreement.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-206.1) (Bill No. 79-98; Bill No. 70-00; Bill No. 94-01;
Bill No. 75-02; Bill No. 34-04; Bill No. 59-06; Bill No. 44-20; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-210. Pay on promotion, demotion, or reclassification on same pay schedule
between represented and non-represented public safety positions.
   (a)   Applicability. Except as otherwise provided by an applicable
memorandum of agreement, this section shall govern pay as a result of any
movement in the classified service between represented and non-represented
public safety positions that are on the same pay schedule.
   (b)   Promotion.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if an employee is
promoted between represented and non-represented public safety positions that
are classified in a higher grade, with documentation justifying the pay rate,
the employee’s new pay is the greater of:
         (i)   the minimum pay amount of the new grade; or
         (ii)   that pay amount within the new grade that is a minimum of 5%
but no more than 15% above the level at which the employee was paid in the
former grade, in accordance with Office of Personnel policies and procedures,
but not exceeding the maximum pay on the applicable pay schedule for the new
grade.
      (2)   If the level at which the employee was paid in the former grade is
more than the maximum pay for the new grade, the employee's new pay shall
remain the same as the employee's pay in the former grade and the employee is
not eligible for any form of pay increase until the maximum pay for the new
grade is increased to a level that exceeds the employee's pay.
   (c)   Demotion.
      (1)   An employee who is demoted is entitled to the pay provided in this
subsection.
      (2)   Except for a demotion under §
808 of the Charter, the employee's rate of pay shall be as determined by the
appointing authority and approved by the Personnel Officer but may not be more
than the employee's rate in the former grade or more than the maximum pay for
the new grade.
      (3)   If the employee is demoted in accordance with §
808(a) of the Charter, the employee's new rate of pay shall be, as determined
by the appointing authority and approved by the Personnel Officer, a rate of
pay within the new grade or a rate of pay that exceeds the maximum pay of the
new grade, but not exceeding the rate of pay the employee received in the
former grade.
      (4)   If the employee is demoted in accordance with §
808(b), (c), (d), or (e) of the Charter, the employee's new rate of pay shall
be, as determined by the appointing authority and approved by the Personnel
Officer, a rate of pay within the new grade that is less than the rate of pay
the employee received in the former grade or a rate of pay that exceeds the
maximum pay for the new grade, but less than the rate of pay the employee
received in the former grade.
      (5)   A change in rate of pay under subsection (c)(3) or (c)(4) may not
result in a pay decrease of more than 15%.
   (d)   Reclassification.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if an employee's
position is reclassified to a class with a higher level of job responsibility
in the judgment of the Personnel Officer, the employee's new pay shall be the
greater of the minimum pay rate of the new grade or that pay rate within the
new grade that is a minimum of 5% but no more than 15% above the level at which
the employee was paid in the former grade, in accordance with Office of
Personnel policies and procedures, but not exceeding the maximum pay for the
new grade.
      (2)   If an employee's position is reclassified to a class with a lower
level of job responsibility in the judgment of the Personnel Officer, the
employee's new pay shall be at a pay amount within the new grade that is the
same pay rate at which the employee was paid in the former grade.
      (3)   If the level at which the employee was paid in the former grade is
more than the maximum pay on the applicable pay schedule for the new grade, the
employee's new pay shall remain the same as the employee's pay in the former
grade and the employee is not eligible for any form of pay increase until the
maximum pay for the new grade is increased to a level that exceeds the
employee's pay.
   (e)   Effective date for pay changes. The effective date for all pay changes
shall be the first day of the first full bi-weekly pay period following the
date that applicable requirements are met.
   (f)   Processing certain pay increases prior to increases under this
section. If an employee's pay increase as provided in §
6-1-204(c) falls on the same date as the employee's promotion or
reclassification, the pay increase shall be processed prior to any increases
provided under this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-206.2) (Bill No. 79-98; Bill No. 70-00; Bill No. 34-04
; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-211. Overtime pay.
   (a)   Eligibility.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, an employee
identified by the Personnel Officer as entitled to receive overtime
compensation pursuant to the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. §§ 207 et
seq., shall be paid overtime compensation as specified under the Fair Labor
Standards Act and Office of Personnel policies and procedures.
      (2)   An employee subject to a memorandum of agreement negotiated and
signed under
Title 4, between the County and an exclusive representative, shall be paid
overtime compensation in accordance with the memorandum of agreement.
      (3)   An employee entitled to receive overtime compensation under the
Fair Labor Standards Act and a memorandum of agreement shall receive whichever
amount of overtime is greater.
   (b)   Compensatory time in lieu of overtime – Represented employees.
Employees represented by a certified employee organization may receive
compensatory time in lieu of overtime compensation if authorized by and at the
rate specified in the applicable collective bargaining agreement.
   (c)   Compensatory time in lieu of overtime – Non-represented employees.
Except as provided in subsection (d), employees not represented by a certified
employee organization, but otherwise entitled to receive overtime compensation
pursuant to the Fair Labor Standards Act, may receive compensatory time in lieu
of overtime compensation at the rate of 1.5 times the number of hours worked in
excess of the normal work day if the employee and the appointing authority have
reached agreement to that effect prior to the work being actually performed.
   (d)   Partial overtime exemption. Employees in classifications to which the
partial overtime exemption applies under 29 U.S.C. § 207(k) but not represented
by a certified employee organization shall receive overtime compensation at the
rate of 1.5 times the number of hours worked beyond the statutory maximum for
the applicable work cycle and may receive compensatory time in lieu of overtime
compensation if the employee and the appointing authority have reached
agreement to that effect prior to the work being actually performed.
   (e)   Maximum accrual of compensatory time. Employees otherwise entitled to
receive overtime compensation under this section, who are not represented by a
certified employee organization, may not accrue more than 120 hours of
compensatory time in a fiscal year. Compensatory time not used within the
fiscal year in which it is earned shall be converted to overtime compensation
and paid at the same rate before the end of the fiscal year.
   (f)   Premium pay. In this subsection, "premium pay" includes overtime,
acting-out-of-class pay, and call-in pay. Non-represented employees entitled to
receive premium pay are not entitled to duplication or pyramiding in the
computation of premium pay or other premium wages. If more than one premium pay
is applicable to any time worked by an employee, the employee shall be paid at
the higher rate.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-207) (Bill No. 73-92; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 43-00;
Bill No. 86-04; Bill No. 66-12; Bill No. 82-12; Bill No. 48-15; Bill No. 27-16;
Bill No. 51-22)
§ 6-1-212. Night shift differential pay.
   (a)   Eligibility. Except as provided in this section, an employee who is
required by the appointing authority to work on a shift on which the majority
of hours worked are after 4:00 p.m. and before 9:00 a.m. is entitled to be paid
7% more than the employee’s regular pay rate.
   (b)   Exceptions to eligibility. Subsection (a) does not apply to an
employee whose work week is designated hours as required; an employee whose
emergency assignment starts within or carries into the time period of 4:00 p.m.
to 9:00 a.m.; overtime work compensated at premium rates of pay, unless the
employee would otherwise have been entitled to night shift pay; or an employee
who is represented by a certified employee organization.
   (c)   Memorandum of agreement applicability. A represented employee shall
receive night shift differential pay as provided by the applicable memorandum
of agreement, negotiated and executed in accordance with Title 4, between the
County and an exclusive representative.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-208) (Bill No. 39-88; Bill No. 60-88; Bill No. 65-97;
Bill No. 40-99; Bill No. 70-00; Bill No. 52-02; Bill No. 34-04; Bill No. 46-11;
Bill No. 45-21)
§ 6-1-213. Call-in pay.
   (a)   Applicability. Subsections (a) and (b) apply only to a non-represented
employee who is in a position classified at or below grade 15 and whose work
week is not designated hours as required.
   (b)   Eligibility. An employee who is required to work on an emergency
assignment on a day other than the employee's regular work day is entitled to
compensation, at the equivalent hourly rate, for at least four hours of work.
   (c)   Memorandum of agreement applicability. Represented employees shall
receive call-in pay as provided by the applicable memoranda of agreement,
negotiated and executed in accordance with
Title 4, between the County and an exclusive representative.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-209) (Bill No. 45-89; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 70-00)
§ 6-1-214. On-call pay.
   (a)   Memorandum of agreement applicability. A represented employee shall
receive on- call pay in accordance with an applicable memorandum of agreement
negotiated and executed in accordance with Title 4, between the County and an
exclusive representative.
   (b)   Eligibility.
      (1)   Uniformed officers in the classification of Police Captain are
entitled to the same on-call pay afforded uniformed officers in the
classification of Police Sergeant under this section.
      (2)   Employees in the classification of Animal Control Supervisor are
entitled to receive on-call pay at the same rate that is paid to employees in
the classification of Animal Control Officer under this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-209.1) (Bill No. 34-04; Bill No. 59-06; Bill No. 46-11;
Bill No. 44-20; Bill No. 45-21)
§ 6-1-215. Out-of-class pay.
   (a)   Approval. The appointing authority of a non-represented employee may
approve the payment of out-of-class pay to that employee if the employee is
assigned temporarily to a position in the classified service or a position in
the exempt pay and benefit plan with a higher pay grade for a period of at
least five consecutive workdays.
   (b)   Assignment in the classified service with a higher pay grade. If a
non-represented employee is assigned temporarily to a position in the
classified service with a higher pay grade, the employee shall be paid for all
hours worked in the higher pay grade at 5% above the employee's regular pay
rate or at the minimum base pay for the position to which assigned, whichever
is greater. The entitlement to and rate for payment of overtime shall be
governed by the ordinances applicable to the position in the higher pay grade.
   (c)   Assignment in the exempt pay and benefit plan. If a non-represented
employee is assigned temporarily to a position in the exempt pay and benefit
plan, the employee shall be paid at a rate within the pay range for the
position in that plan that is at least 5% above the employee's regular pay
rate.
   (d)   Limitations on approval. The appointing authority may approve the
payment of out-of-class pay to a non-represented employee only if the position
to which the employee is assigned is vacant or if the employee regularly
assigned to the position is absent from duty, and if the position is an
authorized, budgeted position. The temporary assignment and out-of-class pay
may not be used as a substitute for reclassification or permanent appointment
to a position.
   (e)   Qualifications for assignment. Except as otherwise provided in a
memorandum of agreement, negotiated and executed under
Title 4, between the County and an exclusive representative, an employee may be
temporarily assigned to a position under this section only if the employee
meets the minimum qualifications of the position or meets any equivalent
combination of education and experience to substitute for the minimum
qualifications as determined by the Personnel Officer and is qualified to
perform all the duties of the position to which the employee is being
temporarily assigned.
   (f)   Memorandum of agreement applicability. Represented employees shall be
entitled to out-of-class pay or temporary transfer pay as provided by the
applicable memoranda of agreement, negotiated and executed in accordance with
Title 4, between the County and an exclusive representative.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-210) (Bill No. 4-95; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 70-00;
Bill No. 39-01; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-1-216. Flight pay.
   Represented employees whose pay grades are designated P-00, P-1B, P-2, or P-
3 shall be entitled to flight premium pay as provided by the applicable
memorandum of agreement, negotiated and executed between the County and an
exclusive representative in accordance with
Title 4.
(Bill No. 33-09; Bill No. 56-18; Bill No. 44-20)
§ 6-1-217. Allowances.
   (a)   Memorandum of agreement applicability. A represented employee shall
receive allowances in accordance with an applicable memorandum of agreement,
negotiated and executed in accordance with Title 4, between the County and an
exclusive representative.
   (b)   Allowances for Police Captain and Police Major. Uniformed officers in
the classifications of Police Captain and Police Major are entitled to the same
allowances afforded uniformed officers in the classification of Police Sergeant
under this section.
   (c)   Allowances for Fire Division Chief and Fire Deputy Chief. Uniformed
officers in the classifications of Fire Division Chief and Fire Deputy Chief
are entitled to the emergency medical technician-paramedic certification
allowance per year payable in 26 pay periods beginning the first full pay
period on or after July 1, 2023.
   (d)   Allowances for Animal Control Supervisor. Employees in the
classification of Animal Control Supervisor are entitled to the same allowances
provided to employees in the classification of Animal Control Officer.
   (e)   Allowances for certain represented employees in the “LM” pay grade.
      (1)   Certain employees in the classified service whose pay grades are
designated “LM” are entitled to an increase of 5% of their regular rate of pay
for all hours worked while assigned to the Fire Shop of the Central Services
Garage, as set forth in the applicable memorandum of agreement, negotiated and
executed in accordance with Title 4, between the County and AFSCME Local 582.
      (2)   Employees of the Detention Center who are in the classifications of
Storekeeper II, Facilities Maintenance Mechanic II or Facilities Maintenance
Mechanic III are entitled to 5% of their regular rate of pay for all hours
worked, as set forth in the applicable memorandum of agreement, negotiated and
executed in accordance with Title 4, between the County and AFSCME Local 582.
   (f)   Allowances for non-represented and exempt employees. Employees in the
classified service who are not represented by an exclusive representative and
employees in the exempt service who are designated by the appointing authority
to be and are certified in accordance with County policies and procedures to
provide foreign language services are entitled to an allowance as determined by
the appointing authority payable on a per day period basis.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-210.1) (Bill No. 43-00; Bill No. 70-00; Bill No. 39-01;
Bill No. 52-02; Bill No. 34-04; Bill No. 43-06; Bill No. 45-07; Bill No. 71-07;
Bill No. 51-10; Bill No. 46-11; Bill No. 57-13; Bill No. 45-15; Bill No. 47-16;
Bill No. 58-17; Bill No. 56-18; Bill No. 44-20; Bill No. 45-21; Bill No. 51-22;
Bill No. 44-23)
§ 6-1-218. Extra shift – Bonus payment.
   (a)   Memorandum of agreement applicability. Bonus pay shall be paid to
employees in the classifications of Fire Battalion Chief and Fire Battalion
Chief/Emergency Medical Technician- Paramedic as provided by the applicable
memorandum of agreement negotiated and executed under
Title 4.
   (b)   Non-represented employees. At the discretion of the Fire Chief, a non-
represented uniformed fire officer may receive a bonus for an additional tour
of duty worked beyond the officer’s regularly assigned shifts for the purpose
of covering a field operations vacancy; providing instruction to emergency
personnel; providing repair capability for emergency apparatus and facilities;
and responding to emergencies as part of a special tactical team. The bonus
amount shall follow the same pay schedule as permitted in subsection (a).
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-211) (Bill No. 65-96; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 75-02;
Bill No. 7-03; Bill No. 43-06; Bill No. 46-11; Bill No. 60-13; Bill No. 77-15;
Bill No. 44-23)
§ 6-1-219. Bonus pay.
   (a)   Generally. Subject to available appropriations, bonus pay may be paid
to one or more groups of employees in the classified service as provided in
this section.
   (b)   Memorandum of agreement applicability. Bonus pay shall be paid to
employees who are represented by a certified employee organization in
accordance with an applicable memorandum of agreement between the County and an
exclusive representative negotiated and signed under
Title 4.
   (c)   Non-represented employees. Bonus pay may be paid to employees who are
not represented by a certified employee organization, as determined by the
County Executive.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-212) (Bill No. 71-96)
§ 6-1-220. Stand-by pay.
   Department of Public Works, Department of Recreation and Parks, Office of
Central Services, and Office of Information Technology Employees who are not
represented by a certified employee organization and who are approved by the
Personnel Officer to receive stand-by pay may be paid stand-by pay at the rate
of $20 per shift up to 8 hours of stand-by time and $2.50 per hour or $1.25 per
half-hour of stand-by time thereafter.
(Bill No. 56-18; Bill No. 47-25)
SUBTITLE 3. BENEFITS
§ 6-1-301. Holidays.
   (a)   Recognized holidays. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
full-time employees in the classified service are entitled to holiday leave for
the following holidays:
      (1)   New Year's Day (January 1);
      (2)   Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday (third Monday in January);
      (3)   Washington's Birthday (third Monday in February);
      (4)   Good Friday;
      (5)   Memorial Day (last Monday in May);
      (6)    Juneteenth (June 19);
      (7)   Independence Day (July 4);
      (8)   Labor Day (first Monday in September);
      (9)   Veteran’s Day (November 11);
      (10)   Thanksgiving Day;
      (11)   Thanksgiving Friday;
      (12)   Christmas Day (December 25);
      (13)   the days of general and congressional elections, not including
primary elections, throughout the State; and
      (14)   the days that are designated as legal holidays for State employees
by the Governor and that are approved by the County Executive.
   (b)   Classified employees who are required to work on holidays. Except as
otherwise provided in a memorandum of agreement negotiated and signed under
Title 4 between the County and an exclusive representative, employees in the
classified positions identified by the Personnel Officer as regularly required
to work on holidays shall receive 16 additional days of annual leave each year
instead of holidays.
   (c)   Holidays falling on weekends or on regularly assigned day off. If a
legal holiday falls on a Sunday, the Monday next following shall be a holiday.
If a legal holiday falls on a Saturday, the Friday preceding shall be a
holiday. If a legal holiday falls on the regularly assigned day off, the
employee is entitled to appropriate time off with pay.
   (d)   Holidays occurring during approved leave. Holidays that occur during a
period of approved leave are not charged as leave.
   (e)   Rate of pay. An employee shall be paid the employee's regular rate of
pay for each holiday unless the employee is on an unauthorized leave of absence
or on disciplinary suspension on the employee's regularly scheduled work day
immediately before or after the holiday. An employee on disability leave
probation who takes disability leave on the employee's regularly scheduled work
day immediately before or after a holiday is considered to take an unauthorized
leave of absence unless the Personnel Officer approved the disability leave
based on extenuating circumstances.
   (f)   Part-time employees. Part-time employees who work at least 50% of the
normal work week are entitled to a prorated amount of additional annual leave
instead of holidays. An appointing authority may require the use of the annual
leave on the County holiday that generates the leave if the holiday occurs on
the part-time employee's regularly scheduled work day.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-301) (Bill No. 87-86; Bill No. 45-89; Bill No. 57-90;
Bill No. 100-92; Bill No. 26-93; Bill No. 34-93; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 34-
04; Bill No. 69-19 ; Bill No. 9-22 )
§ 6-1-302. Annual leave.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsections (a)(2), (a)(3), and (a)(4), full-
time represented employees accrue annual leave as follows:
 
Years of Continuous Service Number of Working Days of Leave per Year
Less than 5                 10
5 to less than 10           15
10 to less than 20          20
20 or more                  25
 
      (2)   (i)   Full-time employees represented by AFSCME Local 582 and
AFSCME Local 2563 accrue annual leave as follows:
 
Years of Continuous Service Number of Working Days of Leave per Year
Less than 5                 13
5 to less than 10           15
10 to less than 20          20
20 or more                  26
 
         (ii)   Effective the first full pay period beginning on or after
January 1, 2026, full-time employees represented by AFSCME Local 582 and AFSCME
Local 2563 accrue annual leave as follows:
 
Years of Continuous Service Number of Working Days of Leave per Year
Less than 5                 13
5 to less than 10           16
10 to less than 15          20
15 to less than 20          23
20 or more                  26
 
      (3)   Full-time non-represented employees and employees in the
classifications of Fire Battalion Chief, Fire Battalion Chief/Emergency Medical
Technician-Paramedic, Police Lieutenant, Park Ranger I, Park Ranger II, and
Deputy Sheriff III accrue annual leave as follows:
 
Years of Continuous Service Number of Working Days of Leave per Year
Less than 3                 13
3 to less than 15           20
15 or more                  26
 
      (4)   (i)   Effective the first full pay period beginning on or after
January 1, 2025, full-time employees in the classification of Deputy Sheriff,
Deputy Sheriff Corporal, and Deputy Sheriff Sergeant accrue annual leave as
follows:
 
Years of Continuous Service Number of Working Days of Leave per Year
Less than 5                 13
5 to less than 10           15
10 to less than 20          20
20 or more                  26
 
         (ii)   Effective the first full pay period beginning on or after
January 1, 2026, full-time employees in the classification of Deputy Sheriff,
Deputy Sheriff Corporal, Deputy Sheriff Sergeant, and Deputy Sheriff Lieutenant
accrue annual leave as follows:
 
Years of Continuous Service Number of Working Days of Leave per Year
Less than 5                 13
5 to less than 10           17
10 to less than 20          21
20 or more                  26
 
   (b)   Part-time employees. Part-time employees who work at least 50% of the
normal work week accrue prorated annual leave in accordance with this section.
   (c)   Approval of annual leave. Annual leave shall be taken at the times
approved or directed by the appointing authority.
   (d)   Accumulation of annual leave. Employees eligible to accumulation
annual leave may not carry over more than 40 days of annual leave into a pay
period calendar year.
   (e)   Advance of annual leave. During a calendar year an employee may be
granted an advance of annual leave that would be accumulated by the end of the
pay period calendar year.
   (f)   Memorandum of agreement applicability for F pay schedule employees.
Represented employees on the F pay schedule shall earn and be charged annual
leave in accordance with the applicable memorandum of agreement negotiated and
executed under
Title 4.
   (g)   Payment upon leaving County service. An employee shall be paid for
annual leave earned but not taken at the time the employee leaves County
service, including annual leave earned but not taken in the year in which the
employee leaves County service.
   (h)   Reimbursement for unearned leave taken. An employee who has been paid
for leave taken but not earned shall, upon separation from County service,
reimburse that amount to the County.
   (i)   Donation of annual leave. Annual leave may be donated and used as
approved or directed by the Office of Personnel or as provided for in a
memorandum of agreement, negotiated and executed in accordance with
Title 4, between the County and an exclusive representative.
   (j)   Payment upon employee's death. If separation from employment occurs as
a result of the employee's death, payment under subsection (g) for annual leave
earned but not taken at the time of death shall be made to the former
employee's beneficiary designated under
Article 5 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-302) (Bill No. 60-88; Bill No. 45-89; Bill No. 73-92;
Bill No. 34-93; Bill No. 13-94; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 39-01; Bill No. 89-01;
Bill No. 94-01; Bill No. 67-03; Bill No. 34-04; Bill No. 86-04; Bill No. 2-07;
Bill No. 46-11; Bill No. 53-12; Bill No. 58-13; Bill No. 44-16; Bill No. 58-17;
Bill No. 58-19; Bill No. 44-20; Bill No. 44-23; Bill No. 4-24; Bill No. 51-24;
Bill No. 47-25)
§ 6-1-303. Disability leave.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following terms have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Child" means:
         (i)   a biological child, an adopted child, a foster child, or a
stepchild of the employee;
         (ii)   a child for whom the employee has legal or physical custody or
guardianship; or
         (iii)   a child for whom the employee stands in loco parentis,
regardless of the child's age.
      (2)   "Domestic violence" means abuse of a "person eligible for relief",
as that term is defined in § 4-501(m) of the Family Law Article of the State
Code.
      (3)   "Family member" means:
         (i)   a child;
         (ii)   a biological parent, an adoptive parent, a foster parent, or a
step-parent of the employee or of the employee's spouse;
         (iii)   a legal guardian of the employee;
         (iv)   an individual who acted as a parent of or stood in loco
parentis to the employee or the employee's spouse when the employee or the
employee's spouse was a minor;
         (v)   the spouse of the employee;
         (vi)   a biological grandparent, an adopted grandparent, a foster
grandparent, or a step-grandparent of the employee;
         (vii)   a biological grandchild, an adopted grandchild, a foster
grandchild, or a step-grandchild of the employee; or
         (viii)   a biological sibling, an adopted sibling, a foster sibling,
or a step-sibling of the employee.
      (4)   "Sexual assault" means rape, sexual offense, or any other act that
is a sexual crime under Title 3, Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law Article of the
State Code; child sexual abuse under § 3-602 of the Criminal Law Article of the
State Code; or sexual abuse of a vulnerable adult under § 3-604 of the Criminal
Law Article of the State Code.
      (5)   "Stalking" has the meaning stated in § 3-802 of the Criminal Law
Article of the State Code.
   (b)   Generally. All full-time employees on the hourly, weekly, or semi-
monthly payroll earn disability leave at the rate of 1.25 work days for each
full month of service to a maximum of 15 days a year.
   (c)   Part-time employees.
      (1)   Part-time employees who work at least 50% of the normal work week
earn a prorated amount of disability leave in accordance with this section.
      (2)   For part-time employees who regularly work at least 12 hours per
week but less than 50% of the normal work week, disability leave shall be
administered in a manner that meets the minimum requirements of and is
consistent with State law.
   (d)   Represented employees on the F pay schedule. Represented employees on
the F pay schedule shall earn and be charged disability leave in accordance
with the applicable memorandum of agreement negotiated and executed under Title
4.
   (e)   Accumulation and carry over. Employees may accumulate and carry over
disability leave into a new calendar year without restriction on the total
amount of accumulation.
   (f)   Availability of accumulated disability leave.
      (1)   Accumulated disability leave is available for use:
         (i)   for the care or treatment of the employee for a mental or
physical illness, injury, or condition;
         (ii)   for the birth, adoption or foster placement of a child for up
to six calendar weeks or for any longer period during which leave is being
taken in accordance with a disability certificate completed by a medical
practitioner pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act;
         (iii)   for the care or treatment of the employee’s family member for
a mental or physical illness, injury, or condition;
         (iv)   when, through exposure to a contagious disease, the presence of
the employee at the post of duty would jeopardize fellow employees;
         (v)   for preventive medical, dental, or optical care, examination or
treatment for the employee or the employee’s family member;
         (vi)   for donation and use as approved or directed by the Office of
Personnel or as provided for in a memorandum of agreement negotiated and signed
in accordance with Title 4; and
         (vii)   for an absence from work due to domestic violence, sexual
assault, or stalking committed against the employee or the employee’s family
member, if the leave is being used:
            1.   by the employee to obtain for the employee or the employee’s
family member:
               A.   medical or mental health attention that is related to the
domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking;
               B.   services from a victim services organization related to the
domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking; or
               C.   legal services or proceedings related to or resulting from
the domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking; or
            2.   during the time that the employee has temporarily relocated
due to the domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking.
      (2)   Whenever disability leave is taken for a medical, dental, or
optical appointment, the request must be made prior to the beginning of the
absence and supported by evidence of the appointment. Whenever possible,
examinations or treatments shall be scheduled on non-work days.
   (g)   Disability occurring while on annual leave. If an employee becomes
disabled or quarantined while on annual leave, the period of disability or
quarantine may be charged to disability leave if the employee submits a written
certification from the employee's physician or other recognized practitioner
confirming the employee's disability or quarantine and the length of the
confinement.
   (h)   Certification of disability. Except as provided in subsections (i),
(j), and (k), the employee's personal certification is sufficient to support a
charge to disability leave for an absence of three working days or less.
Absence resulting in a charge to disability leave of more than three working
days, must be supported by a medical certificate attesting to the incapacity of
the employee. On recovery from the disability, the employee shall submit a
statement from the attending physician attesting to the employee's ability to
resume the duties of the employee's position. The Personnel Officer may require
the employee to undergo a physical examination by the County's physician to
determine the employee's capability of resuming the duties of the employee's
position.
   (i)   Disability leave abuse.
      (1)   "Disability leave abuse" means:
         (i)   a consistent pattern of disability leave use, including leave
use occurring before or after regularly scheduled days off, including holidays
and weekends;
         (ii)   the use of disability leave as fast as it is accrued or regular
requests for advance disability leave; or
         (iii)   failure to provide the required medical certificate from a
physician or other health care provider for absences requiring a medical
certificate.
      (2)   The appointing authority may request a medical certificate to
justify any period of absence if the appointing authority has reason to believe
that there has been disability leave abuse.
      (3)   The appointing authority may take disciplinary action if the
appointing authority has reason to believe that there has been disability leave
abuse. In determining the severity of the discipline, the appointing authority
shall consider the nature and gravity of the offense; the employee's disability
leave record; the employee's work record; and any other factors, including
extenuating or mitigating circumstances presented by the employee.
   (j)   Report and recommendation of Personnel Officer. The appointing
authority shall report to the Personnel Officer an employee who loses excessive
time from employment or appears to be suffering from a mental or physical
disability that interferes with satisfactory job performance. The Personnel
Officer shall conduct the necessary investigation and make appropriate
recommendations to the appointing authority for disability leave,
accommodation, disciplinary action, or removal of the employee. The Personnel
Officer may require the employee to undergo additional examinations to
determine suitability for retention in active County service.
   (k)   Advancement of disability leave. Disability leave may be advanced by
the appointing authority with the approval of the Personnel Officer if all of
the following conditions are met:
      (1)   All available accumulated disability leave to the employee's
account must be exhausted.
      (2)   The amount of disability leave advanced to an employee's account
may not exceed 30 days at any time.
      (3)   Where it is known that the employee is to be retired or where it is
anticipated that the employee is to be separated, the total advance may not
exceed an amount that can be liquidated by subsequent accrual prior to the
separation.
      (4)   There must be a reasonable assurance that the employee will return
to duty.
      (5)   A medical certificate attesting to the necessity for the absence
shall support the request for advance disability leave.
      (6)   All advance disability leave unearned at the termination of
employment shall be reimbursed to the County at the employee's daily rate of
pay.
      (7)   Only employees with permanent status are eligible to receive
advance disability leave.
      (8)   The employee has not been required to provide a medical certificate
under subsection (i).
      (9)   There has not been disability leave abuse by the employee in the
previous 12-month period.
   (l)   Payment for certain employees for disability leave earned but not
taken.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, employees are not entitled to
be paid for disability leave upon separation.
      (2)   On and after September 1, 1986, a management, professional, or
confidential employee and employees in the classifications of Fire Battalion
Chief and Fire Battalion Chief/Emergency Medical Technician-Paramedic, Police
Sergeant and Police Lieutenant shall be paid $25 for each day of disability
leave earned but not taken:
         (i)   at the time of retirement; or
         (ii)   at the time of leaving County service, if at the time of
leaving the employee has acquired vested rights in the pension plan in which
the employee is a participant and the employee elects not to withdraw from the
plan.
      (3)   The employee shall be paid for leave earned before September 1,
1986, not to exceed 10 days leave; and leave earned on and after September 1,
1986.
      (4)   Nothing in this subsection affects an employee's right to receive a
refund of the employee's contributions to the pension plan in which the
employee is a participant, provided that any refund of contributions shall be
reduced by the amount of any prior payment to the employee for unused
disability leave.
      (5)   If separation from employment occurs as a result of death, payment
under this subsection for disability leave earned but not taken at the time of
death shall be made to the former employee's beneficiary designated under
Article 5 of this Code.
   (m)   Annual leave conversion into disability leave. Annual leave
accumulated by a non- represented employee or an employee in the classification
of Deputy Sheriff I, Deputy Sheriff Corporal, Deputy Sheriff II, Deputy Sheriff
III, Park Ranger I, Park Ranger II, Police Officer, Police Officer First Class,
Police Corporal, Police Sergeant, or Police Lieutenant, or in a classification
on the OS, F, LM or FW pay schedule, which exceeds the maximum carry over limit
of 35 days per calendar year as provided by §
6-1-302(d), will be converted to disability leave.
   (n)   Application of unused disability leave to pension plan. Unused
disability leave may be applied as credited service under the applicable
pension plan in accordance with §
5-1-205(c) of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-303) (Bill No. 52-86; Bill No. 74-86; Bill No. 60-88;
Bill No. 45-89; Bill No. 57-90; Bill No. 94-93; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 79-98;
Bill No. 43-00; Bill No. 46-00; Bill No. 39-01; Bill No. 89-01; Bill No. 52-02;
Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 34-04; Bill No. 86-04; Bill No. 59-06; Bill No. 46-11;
Bill No. 58-13; Bill No. 58-17; Bill No. 56-18; Bill No. 58-19; Bill No. 70-19;
Bill No. 44-20; Bill No. 45-21; Bill No. 51-22; Bill No. 44-23; Bill No. 82-23)
§ 6-1-304. Leave without pay.
   (a)   Generally. An employee may apply to the appointing authority for leave
without pay for personal reasons. The appointing authority may authorize the
leave for periods not to exceed 20 work days in a calendar year.
   (b)   Extended leave without pay. In addition to the leave granted under the
provisions of subsection (a), requests for leave of absence without pay for not
more than 40 work days in a calendar year may be granted by the appointing
authority with the approval of the Personnel Officer and, in cases of extreme
and warranted need, leave without pay for more than 40 work days in a calendar
year may be granted by the Personnel Officer with the approval of the Chief
Administrative Officer.
   (c)   Return to former position after extended leave without pay. An
employee who is granted leave without pay for more than 60 work days is not
guaranteed to be restored to the position that the employee left, unless the
employee has left the County in good standing and the position is vacant and
available or the employee is entitled to reinstatement rights under other law.
If an employee on approved leave without pay for more than 60 days is not
restored to the position left and the employee applies for and meets the
minimum qualifications for the position, the employee shall be afforded
priority employment consideration for a period of one year from termination.
   (d)   Effect on seniority and vacation accrual. Unless otherwise provided by
other law, an employee who has been on an approved leave without pay and
returns to active County service within one year from the date granted leave
without pay shall be entitled to seniority and vacation accrual based only on
the total years of active County service, and not for the period of leave
without pay.
   (e)   Effect on annual or disability leave, and holiday pay. An employee on
leave without pay in excess of 60 days may not accrue annual or disability
leave credits, and is not entitled to holiday pay.
   (f)   Health plan premium. Employees on leave without pay shall pay the full
health plan premium cost beginning the first day of the month following the
60th day of leave without pay, except that, in cases of extreme and compelling
need, the Chief Administrative Officer may decrease or eliminate an employee's
share of the premium cost.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-304) (Bill No. 57-90; Bill No. 58-91; Bill No. 73-92;
Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 79-98; Bill No. 89-01)
§ 6-1-305. Miscellaneous leave.
   (a)   Memorandum of agreement applicability. For employees represented by an
exclusive representative, miscellaneous leave shall be as provided in a
memorandum of agreement, negotiated and signed under
Title 4, between the County and an exclusive representative.
   (b)   Non-represented employees. For employees who are not represented by an
exclusive representative, miscellaneous leave shall be as provided in this
subsection.
      (1)   An employee who serves as a member of a jury may be absent from
work without loss of pay or charge to leave. If an employee is excused and
released by the court for a day or substantial portion of a day, the employee
shall return to duty. Failure to return to duty when possible shall result in
charge to annual leave.
      (2)   An employee who is to appear before a court, public body, or
commission in connection with County business may be granted the necessary time
off regularly scheduled hours of work without loss of pay or charge to leave.
      (3)   Leave with pay shall be granted in an amount not to exceed 20 days
in a calendar year to an employee who is a member of the reserve components of
the armed forces when called upon to perform active military duty, including
duty on the active list, full-time training duty, annual training duty, and
attendance at military schools. An employee entering extended active service in
the armed forces is entitled to unpaid leave of absence and re-employment
rights as provided by federal law. The employee shall furnish to the Personnel
Officer a copy of the orders calling the employee to active military duty.
      (4)   On the death of the spouse, child, stepchild, grandchild, brother,
brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, parent, stepparent, foster parent,
parent-in-law, guardian, grandparent, or grandparent-in-law of a permanent
employee, the appointing authority may grant the employee not more than three
work days of leave with pay.
      (5)   (i)   Full-time employees who do not receive additional leave under
§
6-1-301(b) shall be credited with five paid personal leave days at the
beginning of each pay period calendar year.
         (ii)   Paid personal leave days shall be prorated at the time of
commencement of employment as follows:
            1.   Employees commencing employment between January 1 and March 31
shall receive five personal leave days;
            2.   Employees commencing employment between April 1 and June 30
shall receive three personal leave days;
            3.   Employees commencing employment between July 1 and August 31
shall receive two personal leave days; and
            4.   Employees commencing employment between September 1 and
December 31 shall receive one personal leave day.
         (iii)   Paid personal leave days must be used in the pay period
calendar year in which they are credited.
         (iv)   Employees may not be paid or otherwise compensated for unused
personal leave days.
   (c)   Military leave. For any employee who is not otherwise covered by civic
leave under a memorandum of agreement and is activated to military service
pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United States
declaring a national emergency, during the period of such activation, the
employee shall be granted civic leave and, if the employee's base pay with the
County is more than the employee's military pay and allowances, be paid the
difference between the employee's base pay rate and the employee's military pay
and allowances. The employee shall furnish to the Personnel Officer a copy of
the military orders calling the employee to active duty and official
verification of the military pay and allowances.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-305) (Bill No. 60-88; Bill No. 32-89; Bill No. 65-97;
Bill No. 89-01; Bill No. 69-19)
§ 6-1-306. Administrative leave.
   An employee may be granted administrative leave with pay by the Chief
Administrative Officer under any circumstances that the Chief Administrative
Officer considers appropriate.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-305.1) (Bill No. 32-89)
§ 6-1-307. Education assistance.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “direct tuition costs” do not include
textbooks, laboratory fees, and other expenses.
   (b)   Generally.
      (1)   Subject to the conditions provided in this section, a full-time
employee who is in good standing is entitled to reimbursement of direct tuition
costs incurred on satisfactory completion of each course of study that is
approved by the Office of Personnel as directly related to the employee’s
current work assignment; related to a type of work to which the employee may
reasonably be expected to progress; or a required course in an approved degree
or certificate program from an accredited college, university, or learning
institution.
      (2)   An employee who is a member of IAFF Local 1563, FODCOP, IUPA 141,
or AFSCME Local 582 is entitled to a reimbursement of 65%.
      (3)   An employee who is a member of Teamsters Local 355 on behalf of the
Correctional Program Specialists is entitled to reimbursement of 75%.
      (4)   An employee who is a member of FOP Lodge 70 is entitled to a
reimbursement of 100% for a grade of “C” or higher, or for a grade of
satisfactory, and no reimbursement for a grade lower than a grade of “C” or
“satisfactory”.
      (5)   An employee who is not a member of an employee organization
specified in subsections (b)(2) through (b)(4) is entitled to a reimbursement
of 100% for a grade of “A”; 75% for a grade of “B”; 65% for a grade of
“satisfactory”; 50% for a grade of “C”, except that an employee who is
represented by Teamsters 355 on behalf of Park Rangers I and II and Police
Communications Operators III and IV, or by Fraternal Order of Police, Anne
Arundel County Lodge 106—Sheriff’s Office is entitled to 65% for a grade of
“C”; and 0% for a grade lower than a grade of “C”.
   (c)   Authorization for reimbursement. Authorization for reimbursement is
contingent on the availability of funds appropriated for the purpose of
educational assistance under this section and the written approval of the
appointing authority or designee of the appointing authority and the Personnel
Officer or designee of the Personnel Officer.
   (d)   Limitation on reimbursement. In each fiscal year, reimbursement for
direct tuition costs is limited to:
      (1)   $800 for an employee who is a member of FODCOP, IUPA 141, or
Teamsters Local 355 on behalf of the Correctional Program Specialists;
      (2)   $1,200 an employee who is a member of AFSCME Local 2563, AFSCME
Local 582, IAFF Local 1563, or any other represented employee who is a member
of a certified employee organization not identified in subsections (d)(1) and
(d)(3); and
      (3)   $2,000 for an employee who is a member of FOP Lodge 70, or an
employee who is not a member of an employee organization specified in
subsections (d)(1) and (d)(2).
   (e)   Conditions for reimbursement. Subject to the conditions provided in
this section, reimbursement shall be made after successful completion of each
individual course of study. Certified evidence of completion of a course and of
payment of tuition must be submitted to the Controller before reimbursement.
   (f)   Successful completion. Successful completion of a course requires
achievement of at least the grade of C, 2.0 points, or, if a pass/fail system,
a pass.
   (g)   Reimbursement for approved courses taken before July 1, 1992. An
employee who receives a degree or certification in accordance with subsection
(b) who received partial reimbursement for approved courses taken before July
1, 1992 is entitled to an additional reimbursement in the amount previously
paid for the courses taken prior to July 1, 1992.
   (h)   Part-time employees. A part-time employee in good standing who works
at least 50% of the normal work week is entitled to receive prorated
reimbursement of direct tuition cost in accordance with this section.
   (i)   Set-off for other assistance. In the event that an employee is
receiving tuition assistance from another governmental or institutional source,
or some other form of grant, the employee will be reimbursed for only those
direct tuition costs not covered by such assistance.
   (j)   Effect of leaving classified service. An employee who leaves the
classified service prior to actual reimbursement is not entitled to
reimbursement.
   (k)   Reimbursement to County. Unless separated from County service because
of a layoff or other reduction in force, an employee who does not remain active
in County service for a period of at least one calendar year following the
completion of a course or courses for which the employee has received
reimbursement for costs under this section shall, upon separation from County
service, reimburse the County an amount equal to that paid to the employee
under this section during the 12 months immediately preceding separation from
County service.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-306) (Bill No. 60-88; Bill No. 67-92; Bill No. 34-93;
Bill No. 43-00; Bill No. 52-02; Bill No. 67-03; Bill No. 34-04; Bill No. 43-06;
Bill No. 69-06; Bill No. 87-06; Bill No. 41-07; Bill No. 86-07; Bill No. 58-19;
Bill No. 45-21; Bill No. 51-22; Bill No. 44-23)
§ 6-1-308. County Employee and Retiree Health Benefits Program.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Actual plan service" has the meaning stated in §
5-1-101 of this Code defining a type of credited service recognized for
purposes of determining the entitlement to a pension benefit under
Article 5 of this Code.
      (2)   "Child" includes an adopted child, biological child, or stepchild.
      (3)   "Comparable" means substantially the same, but not identical,
benefits, coverage and services as a current plan, either in or out of State.
      (4)   "Connector entity" means an organization that identifies and
provides information on qualified individual navigator entities and health
insurance exchanges to individuals seeking to enroll in a health care plan.
      (5)   "Credited service" has the meaning stated in §
5-1-101 of this Code defining the period of service recognized for purposes of
determining the entitlement to a pension benefit under
Article 5 of this Code.
      (6)   "Dependent" means a person entitled to receive health insurance
benefits under the Program based on a familial relationship with an employee or
retiree receiving health insurance benefits under the Program.
      (7)   "DROP participant period" has the meaning stated in §
5-1-501(4) of this Code defining the term that an employee participates in the
Deferred Retirement Option Program under
Article 5 of this Code.
      (8)   "Employee" means:
         (i)   a person currently employed by an employer;
         (ii)   the Anne Arundel County State's Attorney;
         (iii)   the Anne Arundel County Sheriff; and
         (iv)   an employee of the Anne Arundel County Board of License
Commissioners eligible to participate in the Employee's Retirement Plan under
Article 5 of this Code.
      (9)   "Employee health insurance plan" means a health insurance plan
available to employees and their dependents.
      (10)   "Employer" means:
         (i)   Anne Arundel County, Maryland;
         (ii)   the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County;
         (iii)   the Office of the Anne Arundel County State's Attorney;
         (iv)   the Office of the Anne Arundel County Sheriff; and
         (v)   the Anne Arundel County Soil Conservation District.
      (11)   "Employer subsidy" means that portion of the annual costs of
providing benefits under a plan to be paid by an employer as determined in
accordance with subsection (i).
      (12)   "Health insurance benefit options" means the types and components
of health insurance plans offered to employees and retirees, including:
         (i)   the structures of health insurance plans, which may include
health maintenance organizations, participating provider organizations, point
of service plans, fee for service plans, and consumer-directed health plans;
         (ii)   covered benefits, including medical, dental, prescription drug,
and vision benefits, and the manner of providing the covered benefits,
including group health plans and health insurance exchanges;
         (iii)   cost-sharing plan features, including deductibles, co-pays,
coinsurance, and out-of-pocket maximums; and
         (iv)   cost-controlling plan features, including prior approval
requirements, prescription formularies, and exclusions of treatments and
services.
      (13)   "Health insurance plan" means the health insurance benefit options
available to a participant under the Program.
      (14)   "Medicare supplement" means a health insurance plan that
supplements the benefits available under Medicare with the County or other
insurer as a secondary payer and may include:
         (i)   a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes prescription drug
coverage;
         (ii)   a Medicare Advantage Plan that does not include prescription
drug coverage in addition to prescription drug coverage; or
         (iii)   a Medicare Supplement Plan F in addition to prescription drug
coverage.
The prescription drug coverage may be provided through an employer group waiver
plan.
      (15)   "Navigator entity" means a community-based organization or other
entity or partnership that employs or engages individuals to assist with the
identification of and enrollment in a qualified health care plan or health
insurance exchange as well as providing counseling on tax implications of the
plan selection and evaluation of employer-sponsored plans.
      (16)   "Participant" means a person receiving health insurance benefits
under the Program.
      (17)   "Program" means the County Employee and Retiree Health Benefits
Program.
      (18)   "Retiree" means a former employee other than a school crossing
guard who receives a pension under Article 5 of this Code, including a pension
based on a service-connected or non-service connected disability. "Retiree"
also includes a former employee of the Domestic Relations Division of the Anne
Arundel County Circuit Court eligible to participate in a County retiree health
insurance plan under the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, § 2-510(e) of
the State Code.
      (19)   "Retiree health insurance plan" means a health insurance plan
available to retirees and their dependents and to survivors of employees and
retirees, and does not include a Medicare supplement.
      (20)   "Survivor" means a person entitled to receive health insurance
benefits under the Program based on the death of a family member who was an
employee or retiree who participated in the Program.
      (21)   "Terminated vested employee" means a former employee who, prior to
termination, vested in the benefits of the Employees' Retirement Plan or the
Detention Officers' and Deputy Sheriffs' Retirement Plan and is eligible to
receive a pension under Article 5 of this Code on the date specified in the
Plan.
      (22)   "Transferred service" has the meaning stated in §
5-1-101 of this Code defining a type of credited service recognized for the
purposes of determining the entitlement to a pension under Article 5 of this
Code.
   (b)   Establishment and status of Program.
      (1)   There is a County Employee and Retiree Health Benefits Program
administered by the Personnel Officer that shall include insurance for medical
care and prescription drugs and may include insurance for dental and vision
care as provided in this section.
      (2)   (i)   Employer subsidies for and components of the health insurance
plan available to employees who are represented by an exclusive employee
representative under Title 4 and their eligible dependents are subjects of
collective bargaining to the extent provided by, and subject to, applicable
federal, State, and County laws, including §§
811 and
812 of the Charter.
         (ii)   Collective bargaining regarding components of the health
insurance plan available to employees who are represented by an exclusive
employee representative under Title 4 shall be conducted by the County, jointly
with all exclusive employee representatives recognized by the County, during a
period of time commencing 18 months prior to the expiration of a health
insurance plan or a prescription drug plan. Collective bargaining regarding
employer subsidies for the health insurance plan available to employees who are
represented by an exclusive employee representative under Title 4 shall be
conducted by the County with all exclusive employee representatives recognized
by the County during each collective bargaining cycle.
         (iii)   Employer subsidies and components of the Program for retirees,
survivors, and employees not represented by an exclusive representative
selected in accordance with Title 4 may not be subject to collective
bargaining. Nothing in §
6-1-308 may be construed to void, cancel, or make unenforceable any provision
of a memorandum of agreement between the County and an exclusive employee
representative regarding retiree health benefits that was in effect prior to
July 7, 2019, subject to the eligibility requirements of subsection (i). In
addition, no changes may be made to an employer subsidy applicable to a retiree
after the retiree retires, although changes may be made to the employer subsidy
applicable to the dependents of a retiree after the retiree retires.
         (iv)   Before collective bargaining over any component of the health
insurance plan or a prescription drug plan, the Personnel Officer shall
consider and answer requests for County data and information by or on behalf of
exclusive representatives on health insurance benefit options and the health
insurance plan that, on behalf of the County, the Personnel Officer proposes to
offer to employees for the next plan year. The Personnel Officer may not
unreasonably withhold or deny any request for County data and information that
is available to and used by the County with respect to design, management, or
administration of the County Health Benefits Program.
         (v)   Components of the health insurance plan subject to collective
bargaining under §
6-1-308(b)(2) shall be made available to all employees of the County, whether
or not they are represented under Title 4.
      (3)   The County retains the discretion prior to the start of each plan
year to make changes to the Program by ordinance, subject to the duty to
collectively bargain set forth in §
6-1-308(b)(2)(i), if the changes are enacted by the County Council at least 60
days before the start of the plan year, and are consistent with the Charter.
      (4)   Nothing in §
6-1-308 shall convey to an exclusive employee representative any right to
demand or participate in binding arbitration over employer subsidies for or
components of health insurance plans except as authorized under §
812 of the Charter. Any arbitration decision involving a component of a health
insurance plan issued pursuant to §
812 of the Charter shall be applied equally to all employee groups.
   (c)   Participation in the Program; limitations on eligibility to
participate because of other or duplicate health care insurance.
      (1)    Effective January 1, 2016, an employee eligible to participate in
the Program who is the spouse of another employee who also is eligible to
participate in the Program shall be covered under the employee's own plan
unless an election is made by the spouse to cover the employee under the
spouse's plan, in which case the employee shall be covered as a spouse but is
not entitled to any payment or credit for declining coverage as an employee.
      (2)   A child or grandchild eligible to participate in the Program may be
covered only under the plan of one employee or retiree.
      (3)   A retiree eligible to participate in the Program shall be covered
under the plan of a spouse who is an employee eligible to participate in the
Program unless the retiree makes an election in the manner required by the
Office of Personnel to participate under the provisions of this section
applicable to a retiree.
      (4)    There may not be a duplication of benefits for any person under
multiple health insurance plans and, if a participant other than an employee is
also covered by a plan other than a County plan, then that other plan shall be
considered to be the primary payer unless prohibited by law.
   (d)   Participation; eligibility of employees and certain survivors.
      (1)   A person is eligible to participate in an employee health insurance
plan if the person is:
         (i)    a full-time employee or a part-time employee who works 50% or
more of the work week for the employee's position, provided the employee is:
            1.   a classified employee;
            2.   an exempt employee in a position authorized under §
6-2-101, §
6-2-103, §
6-2-104, or §
6-2-105;
            3.   an employee of the Anne Arundel County Board of License
Commissioners eligible to participate in the employee's retirement plan under
Article 5 of this Code;
            4.   the State's Attorney;
            5.   a deputy State's Attorney or Assistant State's Attorney
appointed under the Criminal Procedure Article, § 15-403(c)(1)(i) or § 15-403
(c)(1)(ii) of the State Code;
            6.   the sheriff;
            7.   a chief deputy appointed under Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Article, § 2-315(c)(2) of State Code; or
            8.   the County Executive;
         (ii)   an employee whose eligibility to participate is mandatory under
State or federal law; or
         (iii)   an employee paid under the Miscellaneous Exempt Employees Pay
and Benefit Plan who is eligible to participate in accordance with the rules
and regulations for miscellaneous exempt employees adopted by the Personnel
Officer under subsection (n)(8).
      (2)   A surviving spouse of an employee who died while employed by an
employer is eligible to participate in the Program in a retiree health
insurance plan or a Medicare supplement if the spouse receives periodic payment
of a death benefit as a surviving spouse under Article 5 of this Code, not
including payment of a lump sum death benefit.
      (3)   A surviving unmarried minor child of an employee who died while
employed by an employer is eligible to participate in a retiree health
insurance plan if the child or the surviving spouse of the employee receives
periodic payment of a death benefit as a surviving child under Article 5 of
this Code, not including payment of a lump sum death benefit.
   (e)   Participation; eligibility of retirees, terminated vested employees,
and certain survivors.
      (1)   An employee hired before January 1, 2015 other than a school
crossing guard or County Executive who retires on or before January 1, 2017 is
eligible upon retirement to participate in a retiree health insurance plan or a
Medicare supplement if the employee is entitled to receive a pension benefit
under Article 5 of this Code and if the employee was not a terminated vested
employee.
      (2)   An employee hired before January 1, 2015 other than a school
crossing guard or County Executive who retires after January 1, 2017 is
eligible upon retirement to participate in a retiree health insurance plan or a
Medicare supplement if the employee is entitled to receive a pension benefit
under Article 5 of this Code and had at least ten years of credited service or
retired as a result of a disability and if the employee was not a terminated
vested employee.
      (3)   An employee hired on or after January 1, 2015 other than a school
crossing guard or County Executive is eligible upon retirement to participate
in a retiree health insurance plan or a Medicare supplement if the employee is
entitled to receive a pension benefit under Article 5 of this Code and had at
least ten years of actual plan service or retired as a result of a disability
and if the employee was not a terminated vested employee.
      (4)   A terminated vested employee hired before January 1, 2014 is
eligible upon retirement to participate in a retiree health insurance plan or a
Medicare supplement. A terminated vested employee hired on or after January 1,
2014 is not eligible upon retirement to participate in a retiree health
insurance plan or Medicare supplement.
      (5)   A surviving spouse of a retiree is eligible to participate in a
retiree health insurance plan or a Medicare supplement if the spouse receives a
pension benefit as a surviving spouse under Article 5 of this Code.
      (6)   A surviving unmarried minor child of a retiree is eligible to
participate in a retiree health insurance plan if the surviving minor child
receives a pension payment as a surviving child under Article 5 of this Code or
is the child of a surviving spouse eligible to participate under subsection
(5).
      (7)   A County Executive who has eight years of actual plan service may
participate in the plan.
   (f)   Participation; eligibility of dependents of employees and retirees.
      (1)   The legal spouse of an employee or retiree as recognized in the
State of Maryland, not including a common law spouse, is eligible to
participate in the Program.
      (2)   The child of an employee or retiree is eligible to participate in
the Program until the end of the month in which the child turns age 26.
      (3)   The child of an employee or retiree is eligible to participate in
the Program regardless of age if the employee or retiree may claim the child as
a dependent for federal income tax purposes under regulations published by the
Internal Revenue Service.
      (4)   The grandchild of an employee or retiree is eligible to participate
in the Program if the employee or retiree is the legal guardian of the
grandchild and may claim the grandchild as a dependent for federal income tax
purposes under regulations published by the Internal Revenue Service.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the dependent of an
employee shall participate in the employee's employee health insurance plan and
the dependent of a retiree shall participate in the retiree's retiree health
insurance plan.
   (g)   Participation; participants eligible for Medicare.
      (1)   An employee who otherwise is eligible to participate in Medicare
because the employee has reached age 65 shall continue to participate in the
Program under an employee health insurance plan.
      (2)   An employee's spouse who otherwise is eligible to participate in
Medicare because the spouse has reached age 65 shall continue to participate in
the Program under the employee's health insurance plan.
      (3)   A retiree or a retiree's spouse who is eligible to participate in
Medicare because the retiree or spouse has reached age 65 is not eligible to
participate in a retiree health insurance plan but may elect to be covered
under a Medicare supplement.
      (4)   If a retiree is eligible to participate in Medicare but has a
dependent who is not eligible to participate in Medicare, the retiree may elect
to have the dependent covered under a retiree health insurance plan.
      (5)   All participants are required to enroll in Medicare Parts A and B
in order to be eligible for coverage under a Medicare supplement.
      (6)   Effective January 1, 2015, a retiree who was hired before April 1,
1986, did not participate in Medicare, and has reached age 65 will not be
eligible to participate in a retiree health insurance plan. A retiree within
the scope of this subsection who is not otherwise eligible for premium-free
participation in Medicare Part A on the basis of the retiree's other employment
or the employment of the retiree's current or former spouse may elect to be
covered under a Medicare supplement upon enrollment in Medicare Parts A and B
with the employer paying:
         (i)   100% of the premiums for Part A for the retiree and the
retiree's spouse;
         (ii)   the penalties for late enrollment in Parts A and B by the
retiree and the retiree's spouse if the retiree and spouse enroll before
January 1, 2015 or when first eligible to enroll, whichever comes later; and
         (iii)   the employer subsidy for a Medicare supplement determined in
accordance with subsection (j).
   (h)   Determination of annual costs of providing benefits.
      (1)   The estimate of the annual costs of providing benefits under the
various health insurance plans shall be:
         (i)   prepared by the Personnel Officer;
         (ii)   presented to and discussed jointly with the exclusive
representatives of County employees, and their consultants, at least ten
calendar days prior to presentation to the County Council; and
         (iii)   approved by resolution of the County Council.
      (2)   The estimated annual costs of providing benefits under a health
insurance plan as calculated under this subsection may not include the cost of
the cost-sharing plan features to be paid by a participant.
   (i)   Determination and amount of employer subsidy.
      (1)   This subsection applies to the employer subsidies for employee and
retiree health insurance plans, but not to the Medicare supplement.
      (2)   All employer subsidies established in accordance with this
subsection shall be applied to the estimated annual costs approved by
resolution of the County Council under subsection (h) in order to determine the
rates paid by participants for participation in health insurance plans.
      (3)   There shall be no employer subsidy for participants covered under
the Consolidated Omnibus Reconciliation Act (COBRA).
      (4)   The employer subsidy for employees represented by an exclusive
representative selected in accordance with Title 4 and any monetary credits for
opting out of coverages shall be determined through collective bargaining and,
if applicable, binding arbitration.
      (5)   The employer subsidy for employees not represented by an exclusive
employee representative under Title 4, survivors of employees, and survivors of
retirees shall be proposed by the Personnel Officer and approved by resolution
of the County Council. The resolution shall also include the rates for part-
time employees who are not represented by an exclusive employee representative
under Title 4 and any monetary credits given to employees not represented by an
exclusive representative under Title 4 for opting out of coverages.
      (6)   Effective January 1, 2016, if the survivor of a retiree is eligible
to participate in employer-sponsored health care insurance on the basis of the
employment of the survivor, the survivor's parent, or the survivor's subsequent
spouse by an employer other than an employer defined in subsection (a)(10), and
the survivor chooses to enroll in a health insurance plan, the employer subsidy
shall be reduced by an amount equal to 50% of the employer's subsidy for
individual coverage as approved by resolution of the County Council under
subsection (h).
      (7)   Effective January 1, 2016, if the survivor of an employee receives
periodic payment of a death benefit as a survivor under Article 5 of this Code,
not including payment of a lump sum death benefit, and the survivor is eligible
to participate in employer-sponsored health care insurance on the basis of the
employment of the survivor, the survivor's parent, or the survivor's subsequent
spouse by an employer other than an employer defined in subsection (a)(10), and
the survivor chooses to enroll in a health insurance plan, the employer subsidy
shall be reduced by an amount equal to 50% of the employer's subsidy for
individual coverage as approved by resolution of the County Council under
subsection (h).
      (8)   The provisions of subsections (6) and (7) shall apply only if the
employer-sponsored health care insurance in which the spouse or survivor may
enroll is an eligible employer-sponsored plan that satisfies the affordability
standards under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
      (9)   The employer subsidy, exclusive of dental and vision coverage, for
retirees who retire on or before January 1, 2017 and for employees who are
eligible to retire with a normal retirement date under §
5-3-302(a), §
5-4-202, §
5-5-202, or §
5-6-202 of this Code, or with an early retirement date under §
5-3-302(b) or §
5-6-202(c) of this Code on or before January 1, 2017 shall be 80%.
      (10)   The employer subsidy, exclusive of dental and vision coverage, for
terminated vested employees who retired before July 1, 2014 shall be 80%. The
employer subsidy, exclusive of dental and vision coverage, for terminated
vested employees hired before January 1, 2014 who retire on or after July 1,
2014 shall be based on their credited service as of their dates of retirement.
CREDITED SERVICE ON RETIREMENT
 
At least 5   At least 10  At least 15  At least 20  At least 25
years but    years but    years but    years but    years but less At least 30
less than 10 less than 15 less than 20 less than 25 than 30 years  years
years        years        years        years
30%          40%          50%          70%          75%            80%
 
      (11)   The employer subsidy, exclusive of dental and vision coverage, for
retirees who retire after January 1, 2017 and receive a service-connected
disability retirement pension under §
5-3-307 (c) of this Code or a military service disability retirement pension
under §
5-3-307 (d), of this Code or whose annual disability retirement pensions are
determined in accordance with the provisions of §
5-4-206 (d)(2) or (4), §
5-5-205 (d)(2) or (4), or §
5-6-207(d)(2) or (4) of this Code shall be 80%.
      (12)   The employer subsidy, exclusive of dental and vision coverage, for
a participant enrolled in the deferred retirement option program under Article
5 of this Code before January 1, 2015 shall be 80%.
      (13)   The employer subsidy, exclusive of dental and vision coverage, for
retirees hired before January 1, 2015 who retire after January 1, 2017 shall be
based on their years of credited service plus DROP participation period as of
their date of retirement as follows, provided the retiree was not rehired by an
employer defined in subsection (a)(10) on or after January 1, 2015, and
provided the retiree is not retired as the result of a disability.
CREDITED SERVICE PLUS DROP PARTICIPATION PERIOD ON RETIREMENT
 
At least 10 years At least 15 years but At least 20 years but
but less than 15  less than 20 years    less than 25 years    At least 25 years
years
50%               60%                   70%                   80%
 
      (14)   The employer subsidy, exclusive of dental and vision coverage, for
retirees hired before January 1, 2015 who retire after January 1, 2017 and who
receive non-service-connected disability retirement pensions under §
5-3-307(b) of this Code or annual disability retirement pensions determined in
accordance with the provisions of §
5-4-206 (d)(3), §
5-5-205 (d)(3), or §
5-6-207(d)(3) of this Code shall be the greater of 50% or the percentage
determined in accordance with subsection (i)(13), provided the retiree was not
rehired by an employer defined in subsection (a)(10) on or after January 1,
2015.
      (15)   The employer subsidy, exclusive of dental and vision coverage, for
retirees who were hired or rehired on or after January 1, 2015 shall be based
on their years of actual plan service plus DROP participation period as of
their date of retirement as follows, provided the retiree was not retired as
the result of a disability.
ACTUAL PLAN SERVICE PLUS DROP PARTICIPATION PERIOD ON RETIREMENT
 
At least 10  At least 15  At least 20  At least 25  At least 30
years but    years but    years but    years but    years but less At least 40
less than 15 less than 20 less than 25 less than 30 than 40 years  years
years        years        years        years
30%          40%          50%          70%          75%            80%
 
      (16)   The employer subsidy, exclusive of dental and vision coverage, for
retirees hired after January 1, 2015 who retire on or after January 1, 2017 and
who receive non-service-connected disability retirement pensions under §
5-3-307(b) of this Code or annual disability retirement pensions determined in
accordance with the provisions of §
5-4-206 (d)(3), §
5-5-205 (d)(3), or §
5-6-207(d)(3) of this Code shall be the greater of 50% or the percentage
determined in accordance with subsection (i)(15).
      (17)   The employer subsidy, exclusive of dental and vision coverage, for
a County Executive shall be the greater of 50% or the percentage determined in
accordance with subsection (i)(13) or (i)(15).
      (18)   For the purposes of this subsection, the date that an employee
retires shall be the date that an employee terminates employment with the
County that is on or after the employee's normal or early retirement date under
the County retirement plan in which the employee is a participant or, in case
of a disability pension, on the date that the employee is retired on a
disability pension. A terminated vested employee shall be deemed to retire on
the date that the terminated vested employee reaches the employee's normal
retirement date under the retirement plan in which the employee is a
participant.
   (j)   Employer subsidy; Medicare supplement.  The employer subsidy for the
Medicare supplement for retirees shall be the same percentage as the employer
subsidy determined in accordance with subsection (i).
   (k)   Replacement of Medicare supplement with cash subsidy or allowance.
      (1)   Effective January 1, 2015, the County may provide a cash subsidy or
allowance in lieu of a Medicare supplement.
      (2)   The amount of the subsidy or allowance shall be proposed by the
Personnel Officer and approved by resolution of the County Council. The
proposed subsidy or allowance shall be calculated by applying the percentages
set forth in subsection (i) to the cost of a Medicare Supplement.
      (3)   The subsidy or allowance may be administered through a Health
Reimbursement Account, and the County may contract with a connector entity for
purposes of establishing a navigator program for participants.
      (4)   The County shall continue to provide Medicare supplements for
participants eligible to participate in Medicare before age 65 because of
disabilities who are not eligible for a navigator program.
      (5)   The Medicare supplement or the subsidy or allowance in lieu of a
Medicare supplement may provide for the reimbursement of out-of-pocket costs to
participants for prescription drugs under the conditions proposed by the
Personnel Officer and approved by resolution of the County Council.
   (l)   Application for and entitlement to benefits.
      (1)   An employee, retiree, or survivor seeking to participate in the
Program shall submit an application on the form provided by the Office of
Personnel and shall provide the required information and may not be entitled to
benefits under the Program until the participation in the Program is approved
by the Office of Personnel.
      (2)   An application to participate in the Program may be filed only by
the employee or retiree entitled to participate in the Program and shall
include application for health insurance benefits for those dependents for
which the employee or retiree seeks participation.
      (3)   An employee or retiree who elects not to participate in the Program
in a given plan year may not be prohibited from electing to participate in any
subsequent plan year.
      (4)    A survivor may file an application in the survivor's own name,
except that a surviving spouse shall file an application that includes
application for health insurance benefits for any surviving child of the
surviving spouse also eligible to participate in the Program.
      (5)   After submitting an application an employee, retiree, or survivor
who made application for benefits in the survivor's own name, shall report any
change in family, employment, or other status that affects a participant's
entitlement to benefits under the Program to the Office of Personnel within 31
calendar days of the change.
      (6)   An employee, retiree, or survivor who willfully makes a false
statement or false representation on an application for benefits under the
Program or who willfully fails to disclose a change in family, employment, or
other status that affects a participant's entitlement to benefits under the
Program is guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in §
9-1-101 of this Code.
   (m)   Health Care Flexible Spending Account. The Program shall include the
option for an employee to establish a Health Care Flexible Spending Account.
   (n)   Duties and powers of the Personnel Officer. In addition to the
specific duties set forth in this section, the Personnel Officer has the
general duty to administer the Program and has the powers necessary to do so,
including the power to:
      (1)   establish, subject to §
6-1-308(b)(2), the health insurance benefit options and design the health
insurance plans, which may include a wellness plan, made available to
participants, and designate the plan year;
      (2)    prepare forms and establish procedures to be followed in order to
obtain health insurance benefits under the Program;
      (3)   determine the eligibility of persons to participate in the Program
and receive health insurance benefits under the Program by applying the
provisions of the Program governing such eligibility subject to the right of
persons to appeal adverse decisions on eligibity to the Anne Arundel County
Board of Appeals;
      (4)   approve or supervise the approval of the payment of claims for
health insurance benefits;
      (5)   establish a process for internal appeals and external review of
decisions on claims that complies with the federal Affordable Care Act;
      (6)   review the payment of claims for health insurance benefits and seek
recovery of any overpayment of benefits;
      (7)   establish Health Care Flexible Spending Accounts and High-
Deductible Health Plans as part of the Program; and
      (8)   adopt rules and regulations necessary to implement the Program as
set forth in this section provided that such rules and regulations are
published on the Office of Personnel website at least 30 days prior to taking
effect.
   (o)   The Personnel Officer shall meet, jointly, with the exclusive
representatives and their consultants up to two times per calendar year to
review and discuss the annually accounted receipts and disbursements including
insured but not reported claims, for each County-sponsored plan, cost
containment, efficiencies, and data for each health insurance plan for active
County employees as such plans are defined in §
6-1-308(a)(13).
   (p)   No later than June 30 of each year, with respect to the immediately
preceding plan year, each health insurance plan provider engaged by the County
to offer a health insurance plan shall provide the County data relating to
enrollment, claims, administrative costs, usage trends, and any other data
necessary to calculate any surplus or deficit experienced by the plan. The data
provided by each plan provider shall be provided to each exclusive
representative that makes a request.
   (q)   If submitted upon the joint demand of either the exclusive employee
representatives for a majority of County employees covered under Title 4 or a
majority of exclusive employee representatives under Title 4, any dispute about
the meaning or application of any part or provision of subsections (b)(2)(iv),
(h)(1)(ii), (o), or (p) shall be subject to grievance and grievance arbitration
under §
6-4-113 provided that a final written grievance arbitration award shall be
subject to review upon petition to modify or vacate filed in the Circuit Court
for Anne Arundel County, and subject to further review on appeal under the
Maryland Uniform Arbitration Act. This remedy shall be exclusive with respect
to the enumerated subsections. It may not bar the exercise of any remedies that
may be available with respect to a dispute about any other part or provision of
this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-307) (Bill No. 33-89; Bill No. 34-93; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 86-04; Bill No. 85-13; Bill No. 24-19)
§ 6-1-309. Pooling for group health plan.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "public entity" has the meaning stated in
the Insurance Article, § 19-602, of the State Code.
   (b)   Pooling agreements. On behalf of the County, the County Executive may
make agreements with one or more public entities to pool together for the
purpose of providing a group health plan for employees and retirees, including
insuring health risks as provided in the Insurance Article, §§ 19-601, 19-602,
and 19-603, of the State Code and purchasing health care services.
   (c)   Agreement terms and conditions. Any agreement made by the County
Executive under this section shall be subject to the following terms and
conditions:
      (1)   each public entity must agree that, on behalf of the public entity
and the County, the County has the exclusive right to procure the services of
and enter into agreements with health insurers or health care service
providers;
      (2)   the County shall provide overall administration of the group health
plan for itself and each public entity, and each public entity shall pay an
administrative fee, as determined appropriate by the Chief Administrative
Officer, for the administrative services provided by the County;
      (3)   the County and each public entity shall be responsible for payment
of the full premium or other cost for each of its respective employees or
retirees for health insurance or health care services, subject to the right of
the County and each public entity to allocate a share of the cost to its
employees and retirees;
      (4)   the County may require the public entity to submit evidence of its
ability to pay its share of costs;
      (5)   each public entity shall pay its share of costs to the County in
the amount, at the time, and in the manner directed by the County;
      (6)   upon the failure of a public entity to timely pay its share of
costs, the County may terminate the agreement with respect to that public
entity and recover the costs due and owing at the time of termination; and
      (7)   under any agreement that the County makes for health insurance, if
the County is required to pay to the insurer additional moneys at the
conclusion of the term of the insurance contract, each public entity shall
reimburse the County a share of the moneys paid, determined by apportioning the
payment on a per-covered-employee basis.
   (d)   Establishment of group health plan. On behalf of itself and each
public entity with which it has a pooling agreement, the County may establish a
group health plan through the procurement of health insurance or health care
services and provide overall administration of the group health plan.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-307.1) (Bill No. 46-93; Bill No. 23-04)
§ 6-1-310. Group life insurance.
   (a)   Applicability. The County shall provide a group life insurance plan
for full-time employees and part-time employees who work at least 50% of the
normal work week.
   (b)   Benefits. The benefits shall be at least $10,000 on each full-time
employee's life, and the benefits shall be prorated for part-time employees who
work at least 50% of the normal work week.
   (c)   Employees killed in the line of duty. If an employee is killed in the
line of duty, the County shall pay an amount equal to the employee's annual pay
to the beneficiary named on the employee's life insurance and the costs of
burial up to a maximum of $10,000, except that for an employee on the F, P or R
pay schedule and employees in the classifications of Detention Officer,
Detention Corporal, Detention Sergeant, Detention Lieutenant, Detention
Captain, Correctional Program Specialist I, Correctional Program Specialist II,
Deputy Sheriff I and Deputy Sheriff II, the County shall pay the costs of
burial up to a maximum of $15,000.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-307.2) (Bill No. 33-89; Bill No. 34-93; Bill No. 46-93;
Bill No. 45-99; Bill No. 33-09; Bill No. 46-11; Bill No. 58-13; Bill No. 35-14)
§ 6-1-311. Employees injured in line of duty – In general.
   (a)   Employees other than uniformed officers. Except for uniformed
officers, whenever an employee sustains an accidental injury arising out of and
during the course of the employee's employment with the County that is
compensable under the State Workers' Compensation Law, and the employee files a
claim with the State Workers' Compensation Commission, during the period the
employee is unable to work, the employee may elect to:
      (1)   use earned annual leave, during which period the employee is
entitled to regular salary plus the amount awarded as temporary total
disability payments under the State Workers' Compensation Law;
      (2)   use earned disability leave at the rate of one-half day for each
regular work day missed, during which period the employee is entitled to
regular salary, if any amount awarded as temporary total disability payments
under the State Workers' Compensation Law is endorsed by the employee over to
the County; or
      (3)   go on leave without pay during which period the employee is
entitled to the amount awarded as temporary total disability payments under the
State Workers' Compensation Law.
   (b)   Exhaustion of annual or disability leave. If the employee initially
elected to use annual leave or disability leave and leave is exhausted before
the employee is able to return to work, on request to the Personnel Officer the
employee shall be granted leave without pay for the duration of the period of
temporary total disability.
   (c)   Pay. On application of the appointing authority and the Personnel
Officer, the Chief Administrative Officer may authorize the payment of an
employee's full regular pay during the period of temporary total disability or
any part of the period where the nature of the circumstances warrant and the
payment is in the best interest of the County.
   (d)   Third-party negligence awards. Whenever an employee sustains a
compensable injury due to the negligence of a third party who is not a County
employee and against whom a claim, demand, or suit is filed by the injured
employee, the County is entitled to reimbursement for regular compensation paid
the employee in excess of the compensation award for temporary total disability
out of any settlement or judgment obtained by the employee against the third
person.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-308) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 23-04)
§ 6-1-312. Employees injured in line of duty – Uniformed officers.
   (a)   Generally. Whenever a uniformed officer sustains an accidental injury
arising out of and during the course of employment with the County that is
compensable under the State Workers' Compensation Law and the officer files a
claim with the State Workers' Compensation Commission, the officer:
      (1)   is entitled to regular pay during the period of temporary total
disability if the amount awarded as temporary total disability payments under
compensation laws is endorsed by the employee over to the County; or
      (2)   may elect to use earned annual leave, during which period the
officer is entitled to receive regular pay plus the amount awarded as temporary
total disability payments under the State Workers' Compensation Law.
   (b)   Exhaustion of annual leave. If the officer elects to use annual leave
and such leave is exhausted before the officer is able to return to work, the
officer is entitled to receive regular pay under the provisions of subsection
(a)(1) for the duration of the period of temporary total disability.
   (c)   Accumulation of annual leave. The officer may accumulate annual leave
at the contracted rate, including holidays and special administrative days,
during the period of temporary total disability.
   (d)   Temporary total disability exceeding six months. Whenever the period
of temporary total disability exceeds six months, or if it appears within six
months that the injury will permanently preclude the officer from returning to
usual duties, the officer shall submit to medical examination by a physician of
the County's choice and shall be considered for retirement under the applicable
retirement plan.
   (e)   Third-party negligence awards. Whenever the injury to a uniformed
officer is due to the negligence of a third party who is not a County employee,
against whom a claim, demand, or suit is filed by the officer, the County is
entitled to reimbursement for regular compensation paid to the officer in
excess of the compensation award for temporary total disability out of a
settlement or judgment obtained by the officer against the third person.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-309) (Bill No. 56-86; Bill No. 65-97)
§ 6-1-313. Family and medical leave.
   County employees are entitled, to the extent required by federal law, to
family and medical leave. The Personnel Officer shall issue personnel policies
implementing the provisions of this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 1-310) (Bill No. 62-93)
TITLE 2. EXEMPT SERVICE
Section
   
6-2-101.   Exempt pay and benefit plan.
   
6-2-102.   Appointments by County Executive, County Council.
   
6-2-103.   Additional exempt positions.
   
6-2-104.   Court and State's Attorney employees pay and benefit plan.
   
6-2-105.   Soil Conservation District Employees' Pay and Benefit Plan.
   
6-2-106.   Miscellaneous exempt employees pay and benefit plan.
   
6-2-107.   Disclosure protection.
   6-2-108.   Police Major positions.
Charter Reference – §
802.
§ 6-2-101. Exempt pay and benefit plan.
   (a)   Pay plan. The Personnel Officer shall formulate and maintain a pay
plan for all positions in the exempt service, which shall include job titles,
pay grades, and pay scales.
   (b)   Approval. The pay plan shall be approved annually by ordinance of the
County Council.
   (c)   Posting. The pay plan shall be posted on the County website and
available to County employees and the public.
   (d)   Pay on appointment. The appointing authority shall make an appointment
to a position in the exempt service that is within the pay scale for the pay
grade in the pay plan formulated under subsection (a).
   (e)   Out-of-class pay. The appointing authority of an employee under the
exempt pay and benefit plan may approve the payment of out-of-class pay to an
employee if the employee is assigned temporarily to a position in the exempt
pay and benefit plan with a higher pay grade for a period of at least five
consecutive workdays. The employee shall be paid at a rate within the pay range
for the higher position in the exempt pay and benefit plan that is at least 5%
above the employee’s regular pay rate.
   (f)   Limitations on approval for out-of-class pay. The appointing authority
may approve the payment of out-of-class pay only if the position to which the
employee is assigned is vacant or the employee regularly assigned to the
position is absent from duty, and the position is an authorized, budgeted
position. The temporary assignment and out-of-class pay may not be used as a
substitute for permanent appointment to a position.
   (g)   Personnel Board report on executive pay plan. During the third year of
a County Executive’s term of office, the Personnel Board shall review the pay
levels in the executive pay plan and report to the County Executive and County
Council its findings and recommendations regarding the pay levels.
   (h)   Employment benefits. Employees in the exempt pay and benefit plan are
entitled to the employment benefits that are applicable to classified non-
represented employees, except that disability leave shall be administered in a
manner that meets the minimum requirements of and is consistent with State law.
   (i)   Variable pay award. This subsection applies to all employees in the
exempt pay and benefit plan. An appointing authority may make a variable pay
award to any employee who makes an extraordinary contribution to the operation
of the County office or department or makes a significant singular effort or
contribution. A variable pay award may be monetary or non-monetary and does not
increase the designated annual base pay of an employee.
   (j)   Performance pay award.
      (1)   This subsection applies to all employees in the exempt pay and
benefit plan, including employees who are at or above the maximum pay for their
grade.
      (2)   An appointing authority may make a performance pay award to any
employee who has in the previous rating period significantly and consistently
exceeded expectations.
      (3)   The appointing authority may make an award to an employee at
intervals no more frequently than once every fiscal year.
      (4)   The amount of the performance pay award and any pay increases under
this section combined may not exceed 10% of the pay that the employee was
receiving prior to the time of the award and increase.
      (5)   A performance pay award made under this section does not increase
the designated base pay of an employee.
   (k)   Bonus pay. Subject to available appropriations, bonus pay may be paid
to employees in the exempt pay and benefit plan as determined by the County
Executive.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 2-101) (Bill No. 44-86; Bill No. 81-86; Bill No. 32-87;
Bill No. 55-87; Bill No. 56-87; Bill No. 39-88; Bill No. 60-88; Bill No. 13-89;
Bill No. 33-89; Bill No. 45-89; Bill No. 34-90; Bill No. 4-91; Bill No. 109-91;
Bill No. 71-92; Bill No. 49-93; Bill No. 58-93; Bill No. 114-93; Bill No. 13-
94; Bill No. 48-94; Bill No. 65-94; Bill No. 4-95; Bill No. 3-96; Bill No. 28-
96; Bill No. 44-96; Bill No. 71-96; Bill No. 27-97; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No.
40-99; Bill No. 43-99; Bill No. 45-99; Bill No. 63-99; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No.
20-00; Bill No. 43-00; Bill No. 70-00; Bill No. 2-01; Bill No. 39-01; Bill No.
40-02; Bill No. 52-02; Bill No. 66-02; Bill No. 7-03; Bill No. 67-03; Bill No.
34-04; Bill No. 41-05; Bill No. 42-05; Bill No. 43-06; Bill No. 41-07; Bill No.
32-08; Bill No. 51-08; Bill No. 55-08; Bill No. 57-13; Bill No. 72-13; Bill No.
98-13; Bill No. 35-14; Bill No. 45-15; Bill No. 47-15; Bill No. 65-15; Bill No.
66-15; Bill No. 67-15; Bill No. 45-16; Bill No. 47-16; Bill No. 58-17; Bill No.
62-17; Bill No. 56-18; Bill No. 59-18; Bill No. 60-18; Bill No. 58-19; Bill No.
61-19; Bill No. 70-19; Bill No. 101-20; Bill No. 16-21; Bill No. 45-21; Bill
No. 46-21; Bill No. 3-22; Bill No. 24-22; Bill No. 51-22; Bill No. 52-22; Bill
No. 44-23; Bill No. 67-23; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-2-102. Appointments by County Executive, County Council.
   (a)   County Executive – Limitations on appointment of relatives. The County
Executive may not appoint to a position in the exempt service the County
Executive's spouse, parent, grandparent, uncle, aunt, child, stepchild,
grandchild, brother, sister, niece, nephew, or the spouse of any of them.
   (b)   County Council – Limitations on appointment of relatives. The County
Council may not appoint to the position of Administrative Officer to the County
Council, Assistant Administrative Officer to the County Council, Legislative
Counsel to the County Council, or County Auditor any Councilmember's spouse,
parent, grandparent, uncle, aunt, child, stepchild, grandchild, brother,
sister, niece, nephew, or the spouse of any of them. A member of the County
Council may not appoint to the position of Legislative Assistant any
Councilmember's spouse, parent, grandparent, uncle, aunt, child, stepchild,
grandchild, brother, sister, niece, nephew, or the spouse of any of them.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 2-101.1) (Bill No. 10-98)
§ 6-2-103. Additional exempt positions.
   (a)   Additional positions by title. In accordance with §
802(b) of the Charter the positions described in this subsection are
established as positions in the exempt service that are in addition to the
positions established by §
802(a) of the Charter, with the compensation for the positions set forth in the
exempt pay and benefit plan. Unless otherwise provided by this subsection, the
number of positions under each title described in this subsection shall be
approved as part of the annual budget and appropriation ordinance and may not
be changed during a fiscal year except as approved by ordinance of the County
Council. The positions are:
Titles
Executive Branch
Administrative Assistant to Department/Agency Head
Administrative Assistant to the County Executive
Administrative Hearing Officer
Assistant Chief of Police
Assistant Fire Chief
Chief of Staff
County Executive Appointment Coordinator
Criminal Justice Coordinator
Deputy Central Services Officer
Deputy Chief Administrative Officer
Deputy Director, Aging and Disabilities
Deputy Emergency Management Director
Deputy Planning and Zoning Officer
Deputy Police Chief, Exempt Service
Director, Equity and Human Relations
Director of Animal Services
Director of Communications & Policy
Executive Administrative Assistant IV
Executive Assistant to the Chief of Police
Executive Budget & Management Analyst
Executive Clerical Aide
Executive Director, Partnership for Children, Youth and Families
Executive Director, Police Accountability Board
Executive Management Assistant I
Executive Management Assistant II
Executive Office Support Assistant I
Executive Office Support Assistant II
Executive Office Support Specialist
Executive Program Manager
Executive Public Information Assistant
Fire Chief of Staff (Civilian)
Human Services Officer
Land Use and Environment Officer
Police Chief of Staff (Civilian)
Police Major
Legislative Branch
Legislative Chief of Staff
 
   (b)   Additional positions by nature of funding source. Positions not in the
classified service that are assigned to the Anne Arundel County Department of
Social Services and funded in whole or in part by State or federal funds other
than grant funds are established as additional positions in the exempt service.
The compensation for the positions shall be set forth in written agreements in
accordance with the miscellaneous exempt employees pay and benefit plan. This
provision does not preclude the County from also assigning positions in the
classified service of the County to the Anne Arundel County Department of
Social Services.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 2-101.2) (Bill No. 43-99; Bill No. 18-11; Bill No. 72-13;
Bill No. 98-13; Bill No. 36-14; Bill No. 47-15; Bill No. 65-15; Bill No. 66-15;
Bill No. 67-15; Bill No. 45-16; Bill No. 62-17; Bill No. 59-18; Bill No. 60-18;
Bill No. 61-19; Bill No. 101-20; Bill No. 16-21; Bill No. 46-21; Bill No. 3-22;
Bill No. 24-22; Bill No. 44-23; Bill No. 67-23; Bill No. 4-24; Bill No. 51-24;
Bill No. 25-25; Bill No. 47-25)
§ 6-2-104. Court and State's Attorney employees' pay and benefit plan.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to those employees in the exempt
service who are appointed by and with the approval of the judges of the Circuit
Court for the County or the State’s Attorney for the County.
   (b)   Pay plan.
      (1)   The Personnel Officer shall formulate and maintain a pay plan for
positions in the exempt service to which employees are appointed by the judges
of the Circuit Court for the County or the State’s Attorney for the County,
which shall include job titles, pay grades, and pay scales.
      (2)   Authority for changing pay grades or titles shall be based on
appropriations.
      (3)   The non-represented employee pay schedule is used to set pay levels
only and confers no merit system rights on the officers and employees of the
Circuit Court and State’s Attorney.
   (c)   Approval. The pay plan shall be approved annually by ordinance of the
County Council.
   (d)   Posting. The pay plan shall be posted on the County website and
available to County employees and the public.
   (e)   Pay upon initial hiring. Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, an employee shall be hired at the minimum pay of the grade. On
finding and certifying in writing that extraordinary circumstances exist, the
appointing authority may hire the employee at a pay within the grade if there
are sufficient appropriations available.
   (f)   Employment benefits. Employees are entitled to all employment benefits
applicable to classified employees provided sufficient appropriations exist.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 2-102) (Bill No. 58-91; Bill No. 65-91; Bill No. 71-92;
Bill No. 58-93; Bill No. 48-94; Bill No. 71-96; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 79-98;
Bill No. 40-99; Bill No. 45-99; Bill No. 63-00; Bill No. 39-01; Bill No. 90-01;
Bill No. 94-01; Bill No. 75-02; Bill No. 86-04; Bill No. 75-05; Bill No. 87-06;
Bill No. 49-20; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-2-105. Soil Conservation District Employees' Pay and Benefit Plan.
   (a)   Employment at will. An employee appointed by the Anne Arundel Soil
Conservation Board of Supervisors is an employee in the exempt service, serves
at the pleasure of the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation Board of Supervisors, and
may be dismissed at will.
   (b)   Pay plan. The Personnel Officer shall formulate and maintain a pay
plan for all employees appointed by the Soil Conservation Board of Supervisors
to positions in the exempt service, which shall include job titles, pay grades,
and pay scales.
   (c)   Approval. The pay plan shall be approved annually by ordinance of the
County Council.
   (d)   Posting. The pay plan shall be posted on the County website and
available to County employees and the public.
   (e)   Pay upon initial hiring. An employee in the Soil Conservation District
Employees’ Pay and Benefit Plan shall be hired at the minimum pay of the grade
except that, upon finding and certifying in writing that extraordinary
circumstances exist, the appointing authority may hire an employee at a rate of
pay within the grade higher than the minimum pay of the grade.
   (f)   Employment benefits. An employee in the Soil Conservation District
Employees’ Pay and Benefit Plan is entitled to all employment benefits
applicable to classified employees provided sufficient appropriations exist.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 2-102.1) (Bill No. 52-02; Bill No. 66-02; Bill No. 75-02;
Bill No. 67-03; Bill No. 34-04; Bill No. 41-05; Bill No. 43-06; Bill No. 41-07;
Bill No. 51-07; Bill No. 51-08; Bill No. 57-13; Bill No. 35-14; Bill No. 45-15;
Bill No. 47-16; Bill No. 58-17; Bill No. 56-18; Bill No. 58-19; Bill No. 45-21;
Bill No. 51-22; Bill No. 44-23; Bill No. 4-24)
§ 6-2-106. Miscellaneous exempt employees pay and benefit plan.
   An employee in an hourly rate position or in a State or federal grant-funded
position that is in the exempt service pursuant to §
802(b)(14) or (17) of the Charter or in a position assigned to the Department
of Social Services that is in the exempt service pursuant to §
6-2-103(b) of this Code shall receive pay and benefits as specified in a
written agreement between the employee and the County and in accordance with
available appropriations in the annual budget and appropriation ordinance.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 2-103) (Bill No. 48-97; Bill No. 79-98; Bill No. 36-14)
§ 6-2-107. Disclosure protection.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, a "personnel action" means an act, a
refusal to act or an omission by an appointing authority which has a
significant adverse impact on the employee or a change in the employee's
responsibilities which is inconsistent with the employee's grade and salary.
   (b)   Action by appointing authority. Unless a disclosure is specifically
prohibited by law, an employee may not be subject to a personnel action by an
appointing authority as a reprisal for seeking any remedy under this section or
for a disclosure to a federal, State or County official or employee, that the
employee reasonably believes, in good faith, demonstrates evidence of:
      (1)   retaliation for a refusal to obey an instruction of an appointing
authority or supervisor involving an illegal act or a refusal to participate in
an illegal act;
      (2)   an illegal action in County government;
      (3)   an unauthorized use of County funds; or
      (4)   a substantial and specific danger to public health or safety.
   (c)   Other action authorized.  This section does not prohibit a personnel
action that otherwise would have been taken regardless of the disclosure.
   (d)   Disclosures to State officers.  An employee has the same protections
provided in subsection (b) of this section regarding a disclosure that is
specifically prohibited by law, if the disclosure is made to the Office of the
State's Attorney, the Office of the Attorney General of Maryland, or the Office
of the Maryland State Prosecutor.
   (e)   Other remedies. This section does not preclude the aggrieved employee
from seeking any legal action or other remedies available.
(Bill No. 17-11)
§ 6-2-108. Police Major positions.
   (a)   Promotion from Police Captain. The Chief of Police shall appoint a
person to the position of Police Major in the exempt service who at the time of
appointment is a Police Captain in the classified service.
   (b)   Reinstatement to Police Captain. Unless the removal is based on action
governed by the Law Enforcement Officers' Bill of Rights, a person removed by
the Chief of Police from the position of Police Major in the exempt service has
the right to a non-competitive administrative placement to the position of
Police Captain in the classified service with the person's pay in the position
of Police Captain to be governed by §
6-1-209(d)(1).
(Bill No. 72-13)
TITLE 3. DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
Section
   
6-3-101.   "Employee" defined.
   
6-3-102.   Establishment and administration of plan.
   
6-3-103.   Payroll deductions.
   
6-3-104.   Investment; funds an asset of County.
   
6-3-105.   Supplemental nature of plan.
§ 6-3-101. "Employee" defined.
   In this title, "employee" means a person who provides services for the
County for which compensation is paid, including an elected or appointed
official.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 3-101)
§ 6-3-102. Establishment and administration of plan.
   The Personnel Officer may establish and administer a deferred compensation
program; enter into a voluntary written agreement with an employee to defer a
portion of the employee's compensation; adopt a master plan for the deferred
compensation program; adopt the rules and regulations necessary for the
deferred compensation program; and negotiate with a private person to provide
consolidated billing services, participant enrollment services, participant
accounts, and other related services as plan administrator.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 3-102)
§ 6-3-103. Payroll deductions.
   (a)   Deferred compensation agreements. The Controller may make payroll
deductions and disburse deferred funds in accordance with deferred compensation
agreements.
   (b)   Deferred amounts and hardship withdrawals. An employee may defer a
minimum of $5 per week. A participant employee may change or discontinue the
amount of compensation to be deferred only as provided in the deferred
compensation program. In case of financial hardship, and on approval by the
Personnel Officer, a participant employee may withdraw previously deferred
funds.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 3-103) (Bill No. 53-98)
§ 6-3-104. Investment; funds an asset of County.
   (a)   Investment of deferred funds. The deferred compensation program shall
provide that deferred funds may be invested in any legitimate investment,
including bank interest-bearing accounts, life insurance contracts, annuities,
mutual funds, equity products, bonds, or real estate investment trusts. Funds
deferred and investments made in accordance with the deferred compensation
program shall be held in trust as provided by § 457(g) or § 401(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, as amended.
   (b)   County contribution prohibited; County not liable for investment
losses. The County may not contribute to the deferred compensation program, and
the County is not responsible for any investment loss incurred in the program.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 3-104) (Bill No. 53-98; Bill No. 86-04)
§ 6-3-105. Supplemental nature of plan.
   The deferred compensation program and any deferred compensation plan shall
exist and serve in addition to any other retirement, pension, or benefit system
established for employees of the County and shall not supersede or reduce
benefits provided by the Anne Arundel County Retirement System or any other
retirement, pension, or benefit program established by law.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 3-105)
TITLE 4. EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
Section
   
6-4-101.   Definitions.
   
6-4-102.   Policy and purpose.
   
6-4-103.   Procedures and regulations.
   
6-4-104.   Grievances.
   
6-4-105.   Rights of classified employees – In general.
   
6-4-106.   Rights of County – In general.
   
6-4-107.   Certification of employee organization as exclusive representative.
   
6-4-108.   Powers and duties of exclusive representatives.
   
6-4-109.   Decertification of exclusive representative.
   
6-4-110.   Impasse procedures in general.
   
6-4-111.   Impasse procedures for Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive
Representatives.
   
6-4-112.   Prohibition against strikes and lockouts.
   
6-4-113.   Binding arbitration.
§ 6-4-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Administration" means the County Executive and officers and agents
under the County Executive's supervision.
      (2)   "Appropriate representation unit" means a group of positions in the
classified service that under the provisions of this title has been found to be
an appropriate group for the purpose of collective negotiations.
      (3)   "Arbitration" means a procedure by which parties who are unable to
agree on a solution to a problem indicate their willingness to be bound by the
decision of a third party.
      (4)   "Budget submission date" means the date by which the proposed
budget of the County for the ensuing fiscal year is submitted to the County
Council by the County Executive.
      (5)   "Confidential employee" means an employee whose functional
responsibility is to assist and act in a confidential capacity to the County
Executive, the Chief Administrative Officer, or any department or office head
appointed under the Charter who formulates, determines, and effectuates
policies in the field of employee relations.
      (6)   "Employee organization" means a lawful association, labor
organization, federation, council or brotherhood, the primary purpose of which
is to represent employees concerning terms and conditions of employment and
having a local constitution or bylaws and a roster of officers elected in
accordance with the constitution or bylaws, but the term does not include an
organization that advocates the overthrow of the constitutional form of
government in the United States or that discriminates with regard to the terms
or conditions of membership because of race, color, creed, sex, age, national
origin, or political affiliation.
      (7)   "Exclusive representative" means an employee organization that has
been certified as the collective negotiating agent for an appropriate
representation unit for the purpose of representing all classified employees in
the unit, regardless of employee organization membership.
      (8)   "Grievance" means an appeal brought by a:
         (i)   non-probationary classified employee pertaining to a
disciplinary action suspending, reducing in rank or pay, or removing the
employee from the classified service; the methods of examination,
certification, or preparation of eligibility lists for appointments or
promotion; or any other action designated by law or collective bargaining
agreement to be subject to the grievance procedures; or
         (ii)    probationary classified employee pertaining to the employee's
discharge on the basis that the discharge is in violation of §
6-1-102, §
6-1-112, or any non-discrimination provision of an applicable collective
bargaining agreement.
      (9)   "Impasse" means when the Administration and exclusive
representative are unable to agree on the wages, hours, working conditions, or
other terms and conditions of employment to create a memorandum of agreement
after a reasonable period of negotiations.
      (10)   "Intervenor employee organization" means an employee organization
that has complied with the provisions of this title that permit it to be
included with the petitioning employee organization as one of the choices on
the ballot in a representation election.
      (11)   "Lockout" means the temporary withholding of work from a group of
employees in order to bring pressure on them or on their representatives to
accept a change in compensation or rights, privileges, obligations, or other
terms and conditions of employment by means of shutting down an operation or
function of the County.
      (12)   "Management employee" means an individual whose primary or
exclusive functional responsibility is to exercise authority using independent
judgment, in the interest of the County, to hire, transfer, suspend, lay-off,
recall, promote, discharge, assign, reward, or discipline other employees, or
effectively to recommend these actions; to direct employees; or to adjust the
grievances of employees.
      (13)   "Mediation" means the process by which the parties to an impasse
seek to reconcile their differences through the services of a third party who
acts as an intermediary in bringing the parties together and actively seeks to
assist the parties in reaching a settlement by making suggestions, providing
background information, and noting avenues open to the parties for settlement.
      (14)   "Professional employee" means an employee engaged in work that is
predominantly intellectual and varied in character as opposed to routine
mental, manual, mechanical, or physical work; involves the consistent exercise
of discretion and judgment in its performance; is of such a character that the
output produced or the result accomplished cannot be standardized in relation
to a given period of time; and requires knowledge of an advanced type in a
field of science or learning customarily acquired by a prolonged course of
specialized intellectual instruction and study in an institution of higher
learning, as distinguished from a general academic education or from an
apprenticeship or from training in the performance of routine mental, manual,
or physical processes.
      (15)   "Strike" means, by concerted action, the failure to report for
duty, the willful absence from one's position, the stoppage or slowdown of
work, or the abstinence in whole or in part from the full, faithful, and proper
performance of the duties of employment for the purpose of inducing,
influencing, coercing, or preventing a change in compensation or rights,
privileges, obligations, or other terms and conditions of employment.
      (16)   “Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative” means an
exclusive representative for any of the classifications of Deputy Sheriff I,
Deputy Sheriff Corporal, Deputy Sheriff II, Deputy Sheriff III, Detention
Officer, Detention Corporal, Detention Sergeant, Firefighter II, Firefighter
III, Firefighter/Cardiac Rescue Technician, Firefighter/Emergency Medical
Technician- Paramedic, Fire Lieutenant, Fire Lieutenant/Emergency Medical
Technician/Paramedic, Fire Captain, Fire Captain/Emergency Medical Technician/
Paramedic, Fire Battalion Chief, Fire Battalion Chief/Emergency Medical
Technician-Paramedic, Police Officer, Police Officer First Class, Police
Corporal, Police Sergeant, and Police Lieutenant, that is authorized under §
812 of the Charter to resolve an impasse with the County through binding
arbitration.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-101) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 52-02; Bill No. 1-03;
Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 20-04; Bill No. 17-11; Bill No. 71-20; Bill No. 44-23)
§ 6-4-102. Policy and purpose.
   To promote harmonious and cooperative relationships between the County and
its employees and to protect the public by assuring the orderly and
uninterrupted operations of the County government, the County Council declares
that it is the public policy of this County, subject to the limitations of the
State Constitution and the applicable State laws, that classified employees be
permitted to participate effectively in the determination of the terms and
conditions of their employment. It is also the purpose of this title to
strengthen existing relationships between the County and its employees and
their representatives by imposing on each the obligation to enter into
negotiations with affirmative willingness to reach agreement in matters of
wages, hours, working conditions, and other terms of employment with due regard
for, and subject to, the provisions of applicable laws and the Charter
provisions governing public employment and fiscal procedures in the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-102)
§ 6-4-103. Procedures and regulations.
   To ensure the exercise of employees' rights and to ensure the effective
implementation of this title, the Personnel Board shall adopt the procedures
and regulations necessary and administratively feasible to implement this
title. The Personnel Board shall conduct at least one public hearing regarding
the procedures and regulations before their final adoption and implementation.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-103)
§ 6-4-104. Grievances.
   (a)   Represented classified employees. Grievances brought by represented
classified employees shall be processed in accordance with the applicable
collective bargaining agreement and §
6-4-113.
   (b)   Non-represented classified employees. Grievances for non-represented
classified employees shall be processed in accordance with the Office of
Personnel policies and procedures and §
6-4-113.
   (c)   Processing of grievances. Grievances submitted to the Personnel Board
shall be processed in accordance with the Personnel Board's rules of procedure.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-104) (Bill No. 52-02)
§ 6-4-105. Rights of classified employees – In general.
   (a)   Right to form and join employee organizations. Except as provided in
subsections (b) and (d), classified employees may form and join employee
organizations and assist in and participate in the activities of employee
organizations of their own choice for the purpose of representation on matters
of employee relations.
   (b)   Limitations on joining employee organizations.
      (1)   With the exception of captains, captains/emergency medical
technician- paramedics, lieutenants, lieutenants/emergency medical technician-
paramedics, battalion chiefs, and battalion chiefs/emergency medical
technician-paramedics in the Fire Department, lieutenants and sergeants in the
Police Department, and Deputy Sheriff IIIs in the Sheriff’s Office, management
employees may not join, assist, or participate in the activities of an employee
organization, or an affiliate of an employee organization, that represents or
seeks to represent employees under the direction of the management employees.
This subsection (b)(1) shall be construed to prohibit Detention Sergeants from
joining, assisting, or participating in the activities of an employee
organization that represents or seeks to represent Detention Officers and
Detention Corporals.
      (2)   Confidential employees may not join, assist in, or participate in
the activities of an employee organization that represents or seeks to
represent non-confidential employees.
      (3)   This prohibition does not apply to activities of a social,
charitable, or fraternal nature.
   (c)   Right to not join employee organizations. County employees may elect
not to join employee organizations or participate in their activities, and may
represent themselves individually or designate their personal representative in
their employment relations with the County. An employee may not be interfered
with, intimidated, restrained, coerced, or discriminated against because of the
employee's exercise of these rights.
   (d)   Limitation on number of appropriate representation units.
      (1)   Under no circumstances shall the number of appropriate
representation units exceed twelve.
      (2)   The limitation imposed by this subsection does not prohibit the
decertification of exclusive representatives or any other action taken under
this title as long as the result of that action does not cause the number of
appropriate representation units to exceed the number determined under
subsection (d)(1).
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-105) (Bill No. 64-96; Bill No. 62-00; Bill No. 28-06;
Bill No. 66-10; Bill No. 87-10; Bill No. 78-12; Bill No. 12-19; Bill No. 71-20;
Bill No. 105-21; Bill No. 44-23)
Editor’s note – The changes to the number of appropriate representation units
made by Bill No. 105-21 apply retroactively to December 1, 2021.
§ 6-4-106. Rights of County – In general.
   (a)   Exclusive County rights. Notwithstanding any provisions of this title
to the contrary, it is the exclusive right of the County to determine the
purposes and objectives of each of its constituent offices and departments; to
set standards of services to be offered to the public; to determine the
methods, means, personnel, and other resources by which the County's operations
are to be conducted; and to exercise control and discretion over its
organization and operations.
   (b)   County rights regarding employees. Subject to an executed memorandum
of agreement, it is also the right of the County to direct its employees; to
hire, promote, transfer, assign, or retain employees; to establish reasonable
work rules; to demote, suspend, discharge, or take other appropriate
disciplinary action against its employees for just cause, in accordance with
the Charter and other applicable laws; and to relieve its employees from duty
because of lack of work or other legitimate reasons.
   (c)   Section to be part of each memorandum of agreement. This section is
part of each memorandum of agreement executed between the County and an
exclusive representative.
   (d)   No limitation on grievances. Nothing in this section denies the right
of an employee to submit a grievance under the provisions of this title.
   (e)   Changes resulting from memorandum of agreement. If the County and an
exclusive representative execute a memorandum of agreement that removes class
titles from or adds class titles to a certified bargaining unit, the Personnel
Officer shall have authority to effect the agreed upon changes to the certified
bargaining unit as of the effective date of the agreement.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-106) (Bill No. 65-97)
§ 6-4-107. Certification of employee organization as exclusive representative.
   (a)   Petition for certification. An employee organization that seeks
certification for purposes of collective negotiations as an exclusive
representative shall file a petition for certification with the Personnel
Officer containing the following information and documentation:
      (1)   a certified copy of the organization's constitution or bylaws along
with a roster of officers elected in accordance with the constitution or
bylaws, and a delineation of inter-organizational affiliations;
      (2)   a statement that the employee organization has as a primary purpose
the representation of employees in their employment relations with the County;
      (3)   a statement that the employee organization has no terms or
conditions of membership which discriminate with regard to race, color, creed,
sex, age, political affiliation, disability, ancestry, or national origin;
      (4)   a request that the County recognize the employee organization as
the exclusive representative of the employees that the organization proposes
for an appropriate representation unit;
      (5)   a list containing each job class title to be included in the
proposed appropriate representation unit; and
      (6)   a statement that the employee organization has in its possession
written proof dated within six months of the date on which the petition is
filed that establishes that at least 30% of the employees in the proposed
appropriate representation unit have designated the employee organization to
represent them in their employment relations with the County.
   (b)   Filing of petition; notice. The petition may be filed with and shall
be received by the Personnel Officer only during the month of October. On
receipt of the petition, the Personnel Officer shall give adequate and timely
notice of the filing to the employees in the proposed appropriate
representation unit and, within 30 days of the filing date of the petition,
determine either that the proposed unit is an appropriate representation unit
or that an alternative unit is the appropriate representation unit.
   (c)   Determination of appropriate representation unit. In making the
determination of the appropriate representation unit, the Personnel Officer
shall consider the following factors:
      (1)   which unit will assure employees the fullest freedom in the
exercise of rights described in this title;
      (2)   the community of interest among employees in the proposed unit,
involving such criteria as similarity of job duties, skills, wages, educational
requirements, supervision, and working conditions;
      (3)    the history of employee relations in the County;
      (4)    the effect on the existing classification structure of dividing a
single classification among two or more units;
      (5)   the effect of the unit on the over-fragmentation of the classified
service to the detriment of mutually beneficial relationships between the
County and its employees; and
      (6)   the effect of the unit on the efficient operation of the public
service.
   (d)   Restrictions on establishing appropriate representation units. An
appropriate representation unit may not be established solely on the basis of
the extent to which employees in the unit have organized. Professional
employees may not be denied the right to be represented separately from
nonprofessional employees. The representation unit may not violate the
prohibitions set forth in §
6-4-105(b) and (d).
   (e)   Arbitration regarding appropriate representation units.
      (1)   Whenever the Personnel Officer and the petitioning employee
organization are in disagreement as to the determination of the appropriate
representation unit, the issue shall be submitted to arbitration at the request
of either party.
      (2)   If the parties are unable otherwise to agree on an arbitrator
within five days of the initial request, they shall make their selection from a
list of five neutrals submitted by the American Arbitration Association. If the
parties are unable to agree on the selection of one of the arbitrators within
three workdays after receipt of the list, the Administration and the employee
organization shall strike one name from the list alternately until one name
remains. The remaining person shall be the arbitrator.
      (3)   If the selected arbitrator is unable to serve, the arbitrator shall
be appointed directly by the American Arbitration Association.
      (4)   An arbitrator shall render a decision within 30 days after
appointment unless the parties mutually agree otherwise. The arbitrator's
decision shall be final and binding on the parties.
      (5)   The cost of arbitration shall be borne equally by the parties
involved.
   (f)   Election of representation unit; certification.
      (1)   When an appropriate representation unit has been determined, the
Personnel Officer shall give adequate and timely notice of the determination to
each employee in the newly established representation unit and shall arrange
for a secret ballot certification election to be conducted by the State
Division of Labor and Industry or an appropriate independent agency appointed
by the Personnel Officer.
      (2)   In the election, the employees in the unit shall be offered a
choice between exclusive representation by the petitioning employee
organization and no exclusive representation. If an intervenor employee
organization certifies that at least 10% of the employees in the unit have
designated it to represent them in their employment relations with the County,
and if the organization complies with the requirements of subsections (a)(1)
through (a)(4), then the ballot shall offer a choice among the petitioning
employee organization, the intervenor employee organization and no exclusive
representation.
      (3)   An employee organization shall be certified as exclusive
representative following an election or run-off election if the employee
organization has received the vote of a majority of the valid ballots cast by
the employees in the unit in which the election or run-off election is held. In
an election involving three or more choices, when none of the choices receives
a majority of the votes cast, a run-off election shall be conducted between the
two choices receiving the largest number of votes cast.
      (4)   An election may not be conducted in any appropriate representation
unit in which an election has been conducted within the preceding two years.
      (5)   The Personnel Officer shall publish the results of the elections.
   (g)   Certification is continuous. Certification is continuous, unless an
exclusive representative is decertified under §
6-4-109.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-107) (Bill No. 64-96; Bill No. 65-97; Bill No. 94-01;
Bill No. 78-12)
§ 6-4-108. Powers and duties of exclusive representatives.
   (a)   Generally. An exclusive representative may negotiate collectively with
the Administration in matters related to wages, hours, working conditions, and
other terms of employment of employees in the appropriate representation unit
without discrimination and without regard to employee organization membership.
An exclusive representative shall confer with the Administration in good faith
at reasonable times, including meetings appropriately related to the budget-
making process, and reduce to a memorandum of agreement the matters agreed upon
as a result of meetings and conferences when all issues have been resolved.
   (b)   Signatures on memorandum of agreements. Each memorandum of agreement
shall be signed by duly authorized representatives of the Administration and
the exclusive representative.
   (c)   Service fees.
      (1)   A memorandum of agreement may contain a provision requiring the
following employees, as a condition of employment, to pay a service fee to the
exclusive representative: employees who elect not to join the exclusive
representative or who execute membership or dues authorization cards as members
of the exclusive representative and later elect to terminate membership or
revoke the authorization cards.
      (2)   The service fee may be collected only for the period during which
the exclusive representative retains its certification and may not exceed the
current dues paid by members in order to defray the costs incurred by the
exclusive representative.
      (3)   Costs to which the service fee may be applied include costs
incurred in:
         (i)   the negotiation, administration, and implementation of the terms
of a memorandum of agreement and all modifications and amendments to the
memorandum, including related proceedings before a mediator or fact finder to
resolve a bargaining impasse;
         (ii)   the processing of grievances;
         (iii)   the conduct and approval of disciplinary proceedings;
         (iv)   the protection and improvement of civil service rights; and
         (v)   other proceedings and matters in which the exclusive
representative is authorized to act.
   (d)   Dues or service fee deductions.
      (1)   On the presentation of dues deduction or service fee authorization
cards executed by individual employees in the unit, an exclusive representative
is entitled to have the employees' membership dues or service fees deducted
from paychecks and remitted to the exclusive representative.
      (2)   The authorization is irrevocable for one year and automatically
renewable from year to year thereafter unless written notice of termination by
the employee is given to the County at least 15 days before the anniversary
date of the authorization.
      (3)   An exclusive representative is entitled to dues or service fee
deductions only from employees in the unit for which the exclusive
representative has been certified and only during the period that the exclusive
representative retains its certification.
   (e)   Rights retained by employees. This section does not preclude an
employee, regardless of employee organization membership, from bringing matters
of personal concern to the attention of appropriate officials, or from choosing
the employee's own representative in a grievance or appellate action.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-108) (Bill No. 23-04)
§ 6-4-109. Decertification of exclusive representative.
   (a)   Decertification petition. A decertification petition alleging that an
exclusive representative is no longer the majority representative of employees
in an appropriate representation unit may be filed with the Personnel Officer
by an employee, a group of employees or their representative, or an employee
organization. The petition shall be accompanied by written proof, dated within
six months of the date on which the petition is filed, of employee approval
equal to at least 30% of the employees in the representation unit.
   (b)   Filing of petition; election.
      (1)   A petition may be filed with and shall be received by the Personnel
Officer only during the month of October following the first full year of
exclusive representation. A decertification petition for the same appropriate
representation unit may not be received more frequently than every other year.
      (2)   The Personnel Officer shall arrange for a secret ballot election to
be conducted by the Division of Labor and Industry or an appropriate
independent agency appointed by the Personnel Officer.
      (3)   In the election the employees in the unit shall be offered a choice
between exclusive representation by the exclusive representative and no
exclusive representation. If an intervenor employee organization complies with
§
6-4-107, the ballot shall offer a choice among the exclusive representative, an
intervenor employee organization, and no exclusive representation.
   (c)   Determination of election results. The determination of election
results shall be made in accordance with §
6-4-107(f).
   (d)   Effect on memorandum of agreements. Whenever a valid memorandum of
agreement is in effect on the effective date of decertification of an exclusive
representative that is a party to the memorandum, the Administration and any
new exclusive representative, are bound by that agreement during the remainder
of the term of the agreement.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-109) (Bill No. 33-04)
§ 6-4-110. Impasse procedures in general.
   (a)   Applicability. Except as provided in §
6-4-111, the procedure for resolving an impasse between the Administration and
an exclusive representative is governed by this section.
   (b)   Impasse reached; mediation. If after a reasonable period of
negotiation over the terms of an agreement, a dispute exists between the
Administration and an exclusive representative with whom it is negotiating, the
parties may mutually agree that an impasse has been reached. If a dispute
exists as of February 14, an impasse shall automatically be considered to have
been reached. Whenever an impasse has been reached, the dispute shall be
submitted to mediation. If the parties are unable to agree on the mediator, the
federal Mediation and Conciliation Service shall be requested to provide a
mediator.
   (c)   Resolution of impasse; fact finder. If an impasse is not resolved at
least 35 days before the budget submission date, a fact finder shall be
selected by mutual agreement between the Administration and the exclusive
representative. If the Administration and the exclusive representative are
unable to agree on the selection of the fact finder at least 31 days prior to
the budget submission date, they shall make their selection from a panel of
neutrals maintained by the American Arbitration Association in accordance with
§
6-4-107(e).
   (d)   Findings of fact and recommendations. The fact finder shall meet with
the parties and shall make written findings of fact and recommendations for the
resolution of the dispute at least 10 days before the budget submission date.
The findings of fact and recommendations shall include the identification of
the major issues in the dispute, review of the positions of the parties, and
resolution of factual differences.
   (e)   Consideration of pertinent factors. In making findings and
recommendations, the fact finder shall take into consideration the pertinent
factors, including the following:
      (1)   wages, benefits, hours, and other working conditions of other local
government employees, both in the County and in other State political
jurisdictions;
      (2)   wages, benefits, hours, and other working conditions of employees
of private employers in the County;
      (3)   the value of other benefits available to or received by County
employees as compared with private sector employees in the County;
      (4)   cost-of-living information; and
      (5)   the availability of funds.
   (f)   Parties to receive copies of findings and recommendations. The fact
finder shall send copies of findings and recommendations made under subsection
(d) to the County Executive, the exclusive representative, and the mediator.
The mediator may thereafter assist the parties to effect a voluntary resolution
of the dispute.
   (g)   County Council action on impasse.
      (1)   If the dispute remains unresolved by the budget submission date,
the County Executive shall submit to the County Council a copy of the findings
of fact and recommendation of the fact finder, together with the County
Executive's recommendations for settling the dispute, and the exclusive
representative shall submit to the County Council its recommendations for
settling the dispute.
      (2)   The County Council shall immediately conduct a public hearing. At
the public hearing the parties shall explain their positions with respect to
the report of the fact finder.
      (3)   After the hearing, but before the passage in final form of the
annual budget and appropriation ordinance, the County Council shall take the
action it determines to be in the public interest, including the interest of
the County employees involved. The decision of the County Council shall be
final. If additional funds are required to implement the decision, the County
Council shall send a supplemental budget request to the County Executive by
resolution.
      (4)   The cost of mediation and fact finding shall be borne equally by
the parties involved in the dispute.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-110) (Bill No. 1-03; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 88-10;
Bill No. 4-11; Bill No. 91-12)
§ 6-4-111. Impasse procedures for Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive
Representatives.
   (a)   Applicability. The procedure for resolving an impasse between the
Administration and a Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative is
governed by this section.
   (b)   Mediation and arbitration. If the Administration and a Uniformed
Public Safety Exclusive Representative are at impasse on February 28, the
Administration and the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative may
agree to mediation as provided in subsection (c) and shall commence arbitration
procedures in accordance with subsection (e).
   (c)   Non-binding mediation. If the Administration and a Uniformed Public
Safety Exclusive Representative agree to mediation under subsection (b), the
mediation shall be non-binding; conducted by a neutral mediator selected by the
Administration and the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative, or in
the event the Administration and the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive
Representative are unable to agree upon a mediator, by a neutral mediator
selected from a list provided by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation
Service; and conducted in a manner agreed to by the Administration and the
Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative.
   (d)   Mediation statements or positions as evidence in other proceedings. No
statement made or position taken during mediation under this section may be
used as evidence in any other proceeding.
   (e)   Arbitration. If the Administration and a Uniformed Public Safety
Exclusive Representative are at impasse on February 28, the Administration and
the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative shall:
      (1)   by March 2, apply to the American Arbitration Association for a
list of nine neutral labor arbitrators who are members of the National Academy
of Arbitrators and who are familiar with impasse disputes and interest
arbitration;
      (2)   pursuant to an application made under subsection (e)(1), instruct
the American Arbitration Association to provide a list of neutral arbitrators
by March 18 and ensure that all of the arbitrators on the list provided are
available to conduct hearings and to issue a final written award by April 20;
      (3)   by March 10, reduce to writing a memorandum of agreed issues that
states all the terms and conditions of employment upon which they agree;
      (4)   by March 17, simultaneously exchange final offers that contain all
of the proposed terms and conditions for a memorandum of agreement between the
County and the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative, including a
proposed term of the memorandum of agreement of not less than one fiscal year
and not more than three fiscal years; and
      (5)   by March 21, select a neutral arbitrator in accordance with
subsection (g).
   (f)   Alternative arbitrator lists. If the American Arbitration Association
is unable to satisfy the requirements of subsection (e), the Administration and
the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative shall:
      (1)   agree to accept a list of fewer than nine arbitrators; or
      (2)   request from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service a
supplementary or alternative list of neutral labor arbitrators who are members
of the National Academy of Arbitrators; familiar with impasse disputes and
interest arbitration; and available to conduct hearings and issue a final
written award by April 20.
   (g)   Selection of neutral arbitrator. The Administration and the Uniformed
Public Safety Exclusive Representative shall select the neutral arbitrator by:
      (1)   tossing a coin to determine whether the Administration or the
Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative shall strike the first
arbitrator from the list or lists provided under subsections (e) and (f); and
      (2)   after the first strike, alternately striking names from the list or
lists provided under subsections (e) and (f) until one arbitrator remains.
   (h)   Alternative neutral arbitrator. If the neutral arbitrator selected
under subsection (g) is unwilling or unable to serve as the arbitrator, then
the Administration and the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative
shall select the arbitrator whose name was the last stricken under subsection
(g).
   (i)   Powers and duties of neutral arbitrator. After conferring with the
Administration and the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative, the
neutral arbitrator selected under this section shall:
      (1)   convene and adjourn a hearing, which may be closed in accordance
with law;
      (2)   administer oaths;
      (3)   issue subpoenas duces tecum to compel the production of relevant
and non-privileged documents and other tangible evidence to be produced at a
time prior to a hearing or at a hearing;
      (4)   issue subpoenas to compel the attendance and testimony of
witnesses, except that no elected official of the County or of the State may be
compelled to appear and testify;
      (5)   sequester witnesses, if requested; and
      (6)   decide whether to hear evidence offered through a proffer.
   (j)   Determinations of neutral arbitrator. The neutral arbitrator selected
under this section shall:
      (1)   have full authority to hear and decide all issues in dispute
including matters of procedure and the scope of the arbitration;
      (2)   receive and enter into the record the final offers of the
Administration and the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative;
      (3)   receive and consider evidence regarding:
         (i)   the wages, hours, working conditions, or other terms and
conditions of employment of similar public employees in comparable surrounding
jurisdictions;
         (ii)   the wages, hours, working conditions, and other terms and
conditions of employment of other Anne Arundel County employees;
         (iii)   the nature of the work performed by employees represented by
the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative, including the hazards and
risks of the employees' occupation; physical fitness requirements; training,
certification, and licenses required by the employees' occupation; shift
assignments; and work schedules;
         (iv)   the interests and welfare of the public and the reasonable
interests of the employees represented by the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive
Representative;
         (v)   the value to the public of the services performed by the
employees represented by the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative;
         (vi)   the ability of the County to fund the final offers proposed and
the County's other general fund personnel costs;
         (vii)   the condition of the County's general operating fund;
         (viii)   increases or decreases in the cost of living for Anne Arundel
County, comparable surrounding jurisdictions, and the State of Maryland as
reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of
Labor;
         (ix)   the ability of the County and its employees to sustain the
standard of services provided to the public; and
         (x)   such other information as the neutral arbitrator deems necessary
to fully weigh the final offers of the Administration and the Uniformed Public
Safety Exclusive Representative;
      (4)   issue a final written award that chooses between and sustains in
its entirety either the final offer of the Administration or that of the
Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative and that briefly states an
explanation as to why the selected final offer was chosen and why the rejected
offer was not; and
      (5)   have copies of a final written award delivered to the
Administration and the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative on or
before the earlier of April 20 or within 10 days after the hearing is
adjourned.
   (k)   Revision of final written award by neutral arbitrator. Upon a motion,
notice, and after offering the Administration and the Uniformed Public Safety
Exclusive Representative an appropriate opportunity to be heard, the neutral
arbitrator may revise the final written award, if necessary, to correct
clerical or other ministerial errors at any time within 10 days after issuing
the award, but in no event later than April 30.
   (l)   Revision of final written award by agreement of parties. The
Administration and the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative may
agree to modify the final written award of the neutral arbitrator by a written
agreement that is executed by the County Executive and the Uniformed Public
Safety Exclusive Representative and the final written award as amended shall
have full force and effect.
   (m)   Final written award final and binding. The final written award issued
by the neutral arbitrator, or the final written award as modified in accordance
with subsections (k), (l), or (p), and the memorandum of agreed issues shall be
final and binding upon the County and the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive
Representative and shall be implemented as part of the budget process for the
appropriate fiscal years.
   (n)   Petition to vacate final written award. The County or the Uniformed
Public Safety Exclusive Representative may move to vacate all or part of the
final written award of the arbitrator by filing a petition to vacate the
arbitrator's final written award in the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County
in accordance with and subject to the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article,
§ 3-224, of the State Code.
   (o)   Revision of final written award by Circuit Court. In the event the
County or the Uniformed Public Safety Exclusive Representative files a petition
to vacate under subsection (n), the Court may upon a motion, notice, and a
hearing stay all or part of the final written award challenged should the Court
find that a petition to vacate is supported by colorable grounds.
   (p)   Severability of provisions. Should any part of the final written award
be vacated pursuant to a final order of the Court of competent jurisdiction,
the portions of the final written award that are not vacated and the written
memorandum of agreed issues shall be severable and given full force and effect.
   (q)   Time limits mandatory. All time limits in this section are mandatory
except to the extent waived by the Administration and the Uniformed Public
Safety Exclusive Representative in a written agreement.
   (r)   Costs shared. The parties shall share equally all costs and
professional fees of mediators and arbitrators engaged under this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-110.1) (Bill No. 1-03; Bill No. 88-10; Bill No. 4-11;
Bill No. 91-12)
§ 6-4-112. Prohibition against strikes and lockouts.
   (a)   Strikes prohibited. An employee or an exclusive representative may not
engage in, initiate, sponsor, support, or direct a strike. If an employee or
exclusive representative violates this section, the County Executive may, as
the County Executive considers necessary in the public interest impose
disciplinary action, including removal from County service, of employees
engaged in the illegal conduct; terminate an exclusive representative's dues
deduction privilege; or revoke exclusive representation certification and
disqualify an exclusive representative from participation in representation
elections for a period up to two years.
   (b)   Lockouts prohibited. The Administration and the County Council may not
engage in, initiate, or direct a lockout of classified employees.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-111)
§ 6-4-113. Binding arbitration.
   (a)   Binding arbitration in lieu of appeal to Personnel Board. The parties
to any appeal that the Personnel Board may hear under §
521(a)(2) of the Charter may submit the matter to binding arbitration instead
of an appeal to the Personnel Board.
   (b)   Notice and filing. Within the period of time for submission of the
matter to the Personnel Board, the party requesting submission of the grievance
to binding arbitration shall:
      (1)   provide to all other parties and the Personnel Officer written
notice of the request, including a summary of the issues presented by the
grievance, and the relief sought; and
      (2)   file with the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service or another
appropriate service mutually agreeable to the parties a written request for a
panel of nine arbitrators who are members of the National Academy of
Arbitrators.
   (c)   Arbitrator selection. The arbitrator shall be chosen from the panel by
mutual agreement of the parties. If the parties are unable to agree, the
parties, beginning with the party requesting arbitration, will alternately
strike panel members until there is only one member remaining. The sole
remaining panel member shall arbitrate the dispute.
   (d)   Powers and duties of arbitrator. The arbitrator may:
      (1)   convene and adjourn hearings on the grievance;
      (2)   administer oaths;
      (3)   call and examine witnesses;
      (4)   issue subpoenas to compel the presence of witnesses and the
production of documents;
      (5)   hear the evidence; and
      (6)   issue a final and binding decision on the grievance.
   (e)   Hearings. Arbitration hearings shall be conducted in Anne Arundel
County unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties. The arbitrator shall
designate a time and place for the hearing and notify the parties not less than
20 days before the hearing.
   (f)   Rights at hearing. At the arbitration hearing, each party has the
right to be heard, to present evidence material to the controversy, and to
examine and cross-examine witnesses. Arbitrators are not bound by the technical
rules of evidence.
   (g)   Jurisdiction and authority. The jurisdiction and authority of the
arbitrator is the same as that of the Personnel Board acting under §
521(a)(2) of the Charter.
   (h)   Written decision. The arbitrator shall issue a written decision on the
grievance within 30 days after declaring the record closed unless the parties
otherwise agree in writing.
   (i)   Costs shared. Each party shall bear its own expenses in connection
with the arbitration proceedings. The parties shall share equally the cost of
obtaining the panel as provided in subsection (b)(2) and the fee and expenses
of the arbitrator.
(1985 Code, Art. 8, § 4-112) (Bill No. 4-93)
TITLE 5. RETIREE HEALTH BENEFITS TRUST
Section
   
6-5-101.   Definitions.
   
6-5-102.   Established.
   
6-5-103.   Declaration of trust; contributions to and distributions from the
Trust.
   
6-5-104.   Board of Trustees.
   Charter Reference – §
815.
§ 6-5-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Board" means the Board of Trustees for the Anne Arundel County
Retiree Health Benefits Trust.
      (2)   "Trust" means the Anne Arundel County Retiree Health Benefits
Trust.
(Bill No. 13-15)
§ 6-5-102. Established.
   (a)   Trust established. There is a Retiree Health Benefits Trust
established pursuant to §
815 of the Charter.
   (b)   Agreements. The County may enter into agreements with one or more
political subdivisions of the State or units of the State Government to pool
assets in the Trust for purposes of investment.
(Bill No. 13-15; Bill No. 68-23)
§ 6-5-103. Declaration of trust; contributions to and distributions from the
Trust.
   (a)   Declaration of trust. The balance of funds in the Reserve Fund for
Retiree Health Benefits on July 1, 2015 shall on that date be deemed, as a
matter of law and without the necessity of further administrative or
legislative action, to be held in trust under the Retiree Health Benefits Trust
and shall be transferred to the Retiree Health Benefits Trust as a contribution
to the separate asset pool for Anne Arundel County, Maryland in the manner
directed by the Board.
   (b)   Contributions to the Trust. 
      (1)   Beginning with fiscal year 2016, appropriations for the purposes of
paying the health care benefits of eligible retired County employees and their
eligible spouses and dependents, the health care benefits of the eligible
survivors of County employees and retired County employees, the expenses of
administering those benefits, and the expenses of administering the Trust may
be made directly to the Trust as contributions to the separate asset pool for
Anne Arundel County, Maryland.
      (2)   Beginning with fiscal year 2016, contributions shall be made to the
Trust from the cost-sharing portion of the health benefit payments of eligible
retired County employees and their eligible spouses and dependents, the health
care benefits of the eligible survivors of County employees and retired County
employees.
      (3)   The amount of appropriations to the Trust for each purpose, if any,
shall be determined in the annual budget of the County and shall be governed by
the provisions of §
718(i) of the Charter as follows:
         (i)   The County Council may increase the appropriations to the Trust
in amounts exceeding the recommendations of the County Executive.
         (ii)   Appropriations to the Trust shall be subject to the limit on
contingency reserves set forth in §
706(c) of the Charter only to the extent that the appropriation would cause the
separate asset pool for Anne Arundel County, Maryland, to exceed the unfunded
accrued liability for the health care benefits of eligible retired County
employees and their eligible spouses and dependents, and the health care
benefits of the eligible survivors of County employees and retired County
employees.
   (c)   Payments and distributions from the Trust. Payments and distributions
from the separate asset pool for Anne Arundel County, Maryland, held in trust
under the Retiree Health Benefits Trust, shall be solely for the purposes of
paying health care benefits of retired County employees and their spouses,
dependents, and survivors, and for paying the expenses of administering those
benefits and for paying the expenses of administering the Trust.
   (d)   Trust expenses. Payment of benefits under the Trust, expenses of
administering benefits, and expenses of administering the Trust shall be
authorized on behalf of the County by the County Personnel Officer.
(Bill No. 13-15)
§ 6-5-104. Board of Trustees.
   (a)   Established. There is a Board of Trustees for the Anne Arundel County
Retiree Health Benefits Trust pursuant to §
815 of the Charter.
   (b)   Composition.
      (1)   The Board shall consist of at least eight Trustees.
      (2)   The Chief Administrative Officer, the County Controller, the County
Personnel Officer, and the County Budget Officer shall serve as ex officio
Trustees.
      (3)   Four Trustees shall be appointed by the County Executive and
confirmed by resolution of the County Council. Of the four Trustees:
         (i)   one shall be an active non-represented employee in the
classified service or a retiree who retired as a non-represented employee in
the classified service, and who is not an ex officio Trustee under (b)(2);
         (ii)   one shall be an active employee who is a member of one of the
uniformed public safety unions or a retiree who retired as a member of one of
the uniformed public safety unions, and who is nominated by a majority of the
presidents of the County uniformed public safety unions;
         (iii)   one shall be an active employee who is in the classified
service represented by an exclusive representative other than one of the County
uniformed public safety unions or a retiree who retired as a classified
employee represented by an exclusive representative other than one of the
County uniformed public safety unions, and who is nominated by a majority of
the presidents of the non-uniformed public safety unions; and
         (iv)   one shall be a County resident with knowledge of finances and
investing who is not an employee or retiree of the County.
      (4)   Additional Trustees may be appointed under the agreements allowed
by §
6-5-102(b).
   (c)   Terms.
      (1)    Of the Trustees appointed by the County Executive, one shall be
appointed for an initial term of one year and one shall be appointed for an
initial term of two years. After the expiration of the initial terms, all terms
shall be for three years. A Trustee who becomes a retiree during the Trustee's
term may complete that term. Ex officio members shall serve at the pleasure of
the County Executive.
      (2)   A Trustee whose term has expired holds over until a successor is
appointed.
      (3)   The County Executive shall fill a vacancy for the remainder of an
unexpired term of a Trustee in the same manner as the original appointment.
   (d)   Officers. The County Executive shall annually appoint a Chair from the
membership of the Board. Neither the County Personnel Officer nor the County
Controller may serve as the Chair. The County Personnel Officer shall serve as
Secretary to the Board.
   (e)   Duties. The Board shall:
      (1)   keep true and accurate records of all transactions of the Trust;
and
      (2)   publish annual audited financial statements of the Trust, prepared
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles by September 30th
of each year.
(Bill No. 13-15)
TITLE 6. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SAVINGS PLAN
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; General Provisions
   
6-6-101.   Plan established.
   
6-6-102.   Definitions.
   
6-6-103.   Eligibility.
Subtitle 2. The Trust; Contributions
   
6-6-201.   Trust established; contributions.
   
6-6-202.   Vesting.
   
6-6-203.   Determination of normal retirement date.
   
6-6-204.   Limitations on contributions.
   
6-6-205.   Participants' investment elections.
   
6-6-206.   Participants' investment options.
   
6-6-207.   Military benefits.
Subtitle 3. Distributions
   
6-6-301.   Distributions.
   
6-6-302.   Death of a participant.
   
6-6-303.   Disability.
   
6-6-304.   Mandatory commencement of benefits.
   
6-6-305.   Direct rollovers.
   
6-6-306.   Minimum distributions.
   
6-6-307.   Eligibility for retiree health insurance.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 6-6-101. Plan established.
   The "Anne Arundel County Employee Retirement Savings Plan" is established
effective July 1, 2018. The plan provisions include the provisions of this
title and the provisions of any separate trust agreement not inconsistent with
the provisions of this title.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-102. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
   (a)   "Active participant" means a participant who is currently making
contributions to the plan, including a participant on an authorized leave of
absence without pay of not more than one year.
   (b)   "Active vested participant" means an active participant who has met
the requirements for full or partial vesting under the plan.
   (c)   "Administrator" means the Anne Arundel County Personnel Officer or any
other County official designated by the County Executive.
   (d)   "Compensation" means the participant's annual salary for an employee
paid on a salary pay scale; the rate of hourly pay multiplied by 2,080 hours
for a full-time employee paid on an hourly pay scale; and the rate of hourly
pay multiplied by scheduled hours for a part-time employee paid on an hourly
pay scale. "Compensation" includes earnings that have been reduced under the
County's Deferred Compensation Plan under the Internal Revenue Code § 457 and
under any other statutory fringe benefit program sponsored by an employer and
permitted by the Internal Revenue Code. Notwithstanding any other provision of
the plan, the compensation of any participant taken into account under the plan
for any year may not exceed the dollar limit under Internal Revenue Code § 401
(a)(17). This dollar limitation shall be adjusted automatically at the same
time and in the same manner as any cost-of-living adjustment made by the
Secretary of the Treasury under Internal Revenue Code § 415(d), as modified by
Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(17).
   (e)   "Employee" means an individual who is employed by the County or who is
otherwise eligible to participate in the plan.
   (f)   "Employee contribution" means that portion of the participant's plan
account which is attributable to contributions made under §
6-6-201(b) and picked up under §
6-6-201(c), as increased or decreased by investment.
   (g)   "Employer" means the County and, when applicable, any agency whose
employees are participants in the plan.
   (h)   "Employer contribution" means that portion of the participant's plan
account which is attributable to contributions made under §
6-6-201(d), as increased or decreased by investment.
   (i)   "Internal Revenue Code" means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and
the regulations promulgated thereunder, as amended from time to time.
   (j)   "Military service" means induction into the Armed Forces of the United
States, as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101(a)(4), for training and service under the
Selective Service Training and Service Act of 1940 or a subsequent act of a
similar nature; enlistment into the Armed Forces of the United States as
defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101(a)(4); or membership in a reserve component of the
Armed Forces of the United States, as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101(a)(4), on
active duty or ordered or assigned to active duty.
   (k)   "Normal retirement age" means age 60.
   (l)   "Participant" means any employee who participates in the plan as
provided in §
6-6-103. A participant shall continue to be a participant as long as the
participant has a plan account.
   (m)   "Plan" means the Anne Arundel County Employee Retirement Savings Plan
created under this title.
   (n)   "Plan account" means the amount held under the plan for the account of
a participant, and shall equal the sum, as increased or decreased by
investment, of the participant's employee contribution, employer contribution,
and rollover contribution.
   (o)   "Plan year" means the 12 month period beginning each January 1 and
ending each December 31 during which the plan is in effect.
   (p)   "Qualified domestic relations order" means a qualified domestic
relations order as defined in the Internal Revenue Code § 414(p)(1)(a).
   (q)   "Rollover contribution" means an amount contributed to the plan on or
before the 60th day after the day the contributing employee received it, if the
amount received by the employee is a distribution which is eligible for
rollover to the plan under Internal Revenue Code § 402 and is a distribution
from one of the following:
      (1)   another retirement plan qualified under Internal Revenue Code § 401
(a) or § 403(a);
      (2)   to the extent permitted under the Internal Revenue Code, an
individual retirement account or annuity described in Internal Revenue Code §
408(a) or (b), but only if the distribution would otherwise be includible in
gross income;
      (3)   to the extent permitted under the Internal Revenue Code, a
distribution from an annuity contract described in Internal Revenue Code § 403
(b); or
      (4)   to the extent permitted under the Internal Revenue Code, an
eligible plan under Internal Revenue Code § 457(b) that is maintained by a
State, political subdivision of a State, or any agency or instrumentality of a
State or political subdivision of a State.
   (r)   "Rollover contribution account" means that portion of a participant's
plan account which is attributable to contributions made under §
6-6-201(e), as increased or decreased by investment.
   (s)   "Savings plan service" means the total time of employment during which
the employer contributed to the plan on behalf of the participant plus credited
service under any Anne Arundel County pension plan.
   (t)   "Total and permanent disability" means that, as a result of bodily
injury or disease, the participant is wholly and permanently prevented from
engaging in any occupation or employment for remuneration or profit or
continuing as an employee of the County.
   (u)   "Trust" means the trust established under the plan or under a separate
trust agreement which forms a part of the plan.
   (v)   "Trust fund" means the assets of the trust.
   (w)   "Trustee" means the trustee of the trust serving from time to time.
   (x)   "Vested" or "vesting" means the accrual by a participant of a right to
a portion or all of the participant's plan account.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-103. Eligibility.
   (a)   Eligible employees.
      (1)   Any employee hired in any position eligible to participate in the
Employees' Retirement Plan under Article 5, Title 3 of this Code, on or after
July 1, 2018, and not deemed ineligible under subsection (b), shall have the
option to elect irrevocably to participate in either the Employees' Retirement
Plan or the plan within 30 days of the employee's date of employment, in
accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by the County.
      (2)   Other than an exempt employee or an elected official, any employee
who is a non-vested member of the Employees' Retirement Plan as of July 1,
2018, who was hired on or after December 1, 2014, and who remains employed in
an eligible capacity on July 1, 2018, and not deemed ineligible under
subsection (b), shall have the option, during the period from July 1, 2018,
through and including December 31, 2018, to elect irrevocably to cease
participation in the Employees' Retirement Plan and participate in the plan, in
accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by the County.
      (3)   An exempt employee or an elected official who is a non-vested
member of the Employees' Retirement Plan as of December 3, 2018, who was hired
on or after December 1, 2014, who remains employed in an eligible capacity on
December 3, 2018, and who is not deemed ineligible under subsection (b), shall
have the option, during the period from December 3, 2018, through and including
December 31, 2018, to elect irrevocably to cease participation in the
Employees' Retirement Plan and participate in the plan in accordance with the
guidelines and procedures established by the County.
      (4)   (i)   Except as provided in subparagraph (4)(ii), any person
classified by the County as a temporary or contractual employee of the County,
as determined by the County, under §
802(a)(14) and (17) of the Charter in the position of School Health RN1, School
Licensed Practical Nurse, School Health Assistant, or School Special Needs Aide
shall have the option to elect to participate in the plan within 30 days of the
employee’s date of employment.
         (ii)   A person described in subparagraph (4)(i) as of August 8, 2024
shall have 60 days from August 8, 2024 to elect to participate in the plan in
accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by the County.
   (b)   Ineligible employees. The following individuals are not eligible to
participate in the plan:
      (1)   except as provided in paragraph (a)(4), any person classified by
the County as a temporary or contractual employee of the County, as determined
by the County, under §
802(a)(14) and (17) of the Charter;
      (2)   any employee working less than 50% of the amount of time specified
for the position;
      (3)   any employee of the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District;
      (4)   any employee of the Public Library Association of Annapolis and
Anne Arundel County, Inc. in positions eligible for any State pension or
retirement plan;
      (5)   any employee of the Domestic Relations Division of the Circuit
Court for Anne Arundel County; and
      (6)   except as provided in paragraph (a)(4), any other employee who is
excluded from participation in the Employees’ Retirement Plan.
   (c)   Break in eligibility. A participant who ceases to be an eligible
employee for any reason and who subsequently becomes an eligible employee shall
be eligible to participate in the plan on the first day the employee again
becomes an eligible employee.
(Bill No. 95-17; Bill No. 49-24)
SUBTITLE 2. THE TRUST; CONTRIBUTIONS
§ 6-6-201. Trust established; contributions.
   (a)   Established. There is hereby established a trust fund for the Anne
Arundel County Employee Retirement Savings Plan. Any fees and expenses with
respect to the administration of the plan shall be paid from the trust, unless
otherwise noted in this title, except to the extent that the County decides to
pay such administrative fees and expenses from any other source permitted by
applicable law.
   (b)   Employee contributions; compensation. Each participant shall make an
election to reduce the participant's compensation per payroll period in an
amount equal to 4% of the participant's compensation, subject to the employer's
right to amend or revoke the participant's election as provided in this title.
   (c)   Employer "pick-up" contributions. The employer shall "pick-up" the
contributions described in subsection (b) in accordance with the Internal
Revenue Code § 414(h)(2), and a participant shall have no option of receiving
the "picked-up" contributions directly, so that, for tax purposes, these
contributions shall be treated as employer pre-tax contributions.
   (d)   Employer mandatory contributions. The employer shall make
contributions to the employer contribution for each participant in the plan in
an amount equal to 8% of the participant's compensation. The employer shall
have the right to amend or revoke a participant's contribution election if such
election causes the participant's contributions to exceed the limits on annual
additions imposed by §
6-6-204 or other applicable law.
   (e)   Employee rollover contributions.
      (1)   Any eligible employee may transfer any rollover contributions to
the trust. An employee's rollover contribution shall be credited to and held as
the participant's rollover contribution. A participant shall be 100% vested in
the participant's rollover contribution at all times. A rollover contribution
may not be taken into account in determining the annual additions to a
participant's plan account under §
6-6-204.
      (2)   The Administrator may reject any rollover contribution which is not
qualified to be a rollover contribution to the plan under this title or under
the Internal Revenue Code. The Administrator may make all investigations
necessary to determine whether any amount submitted as a rollover contribution
should be accepted.
      (3)   A participant may at any time withdraw all or any portion of the
participant's rollover contribution, subject, however, to such uniform rules
that the Administrator may establish, including any required notice, frequency
of withdrawals, and minimum withdrawal amounts at any one time.
   (f)   Transfer of contributions from Employees' Retirement Plan.  
      (1)   Any employee who elects irrevocably to cease participation in the
Employees' Retirement Plan and participate in the plan pursuant to §
6-6-103(a)(2) shall receive a transfer from the Employees' Retirement Plan into
the participant's plan account as follows:
         (i)   1.   The amount transferred shall include the greater of the
estimated value of the employee's accrued benefit under the Employees'
Retirement Plan as of June 30, 2018, and the employee's accumulated
contributions to the Employees' Retirement Plan plus credited interest as
described in §
5-1-108 of this Code as of June 30, 2018.
            2.   The estimated value of the accrued benefit shall be calculated
based on the employee's credited service in the Employees' Retirement Plan and
actual earnings as of June 30, 2018. The estimated value of the accrued benefit
shall be based on actuarial equivalence, as defined in the Employees'
Retirement Plan, at normal retirement age, as defined in the Employees'
Retirement Plan, but not earlier than age 60, and discounted to the employee's
age as of June 30, 2018, at a rate of 6% per annum.
            3.   Of the amount transferred, the employee's contribution shall
be the employee's accumulated contributions to the Employees' Retirement Plan
plus credited interest described in §
5-1-108 of the Code as of June 30, 2018, and the employer's contribution shall
be the remainder, if any.
         (ii)   The amount transferred shall include, as employee contribution,
the employee's contributions to the Employees' Retirement Plan from July 1,
2018, until the date of entry into the plan plus credited interest as described
in §
5-1-108 of this Code.
      (2)   An exempt employee or elected official who elects irrevocably to
cease participation in the Employees' Retirement Plan and participate in the
plan pursuant to §
6-6-103(a)(3) shall receive a transfer from the Employees' Retirement Plan into
the participant's plan account as follows:
         (i)   1.   The amount transferred shall include the greater of the
estimated value of the employee's accrued benefit under the Employees'
Retirement Plan as of December 2, 2018, and the employee's accumulated
contributions to the Employees' Retirement Plan plus credited interest as
described in §
5-1-108 of this Code as of December 2, 2018.
            2.   The estimated value of the accrued benefit shall be calculated
based on the employee's credited service in the Employees' Retirement Plan and
actual earnings as of December 2, 2018. The estimated value of the accrued
benefit shall be based on actuarial equivalence, as defined in the Employees'
Retirement Plan, at normal retirement age, as defined in the Employees'
Retirement Plan, but not earlier than age 60, and discounted to the employee's
age as of December 2, 2018, at a rate of 6% per annum.
            3.   Of the amount transferred, the employee's contribution shall
be the employee's accumulated contributions to the Employees' Retirement Plan
plus credited interest described in §
5-1-108 of this Code as of December 2, 2018, and the employer's contribution
shall be the remainder, if any.
         (ii)   The amount transferred shall include, as employee contribution,
the employee's contributions to the Employees' Retirement Plan from December 3,
2018, until the date of entry into the plan plus credited interest as described
in §
5-1-108 of this Code.
      (3)   (i)   If an employee elects irrevocably to cease participation in
the Employees' Retirement Plan and participate in the plan pursuant to §
6-6-103(a)(2), the County shall pay into the plan as employer contribution 8%
of the employee's compensation for the period of July 1, 2018, until the date
of entry into the plan.
         (ii)   If an exempt employee or elected official elects irrevocably to
cease participation in the Employees' Retirement Plan and participate in the
plan pursuant to §
6-6-103(a)(3), the County shall pay into the plan as employer contribution 8%
of the employee's compensation for the period of December 3, 2018, until the
date of entry into the plan.
      (4)   Upon transfer of the amounts described in subsection (f)(1) or (f)
(2) into the plan, the participant shall be credited with service under the
plan for the period of the participant's participation credited service in the
Employees' Retirement Plan.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-202. Vesting.
   (a)   Employee contributions. A participant shall be 100% vested in the
participant's employee contributions at all times.
   (b)   Employer contribution. Except as provided in §
6-6-302 and §
6-6-303, a participant vests in the participant's employer contribution in
accordance with the following schedule:
 
Years of credited plan service Vested percentage
Less than 1                    0%
1                              20%
2                              40%
3                              60%
4                              80%
5 or more                      100%
 
   (c)   Vested and unvested funds.
      (1)   The vested portion of a terminated participant's plan account shall
be payable as provided in this title.
      (2)   The unvested portion of the terminated participant's plan account
shall be forfeited on the earlier of:
         (i)   the date of a complete distribution of the participant's plan
account; or
         (ii)   the last day of the plan year in which the participant's
employment with the employer is terminated. Forfeitures of employer
contributions shall be transferred to a plan forfeiture account and may be used
to pay any expenses payable by the trust or may be reallocated as the employer
contribution to other plan accounts.
   (d)   County's rights to amend or terminate plan. The rights in which a
participant vests under the plan are subject to the County's rights to amend or
terminate the plan in accordance with §
5-1-103 of this Code.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-203. Determination of normal retirement date.
   (a)   Normal retirement date. The participant's normal retirement date shall
be the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the month of
the participant's attainment of normal retirement age.
   (b)   Early retirement date. There is no early retirement date under the
plan.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-204. Limitations on contributions.
   (a)   Basic limitations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title,
a participant's total annual additions under the plan for any plan year may not
exceed the lesser of:
      (1)   the dollar limit under Internal Revenue Code § 415(c)(1)(a) in
effect for the plan year; or
      (2)   100% of the participant's compensation for such plan year.
   (b)   Internal Revenue Code limitations. The limitations of Internal Revenue
Code § 415 and the Final Treasury Regulations issued under Internal Revenue
Code § 415, applying the special rules under the Final Treasury Regulations
applicable to governmental plans, are hereby incorporated by reference. (Bill
No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-205. Participants' investment elections.
   The County may establish and implement procedures pursuant to which each
participant and each former participant with a vested plan account shall be
permitted to direct the investment of all or a portion of a participant's plan
account into one or more investment options described in §
6-6-206. If any participant or former participant fails to make an investment
election, such participant's or former participant's plan account shall be
invested in an investment option, or a combination of investment options,
selected by the Administrator, which offer reasonable opportunities for capital
appreciation, preservation of capital, and liquidity. Investment elections may
be changed at least quarterly on any January 1, April 1, July 1 or October 1,
subject to any rules established by the Administrator and any rules or
restrictions of any insurance company or other entity serving as the manager or
funding vehicle of any of the investment funds. Investment elections shall be
subject to such uniform rules and procedures as the Administrator shall
establish. Any fees charged based on any individual fund selection shall be
charged against the participant's plan account.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-206. Participants' investment options.
   If procedures are implemented which permit participants to direct the
investment of their plan accounts, the trustee shall establish such investment
options as the Administrator shall direct pursuant to an award under § 8-2-118
of this Code, and shall divide the trust among investment options in accordance
with the investment directions of participants made as provided in the plan.
Investment options shall be established either by direct investment or through
the medium of a bank, trust fund, insurance contract, or regulated investment
company mutual fund, as the Administrator shall direct pursuant to an award
under § 8-2-118 of this Code. Each investment option shall be held and
administered as part of the trust, but shall be separately invested and
accounted for. The assets of the trust invested in each of the options shall be
separately valued at fair market value as of the last day of the plan year or
any other date or dates chosen by the County.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-207. Military service benefits.
   (a)   In general. Notwithstanding any provision of this title to the
contrary, contributions, benefits, and service credit with respect to qualified
military service shall be provided in accordance with the Internal Revenue Code
§ 414(u).
   (b)   Application. This section applies to an employee who:
      (1)   has completed qualified military service under the Uniformed
Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 ("USERRA");
      (2)   the employer has rehired under USERRA; and
      (3)   is a participant entitled to makeup contributions under Internal
Revenue Code § 414(u).
   (c)   Employer contributions. The employer shall make up any employer
contribution the employer would have made and which the Plan Administrator
would have allocated to the participant's account had the participant remained
employed by the employer during the period of qualified military service.
   (d)   Determination of compensation. During the period of qualified military
service, the participant is deemed to receive compensation equal to that which
the participant would have received had the participant remained employed by
the County based on the participant's rate of pay that would have been in
effect for the participant during the period of qualified military service. If
the compensation during such period would have been uncertain, the County shall
use the participant's actual average compensation from the County for the
longer of the 12 month period immediately preceding the period of qualified
military service, or the period of the participant's employment.
   (e)   Employee contributions. The County shall allow a participant to whom
this section applies to make up employee contributions to the participant's
account. The participant may make up the maximum amount of employee
contributions which the participant would have been able to contribute under
the terms of this title during the period of qualified military service, less
any such amounts the participant actually contributed during such period. The
participant must make up any contribution under this subsection (d) between the
participant's re-employment commencement date and the lesser of:
      (1)   five years following the participant's re-employment commencement
date; or
      (2)   a period equal to three times the length of the participant's
qualified military service.
   (f)   Limitations. Contributions under this section are annual additions in
the year for which such contributions are allocated, but not in the year in
which such contributions are made.
   (g)   No earnings. A participant receiving any make-up contribution under
this section is not entitled to an allocation of any earnings on any such
contribution prior to the time that the employer actually makes the
contribution or makes timely deposits of the participant's own make-up employee
contributions to the trust.
(Bill No. 95-17)
SUBTITLE 3. DISTRIBUTIONS
§ 6-6-301. Distribution.
   (a)   Generally. Except as otherwise set forth in this subtitle,
distribution of the vested portion of a participant's plan account may be made
or may commence following the participant's termination of employment for any
reason and as soon as is practicable after arrangements for payment have been
made by the Administrator and the trustee, provided that the participant may
elect to defer the distribution until a date which is no later than the
participant's required distribution commencement date under §
6-6-304.
   (b)   Payment. 
      (1)   The normal form of benefit under the plan is a lump sum.
      (2)   Except as set forth in this subtitle, in lieu of receiving the
normal form of benefit provided in subsection (b)(1), a participant may elect
to receive distribution in periodic withdrawals of the same or varying amounts,
subject to the requirements of §
6-6-304.
      (3)   Election of the form of payment must be in writing on a form
provided by the Administrator and filed with the Administrator prior to the
commencement of retirement benefit payments. If no election is made, then a
lump sum payment shall be deemed to have been elected by the participant.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, if
the present value of the vested portion of a participant's plan account to be
distributed does not exceed $5,000 on the date the distribution commences
pursuant to this article, such participant's vested plan account shall be
distributed in a lump sum as soon as practicable after the date on which the
participant becomes entitled to the distribution.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-302. Death of a participant.
   (a)   Vesting. If a participant's employment is terminated due to the death
of the participant, to the extent not then vested, the participant shall become
fully vested in the participant's plan account.
   (b)   Payment.
      (1)   Upon the death of a participant, the participant's plan account
shall be paid to the participant's designated beneficiary. If there is no
designated beneficiary, a participant's beneficiary shall be the participant's
surviving spouse, or, if the participant has no surviving spouse, the
participant's estate.
      (2)   Payment of the participant's plan account on death shall be made in
a lump sum form of benefit as soon as is practicable following the
participant's death and after arrangements for payment have been made by the
Administrator and the trustee.
   (c)   Death while performing qualified military service. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this title to the contrary, in the case of a participant who
dies while performing qualified military service, as defined in Internal
Revenue Code § 414(u), the survivors of the participant are entitled to any
additional benefits provided under this plan, other than benefit accruals
relating to the period of qualified military service, as if the participant had
resumed employment and then terminated employment on account of death.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-303. Disability.
   If a participant's employment with the employer terminates because of total
and permanent disability, to the extent not then vested, the participant shall
become fully vested in the participant's plan account.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-304. Mandatory commencement of benefits.
   If a participant continues employment with the employer past normal
retirement age, the participant's distribution of the participant's vested plan
account must be made or must commence by the first day of April of the calendar
year following the later of:
      (1)   the calendar year in which the participant terminates employment
with the employer; or
      (2)   the calendar year in which the participant attains age 70½.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-305. Direct rollovers.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following terms have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Eligible rollover distribution" has the meaning given such term in
Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(31)(d).
      (2)   "Eligible retirement plan" has the meaning given such term in
Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(31)(e).
      (3)   "Distributee" includes the participant and the participant's
surviving spouse. In addition, "distributee" includes the participant's spouse
or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a qualified domestic
relations order, as defined in Internal Revenue Code § 414(p), with respect to
the payee's interest under the plan. In addition, for distributions to an
eligible retirement plan that is an individual retirement account described in
Internal Revenue Code § 408(a) or an individual retirement annuity described in
Internal Revenue Code § 408(b), other than an endowment contract, "distributee"
also includes the participant's surviving non-spouse beneficiary who is a
designated beneficiary within the meaning of Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(9)
(e).
   (b)   Election. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, any
distributee who is to receive an eligible rollover distribution may elect the
direct trustee-to-trustee rollover of the distribution to an eligible
retirement plan. A direct rollover election must be made pursuant to the
procedures established by the Plan Administrator and must specify the eligible
retirement plan to which the direct rollover is to be made. If the distributee
elects a direct rollover as permitted hereunder, the Plan Administrator shall
make the rollover as elected.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-306. Minimum distributions.
   This section is included in the plan to comply with Internal Revenue Code §
401(a)(9) and the regulations thereunder which are incorporated by reference.
To the extent that there is any conflict between the provisions of Internal
Revenue Code § 401(a)(9) and the regulations thereunder and any other provision
in this title, the provisions of Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(9) and the
regulations thereunder shall control. If the participant's spouse is not the
beneficiary with respect to any distribution of benefits, the method of
distribution elected must satisfy the incidental death benefit requirements
specified in the Internal Revenue Code § 401(a)(9)(g) and Treasury Regulation §
1.401(a)(9)-2.
(Bill No. 95-17)
§ 6-6-307. Eligibility for retiree health insurance.
   Any participant who is an employee described in §
5-3-103(a)(1) or (2) of this Code at the participant's normal retirement age
and who retires from County service shall be eligible for retiree health
insurance pursuant to this section and §
6-1-308 until the last day of the month coincident with the participant's
attainment of age 65.
(Bill No. 95-17)
ARTICLE 7. PUBLIC ETHICS
   Title
      
1.   IN GENERAL
      
2.   ETHICS COMMISSION
      
3.   ADVISORY OPINIONS
      
4.   PROCEDURES FOR COMPLAINT
      
5.   CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
      
6.   FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
      
7.   LOBBYING DISCLOSURE
      
8.   ENFORCEMENT
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, Title 5.
TITLE 1. IN GENERAL
Section
   
7-1-101.   Definitions.
   
7-1-102.   Legislative findings; policy; liberal construction.
   
7-1-103.   Administration of title.
   
7-1-104.   Other laws.
   
7-1-105.   Employee training.
§ 7-1-101. Definitions.
   In this article, the following words have the meanings indicated unless a
different definition is adopted for a particular provision or the context
clearly requires a different meaning.
      (1)   "Board", "commission", "authority", "or similar entity" means a
body comprised of at least two members, all of whom are appointed by the County
Executive, the County Council, or a County employee and serve on a part-time
basis.
      (2)   "Business entity" means a person engaged in business, whether
profit or nonprofit, regardless of form.
      (3)   "Child" or "children" includes a biological child, adopted child,
stepchild, foster child, or grandchild, of any age.
      (4)   "Compensation" means money or any other valuable thing, regardless
of form, received or to be received by a person from an employer for services
rendered.
      (5)   "Employee" means an individual elected to, appointed to, or
employed in the Executive or Legislative Branch of the County; a member,
executive director, or employee of any County board, commission, authority, or
similar entity; an employee of the Public Library Association of Annapolis and
Anne Arundel County, Inc.; a commissioner, the executive director, or employee
of the Housing Commission; or an employee, officer, or director of Anne Arundel
Economic Development Corporation, Arundel Community Development Services, Inc.,
or Anne Arundel Workforce Development Corporation. "Employee" includes anyone
designated as being in an "acting" capacity. "Employee" does not include an
individual who is subject to the provisions of the Maryland Public Ethics Law.
      (6)   "Employer" means a person who pays or agrees to pay compensation to
another person for services rendered.
      (7)   "Entity doing business with the County" means:
         (i)   a lobbyist required to register under
Title 7;
         (ii)   a person regulated by the governmental unit of the applicable
employee; or
         (iii)   a person who is a party to one or a combination of sales,
purchases, leases, or contracts to, from, or with the County involving
consideration:
            1.   of at least $5,000 on a cumulative basis during a calendar
year for which a statement required by
Title 6 is filed, regardless of when the consideration is to be paid; and
            2.   which shall include as of the award or execution of a contract
or lease, the total consideration committed to be paid under the contract or
lease, to the extent ascertainable when awarded or executed, regardless of the
period over which payments are to be made.
      (8)   "Ethics Commission" means the Anne Arundel County Ethics
Commission.
      (9)   "Executive action" means an act for which the Executive Branch of
the County government is responsible and that is taken by an employee of that
branch.
      (10)   "Financial interest" means:
         (i)   ownership of an interest as the result of which the owner has
received within the past three years, is currently receiving, or in the future
is entitled to receive, more than $1,000 per year; or
         (ii)   ownership of more than 3% of a business entity by an employee
or the spouse of an employee; or
         (iii)   ownership of securities of any kind that represent or are
convertible into ownership of more than 3% of a business entity by an employee
or the spouse of an employee.
      (11)   "Gift" means the transfer of anything of economic value,
regardless of form, without adequate and lawful consideration. "Gift" does not
include the solicitation, acceptance, receipt, or regulation of a political
contribution that is regulated in accordance with the Election Law Article of
the State Code, or any other State law regulating the conduct of elections or
the receipt of political contributions.
      (12)   "Governmental unit" means a department, office, agency,
commission, board, council, authority, or other body of County government that
is established by law.
      (13)   "Honorarium" means the payment of money or anything of value for
speaking to, participating in, or attending a meeting or other function, or
writing an article that has been or is intended to be published. "Honorarium"
does not include payment for writing a book that has been or is intended to be
published.
      (14)   "Immediate family" means an individual's spouse and dependent
children.
      (15)   "Interest" means a legal or equitable economic interest that is
owned or held wholly or partly, jointly or severally, or directly or
indirectly, whether or not the economic interest is subject to an encumbrance
or a condition. "Interest" does not include:
         (i)   an interest held in the capacity of agent, custodian, fiduciary,
personal representative, or trustee, unless the holder has an equitable
interest in the subject matter;
         (ii)   an interest in a time or demand deposit in a financial
institution;
         (iii)   an interest in an insurance policy, endowment policy, or
annuity contract by which an insurer promises to pay a fixed amount of money in
a lump sum or periodically for life or a specified period;
         (iv)   a common trust fund or a trust that forms part of a pension or
a profit- sharing plan that has more than 25 participants and is determined by
the Internal Revenue Service to be a qualified trust under § 401 or § 501 of
the Internal Revenue Code;
         (v)   except as to the County Executive, a member of the County
Council, or a candidate for the Office of County Executive or County Council,
an interest in a mutual fund, exchange-traded fund, or similar commingled
investment vehicle, the investments of which the employee does not control or
manage; or
         (vi)   an interest in a County pension plan or a County deferred
compensation plan.
      (16)   "Legislative action" means an official action or inaction relating
to a bill, resolution, amendment, nomination, appointment, report, or other
matter within the jurisdiction of the County Council or to an ordinance or
resolution presented to the County Executive for signature or veto.
"Legislative action" includes introduction, sponsorship, consideration, debate,
amendment, passage, defeat, approval, and veto.
      (17)   "Lobbying" means performing any act that requires registration
under
Title 7.
      (18)   "Lobbyist" means any person who communicates with any employee in
the Legislative or Executive Branch of County government for the purpose of
influencing any executive action or legislative action, and who, for that
purpose:
         (i)   incurs personally, or through a representative, expenses of $100
or more, or receives $100 or more as compensation, exclusive of personal travel
or subsistence expenses, during a reporting period;
         (ii)   expends cumulatively $50 or more during a reporting period on
one or more employees in the Executive or Legislative Branch for meals,
beverages, special events, or gifts;
         (iii)   expends $1,000 or more, including postage, in a reporting
period for the express purpose of soliciting others to communicate with any
employee to influence any legislative or executive action; or
         (iv)   spends at least $500 to provide compensation to one or more
persons required to register under this article.
      (19)   "Member of household" means, if sharing an individual's legal
residence, the individual's spouse, child, ward, financially dependent parent,
or other financially dependent relative; or an individual's spouse, child,
ward, parent, or other relative over whose financial affairs the individual has
legal or actual control.
      (20)   "Person" means an individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation, business trust, limited liability company, or other entity of any
kind and, except as used in
Title 8 with respect to the imposition of criminal penalties, a governmental
entity or an instrumentality or unit of a governmental entity.
      (21)   "Political contribution" means a contribution as defined in the
Election Law Article of the State Code.
      (22)   "Qualifying relative" means a spouse, parent, child, brother, or
sister.
      (23)   “Quasi-governmental entity” means an entity that is created by
State or County statute, that performs a public function, and that is supported
in whole or in part by the State but is managed privately.
      (24)   “Relative” means an individual’s spouse, parents, grandparents,
great- grandparents, aunts, uncles, brothers, sisters, nieces, nephews,
children, grand-children, and great- grandchildren, and their spouses.
      (25)   “Respondent” means any person who is the subject of a complaint
before the Ethics Commission.
      (26)   (i)   “Usual and customary constituent services” means actions
taken by County Councilmembers or their designees on behalf of an Anne Arundel
County resident or a business entity that is located in the County or that
contributes to the well-being of the County, and includes:
            1.   requesting information from a governmental agency relating to
active or potential legislation or the governmental agency's processes,
procedures, or similar matters;
            2.   providing opinions relating to information received from a
governmental agency for the purpose of considering or taking legislative
action;
            3.   scheduling and participating in meetings for purposes of
inquiry with a governmental agency, with or without the presence of the
resident or business entity;
            4.   inquiring about an issue on behalf of a resident relating to a
governmental agency or a County employee; and
            5.   writing letters of recommendation for employment or admission
to an educational institution.
      (ii)   For the purposes of this definition, a Councilmember or a
Councilmember's designee may not:
            1.   engage in an action if the Councilmember, a qualifying
relative of the Councilmember, or a business associate of the Councilmember has
an interest in the matter that is different from that of the public in general;
            2.   advocate for or represent a resident or business entity in a
judicial or quasi-judicial proceeding or communicate with a decision-making
employee of a judicial or quasi-judicial body off the record and out of the
presence of the parties;
            3.   directly or indirectly threaten reprisal or promise favoritism
for the performance or nonperformance of an employee's duties or request an
employee to abuse or exceed the discretion available to that employee under
law; or
            4.   exhibit favoritism for one resident over another in the same
or similar circumstances.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 1-101) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 10-96;
Bill No. 28-97; Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 84-01; Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 23-
04; Bill No. 58-05; Bill No. 59-07; Bill No. 70-12; Bill No. 18-17; Bill No.
80-18; Bill No. 93-20; Bill No. 16-23)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, §§ 5-101, 5-702(a).
§ 7-1-102. Legislative findings; policy; liberal construction.
   (a)   Findings.
      (1)   The County Council, recognizing that our system of representative
government is dependent upon the people maintaining the highest trust in County
officials and employees, finds and declares that the people have a right to be
assured that the impartiality and independent judgment of County officials and
employees will be maintained.
      (2)   It is evident that this confidence and trust is eroded when the
conduct of the County's business is subject to improper influence or even the
appearance of improper influence.
   (b)   Policy. For the purpose of guarding against improper influence, the
County Council enacts this public ethics law to require certain County
officials and employees to disclose their financial affairs and to set minimum
ethical standards for the conduct of County business.
   (c)   Liberal construction. The County Council intends that this article,
except its provisions for criminal sanctions, be liberally construed to
accomplish its purpose.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 1-102) (Bill No. 38-03)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-102.
§ 7-1-103. Administration of title.
   This title shall be administered by the Ethics Commission.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 1-103) (Bill No. 38-03)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-104
§ 7-1-104. Other laws.
   In addition to provisions of this article and regulations issued pursuant to
it, a person shall comply with other provisions of law, regulations, and any
applicable policies and procedures relating to conflicts of interest, financial
disclosure, or lobbying, even if they are more stringent than this article.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 1-104) (Bill No. 38-03)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-105
§ 7-1-105. Employee training.
   (a)   Current employees. Employees hired, appointed, or elected on or before
December 6, 2018 shall successfully complete a training program on public
ethics developed by the Ethics Commission within 180 days of December 6, 2018
and once every five years thereafter.
   (b)   New hires. Employees hired, appointed, or elected after December 6,
2018 shall successfully complete a training program on public ethics developed
by the Ethics Commission within 60 days of hire, appointment, or election and
once every five years thereafter.
(Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-205(d).
TITLE 2. ETHICS COMMISSION
Section
   
7-2-101.   Officers.
   
7-2-102.   Quorum.
   
7-2-103.   Staff.
   
7-2-104.   Duties.
   
7-2-105.   Regulations.
   
7-2-106.   Oaths and subpoenas.
   
7-2-107.   Exemption from article.
§ 7-2-101. Officers.
   The Ethics Commission shall elect a Chair from among its members. The term
of the Chair is one year, and the Chair may be reelected.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 2-101) (Bill No. 38-03)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-203 (see also Charter
Section
1001(e)(4)).
§ 7-2-102. Quorum.
   A majority of members of the Ethics Commission is a quorum. The Ethics
Commission may act only on the affirmative vote of at least a majority of its
members.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 2-102) (Bill No. 38-03)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-204(a) (see also Charter
Section
1001(h).
§ 7-2-103. Staff.
   (a)   Executive Director and Secretary.
      (1)   The Ethics Commission shall appoint an Executive Director and a
Secretary to serve at its pleasure.
      (2)   The Executive Director shall be an attorney admitted to practice
law in the State of Maryland.
   (b)   Other staff. The Ethics Commission may have other staff in accordance
with the County budget.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 2-103) (Bill No. 38-03)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-204(d) and (e) (see also
Charter Section
1001(i).
§ 7-2-104. Duties.
   (a)   Generally. The Ethics Commission shall:
      (1)   except as otherwise expressly provided in this title, administer
the provisions of this article;
      (2)   prescribe and provide forms for each document required by this
article;
      (3)   retain as a public record each document filed with the Ethics
Commission for at least four years after receipt;
      (4)   periodically review the adequacy of public ethics laws and propose
any amendments that it finds necessary or desirable;
      (5)   review each statement and report filed in accordance with
Title 6 or
Title 7 and notify employees who have submitted documents under
Title 6 of any omissions or deficiencies;
      (6)   publish and make available to the public and to persons subject to
this article in the Commission's choice of format, including electronically,
information that explains the provisions of this article, the duties imposed by
it, and the means for enforcing it;
      (7)   provide a training course for County employees of at least one hour
on the requirements of the public ethics law; and
      (8)   submit to the County Executive and the County Council an annual
report, including a description of its activities.
   (b)   List of entities doing business with the County.
      (1)   The Ethics Commission shall:
         (i)   maintain in the Commission's choice of format, including
electronically, an alphabetized list of entities doing business with the
County, as defined in §
7-1-101(7), during the preceding calendar year; and
         (ii)   make information from the list available to individuals
required to file a statement under
Title 6.
      (2)   The list prepared under subsection (b)(1) shall be available for
public inspection, in the Commission's choice of format, including
electronically, by March 1 of each year.
      (3)   On request of the Ethics Commission, an employee or governmental
unit shall provide to the Ethics Commission in a timely manner any information
necessary for the Ethics Commission to perform its duties under this
subsection.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 2-104) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, §§ 5-205 and 5-602(f)
(see also Charter Section
1001B).
§ 7-2-105. Regulations.
   The Ethics Commission may adopt regulations to implement this article.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 2-105) (Bill No. 38-03)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-206.
§ 7-2-106. Oaths and subpoenas.
   The Ethics Commission and Executive Director each may:
      (1)   administer oaths, as provided in §
1-2-102 of this Code; and
      (2)   issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses to testify or to
produce other evidence, as provided in §
1-2-101 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 2-106) (Bill No. 38-03)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-207.
§ 7-2-107. Exemption from article.
   (a)   Exemptions authorized. The Ethics Commission may exempt from this
article or may modify the requirements of this article as to a board,
commission, or authority or a member of a board, commission, or authority if
the Ethics Commission finds that, because of the nature of the board,
commission, or authority, the application of this title to that board,
commission, or authority:
      (1)   would be an unreasonable invasion of privacy;
      (2)   would significantly reduce the availability of qualified
individuals for public service; and
      (3)   is not necessary to preserve the purposes of this article.
   (b)   Written request. The Ethics Commission may grant an exemption to a
board, commission, or authority or member of a board, commission, or authority
only on written request of the board, commission, or authority involved.
   (c)   Open records. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the
records of the Ethics Commission in any matter in which an exemption is granted
under this title shall be available for public inspection.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 2-107) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, 5-209.
TITLE 3. ADVISORY OPINIONS
Section
   
7-3-101.   Request for advisory opinion; informal advice.
   
7-3-102.   Issuance.
   
7-3-103.   Confidentiality.
§ 7-3-101. Request for advisory opinion; informal advice.
   (a)   Issuance. On request of a person subject to this article, the Ethics
Commission shall issue an advisory opinion or informal advice regarding the
application of this article to that person. On request of any other person, the
Ethics Commission may issue an advisory opinion or informal advice.
   (b)   Informal advice. Informal advice shall remain confidential and shall
not be subject to publication. At its discretion, the Commission may issue an
advisory opinion concerning the subject matter of any informal advice, subject
to the confidentiality requirements of §
7-3-103.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 3-101) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-301.
§ 7-3-102. Issuance.
   The Ethics Commission shall issue an advisory opinion or informal advice in
writing within 30 days of receiving a request under §
7-3-101, or more promptly if feasible and if circumstances require.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 3-102) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, §§ 5-302 and 5-303(a).
§ 7-3-103. Confidentiality.
   Before an advisory opinion may be published or otherwise made public, the
Ethics Commission shall delete the name of the person who is the subject of the
opinion and, to the fullest extent possible, if not material to the opinion,
any other information that may identify the person who is the subject of the
opinion. The identity of the person who is the subject of the opinion may not
otherwise be revealed.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 3-103) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-303(b).
TITLE 4. PROCEDURES FOR COMPLAINT
Section
   
7-4-101.   Complaints; filing; requirements.
   
7-4-102.   Preliminary proceedings.
   
7-4-103.   Hearing.
   
7-4-104.   Disposition.
   
7-4-105.   Judicial review.
   
7-4-106.   Confidentiality.
   
7-4-107.   Referral to prosecuting authority.
   
7-4-108.   Retention of documents.
   
7-4-109.   Protection for complainants.
§ 7-4-101. Complaints; filing; requirements.
   (a)   Filing.
      (1)   Any person may file a written complaint with the Ethics Commission
on a form provided by the Ethics Commission alleging a violation of this
article.
      (2)   A complaint filed under this subsection shall be signed and made
under oath.
   (b)   Complaint issued by Ethics Commission. The Ethics Commission, on its
own initiative, may issue a complaint alleging a violation of this article.
   (c)   Dismissal. The Ethics Commission may dismiss a complaint at any time
if the Commission determines that it lacks jurisdiction, that the complaint
form is incomplete, that the complaint is frivolous, or that the evidence does
not support further action.
   (d)   Copies. Unless it dismisses a complaint as provided in subsection (c)
within 45 days of filing, the Ethics Commission shall promptly transmit a copy
of the complaint to each respondent.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 4-101) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03;
Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-401.
§ 7-4-102. Preliminary proceedings.
   (a)   Evidence.
      (1)   The Executive Director shall collect and refer to the Ethics
Commission evidence relating to each violation of this article alleged in a
complaint.
      (2)   Before submitting the evidence to the Ethics Commission, the
Executive Director shall notify the complainant and the respondent that
evidence is being presented.
   (b)   Dismissal through consent agreement if curative action taken.
      (1)   The Ethics Commission shall dismiss the complaint in a signed
consent agreement if:
         (i)   the respondent, within 15 days after receiving the notice, takes
any action that may be available to cure each alleged violation; and
         (ii)   the Ethics Commission finds that dismissal is not contrary to
the purposes of this article.
      (2)   If the complaint is dismissed under this subsection, the Ethics
Commission shall promptly send a copy of the consent agreement to the
complainant and to the respondent.
   (c)   Dismissal for lack of evidence. If the Ethics Commission determines
that the evidence submitted by the Executive Director does not merit further
proceedings, the Ethics Commission shall:
      (1)   dismiss the complaint in a signed order; and
      (2)   promptly send a copy of the order to the complainant and to the
respondent.
   (d)   Hearing. If a complaint is not dismissed under subsection (b) or (c),
the Ethics Commission shall proceed to a hearing on the complaint, conducted in
accordance with this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 4-102) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-403.
§ 7-4-103. Hearing.
   (a)   Evidentiary procedures; subpoena power. A hearing on a complaint shall
be conducted in accordance with the evidentiary procedures set forth in §§ 10-
213 and 10-214 of the State Government Article of the State Code. In
preparation for the hearing, the respondent may use the subpoena power of the
Ethics Commission.
   (b)   Rights of respondent. The respondent may be represented by counsel,
present evidence, and cross-examine witnesses.
   (c)   Duties of Executive Director. At the hearing, the Executive Director:
      (1)   shall present to the Ethics Commission all available evidence
relating to each alleged violation of this article;
      (2)   may recommend any disposition of the complaint that appears
appropriate to the Executive Director; and
      (3)   shall not otherwise advise the Commission on the matter or
procedure or participate in the Commission's deliberations or decision.
   (d)   Counsel to the Commission. At the hearing and during all
deliberations, an attorney hired by the Commission, other than the Executive
Director and any member of the Commission who is an attorney, shall act as
counsel to the Commission, providing advice and assistance on the matter and on
procedure as requested.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 4-103) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-404.
§ 7-4-104. Disposition.
   (a)   Findings of fact and conclusions of law. Within 45 days of the
hearing, the Ethics Commission, based on all of the evidence presented at the
hearing, shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law in writing with
respect to each alleged violation and shall provide a copy to each complainant
and each respondent.
   (b)   Violation not found. If the Ethics Commission determines that the
respondent has not violated this article, the Ethics Commission shall:
      (1)   dismiss the complaint in a signed order; and
      (2)   promptly send a copy of the order to the complainant and to the
respondent.
   (c)   Violation found. If the Ethics Commission determines that the
respondent has violated any provision of this article, the Ethics Commission
may:
      (1)   issue an order of compliance directing the respondent to cease and
desist the violation;
      (2)   issue a reprimand; or
      (3)   recommend other appropriate discipline of the respondent authorized
by law.
   (d)   Late filings.
      (1)   If the respondent is a lobbyist, for each report required under
Title 7 that is filed late, the respondent shall pay a fee of $10 for each late
day, not to exceed a total of $1,000, into the County's general fund.
      (2)   If the respondent is an employee, for each statement required under
Title 6 found to have been filed late, the respondent shall pay a fee of $5 for
each late day, not to exceed a total of $500, into the County's general fund.
   (e)   Suspension or revocation of lobbyist registration.
      (1)   If the Ethics Commission determines, by an affirmative vote of five
members, it necessary to protect the public interest and the integrity of the
governmental process, the Ethics Commission may issue an order to:
         (i)   suspend the registration of an individual lobbyist if the Ethics
Commission determines that the individual lobbyist:
            1.   has knowingly and willfully violated
Title 7; or
            2.   has been convicted of a criminal offense arising from lobbying
activities; or
         (ii)   revoke the registration of an individual lobbyist if the Ethics
Commission determines that, based on acts arising from lobbying activities, the
individual lobbyist has been convicted of bribery, theft, or other crime
involving moral turpitude.
      (2)   If the Ethics Commission suspends the registration of an individual
lobbyist under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the individual lobbyist may
not engage in lobbying for compensation for a period, not to exceed 3 years,
that the Ethics Commission determines as to that individual lobbyist is
necessary to satisfy the purposes of this subsection.
      (3)   If the Ethics Commission revokes, by an affirmative vote of five
members, the registration of an individual lobbyist under paragraph (1) of this
subsection, the individual lobbyist may not engage in lobbying for
compensation.
      (4)   If the Ethics Commission initiates a complaint based on a violation
or conviction described in paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Ethics
Commission shall initiate the complaint within 2 years after the earlier of:
         (i)   the Ethics Commission's knowledge of the violation; or
         (ii)   the date the conviction becomes final.
      (5)   The termination or expiration of the registration of an individual
lobbyist does not limit the authority of the Ethics Commission to issue an
order under this subsection.
   (f)   Reinstatement of lobbyist registration.
      (1)   An individual whose registration as a lobbyist is revoked or
suspended under subsection (e) of this section may apply to the Ethics
Commission for reinstatement.
      (2)   The Ethics Commission may reinstate the registration of an
individual whose registration as a lobbyist has been revoked or suspended under
subsection (e) of this section if the Ethics Commission determines, by an
affirmative vote of five members, that reinstatement of the individual would
not be detrimental to the public interest and the integrity of the governmental
process, based on:
         (i)   the nature and circumstances of the original misconduct or
violation leading to revocation or suspension;
         (ii)   the individual's subsequent conduct and reformation; and
         (iii)   the present ability of the individual to comply with the
ethics law.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 4-104) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-405.
§ 7-4-105. Judicial review.
   (a)   Generally. If the respondent is aggrieved by a final order of the
Ethics Commission, the respondent may seek judicial review by filing a petition
for judicial review as provided in Title 7, Chapter 200, of the Maryland Rules.
   (b)   Stay of orders. An order of the Ethics Commission is stayed
automatically until the time for seeking judicial review has expired. The
filing of a petition for judicial review does not automatically stay the
enforcement of the order. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Ethics
Commission or the reviewing court may stay the enforcement of the order under
terms it considers proper.
   (c)   Judicial enforcement by Ethics Commission. The Ethics Commission may
seek judicial enforcement and other relief as provided under
Title 8.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 4-105) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 58-05)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-406.
§ 7-4-106. Confidentiality.
   (a)   Generally. Notwithstanding any other law and except as provided in
subsections (b) and (c), after a complaint is filed:
      (1)   the proceedings, meetings, and activities of the Ethics Commission
and its staff and employees relating to a complaint are confidential;
      (2)   information relating to a complaint, including the identity of the
complainant and respondent, may not be disclosed by the:
         (i)   Ethics Commission;
         (ii)   staff of the Ethics Commission;
         (iii)   complainant; or
         (iv)   respondent; and
      (3)   if information relating to the complaint is disclosed by the
complainant, the Commission may dismiss the complaint without further action by
the Commission.
   (b)   Exceptions. Except as provided in subsection (c), the restrictions in
subsection (a) apply unless:
      (1)   the matter is referred for criminal prosecution; or
      (2)   the Ethics Commission issues an order finding a violation, in which
case the order is public.
   (c)   Permission by respondent. The Ethics Commission may release any
information at any time if the respondent agrees in writing to the release.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 4-106) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 16-23)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-407.
§ 7-4-107. Referral to prosecuting authority.
   (a)   Generally. If, while considering a complaint or during any
investigation or inquiry, the Ethics Commission finds that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that the respondent may have committed a criminal offense,
the Ethics Commission shall refer the matter promptly to an appropriate
prosecuting authority.
   (b)   Evidence to be available. The Ethics Commission shall make all
evidence within its control available to the Prosecuting Authority.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 4-107) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-408.
§ 7-4-108. Retention of documents.
   (a)   Generally. A person who is required to file a report, statement, or
record under this article shall obtain each account, bill, receipt, book,
paper, or other document necessary to complete and substantiate the report,
statement, or record.
   (b)   Length of time for retention. The person shall retain the documents
required by subsection (a) for three years from the date the report, statement,
or record was filed or, if the report, statement, or record was not filed, from
the date the report, statement, or record was required to be filed.
   (c)   Available for inspection. On request by the Ethics Commission, and
after reasonable notice, the documents required by subsection (a) shall be
available for inspection by the Ethics Commission.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 4-108) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-409.
§ 7-4-109. Protection for complainants.
   (a)   Applicability. The provisions of this section do not apply to a
complainant or an employee acting on behalf of a complainant who knowingly
makes a false report.
   (b)   Retaliation prohibited. A County agency or appointing authority may
not discharge, threaten, or otherwise discriminate against a complainant or
employee acting on behalf of a complainant regarding compensation, terms,
conditions, location, or privilege of employment because:
      (1)   the complainant or employee acting on behalf of a complainant
reports or is about to report, verbally or in writing, a violation or a
suspected violation of this article; or
      (2)   a complainant or employee acting on behalf of a complainant is
requested by the Ethics Commission to participate in an investigation, hearing,
or inquiry held by the Ethics Commission or in any related court action.
   (c)   Civil action for retaliation. A complainant or employee acting on
behalf of a complainant who alleges a violation of subsection (b) may bring a
civil action for appropriate injunctive relief or actual damages, or both,
within one year after the occurrence of the alleged violation.
   (d)   Remedies. In an action brought under subsection (c), the court may
order any of the following:
      (1)   reinstatement of a complainant or employee acting on behalf of a
complainant;
      (2)   payment of back wages and full reinstatement of fringe benefits and
seniority rights;
      (3)   an award of actual damages; and
      (4)   an award of all or a portion of the costs of litigation, including
reasonable attorney fees.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 4-109) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03)
TITLE 5. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Section
   
7-5-101.   Restrictions on participation.
   
7-5-102.   Employment or financial interests; general restriction.
   
7-5-103.   Employment restriction – Entities contracting with the County.
   
7-5-104.   Employment restriction – Representation or assistance.
   
7-5-105.   Representation by former employees.
   
7-5-106.   Solicitation or acceptance of gifts or honoraria.
   
7-5-107.   Use of prestige of office or position.
   
7-5-108.   Disclosure or use of confidential information.
   
7-5-109.   County Executive.
   
7-5-110.   Legislative acts of members of County Council.
   
7-5-111.   Suspension of disqualification – County Council.
   7-5-112.   Retaliation prohibited.
§ 7-5-101. Restrictions on participation.
   (a)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this article, an employee
may not participate in a matter if:
      (1)   the employee or a qualifying relative of the employee has an
interest in the matter distinguishable from that of the public generally and
the employee knows of the interest; or
      (2)   any of the following is a party to the matter:
         (i)   a business entity in which the employee has a financial interest
of which the employee reasonably may be expected to know;
         (ii)   a business entity of which the employee, or if known to the
employee, a qualifying relative of the employee is an officer, director,
trustee, partner, limited partner, member, or employee;
         (iii)   a business entity with which the employee or, if known to the
employee, a qualifying relative of the employee has applied for a position, is
negotiating employment, or has arranged prospective employment;
         (iv)   if the contract reasonably could be expected to result in a
conflict between the private interest and the official County duties of the
employee, a business entity that is a party to a contract with the employee or,
if known to the employee, a qualifying relative of the employee;
         (v)   a business entity either engaged in a transaction with the
County or subject to regulation by the employee's governmental unit in which a
financial interest is owned by another business entity if the employee has a
financial interest in the other business entity, and reasonably may be expected
to know of both financial interests; or
         (vi)   a business entity that the employee knows is a creditor or
obligee of the employee or of a qualifying relative of the employee with
respect to a thing of economic value and, as a creditor or obligee, is in a
position to affect directly and substantially the interest of the employee or
qualifying relative.
   (b)   Lobbyists.
      (1)   This subsection does not apply to an individual who is an employee
only as an uncompensated member of a board or commission.
      (2)   A former lobbyist who is or becomes an employee subject to
regulation under this title may not participate in a case, contract, or other
specific matter as an employee for one calendar year after the termination of
the registration of the former lobbyist if the former lobbyist previously
assisted or represented another party for compensation in the matter.
   (c)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The prohibitions of subsection (a) do not apply if participation is
allowed:
         (i)   by regulation of the Ethics Commission;
         (ii)   by the opinion of the Ethics Commission; or
         (iii)   by another provision of this article.
      (2)   This section does not prohibit participation by an employee that is
limited to the exercise of a ministerial or administrative duty that does not
affect the disposition of or a decision with respect to the matter involved.
   (d)   Disclosure.
      (1)   An employee who otherwise would be disqualified from participation
under subsection (a) shall disclose the nature and circumstances of the
conflict and may participate or act if:
         (i)   the disqualification would leave a body with less than a quorum
capable of acting;
         (ii)   the disqualified employee is required by law to act; or
         (iii)   the disqualified employee is the only individual authorized to
act and cannot delegate that authority.
      (2)   Any disqualification arising under subsection (a) may be suspended
as set forth in §
7-5-109 as to the County Executive and §
7-5-111 as to the County Council.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 5-101) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-501.
§ 7-5-102. Employment or financial interests; general restriction.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), an employee
may not:
      (1)   be employed by, have a contract with, or have a financial interest
in:
         (i)   a person subject to the authority of the employee or of the
employee's governmental unit;
         (ii)   a person who is negotiating or has entered into a contract with
the County that is administered by the employee's governmental unit; or
         (iii)   an entity that is a subcontractor on a contract with the
County that is administered by the employee's governmental unit; or
      (2)   hold any other employment relationship that would impair the
impartiality or independent judgment of the employee.
   (b)   Exceptions. The prohibitions of subsection (a) do not apply:
      (1)   to employment or a financial interest allowed by opinion or
regulation of the Ethics Commission if:
         (i)   the employment or financial interest does not create a conflict
of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest; and
         (ii)   the employment or financial interest is disclosed;
      (2)   to an employee who is appointed to a regulatory or licensing unit
pursuant to a statutory requirement that persons subject to the jurisdiction of
the unit be represented in appointments to it;
      (3)   as allowed by opinion or regulation of the Commission, to an
employee whose duties are ministerial or administrative if the non-County
employment or financial interest does not create a conflict of interest or the
appearance of a conflict of interest;
      (4)   to a member of a board who holds the employment or financial
interest when appointed if the employment or financial interest is publicly
disclosed to the appointing authority, the Ethics Commission, and, if
applicable, the County Council before any required approval of the appointment.
   (c)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Subject to paragraph (c)(2), the Ethics Commission may exempt an
employee from the prohibitions of subsection (a) if the Ethics Commission
determines that:
         (i)   failure to grant the exemption would limit the ability of the
County to recruit and hire highly or uniquely qualified professionals for
public service or ensure the availability of competent services to the public;
and
         (ii)   the number of exemptions under this subsection has not eroded
the purposes of subsection (a) or other provisions of this article.
      (2)   The Ethics Commission may grant an exemption under subsection (c)
(1) only in extraordinary situations and upon recommendation of the County
Executive at the request of the governmental unit involved. The Ethics
Commission shall apply this subsection as consistently as possible under
similar facts and circumstances.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 5-102) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 59-07; Bill No. 59-11;
Bill No. 18-17; Bill No. 80-18)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-502.
§ 7-5-103. Employment restriction – Entities contracting with the County.
   An employee may not be employed by, be an agent of, or be an independent
contractor of an entity that is a party to a contract that binds or purports to
bind the County if:
      (1)   the duties of the employee include matters substantially relating
to or affecting the subject matter of the contract; and
      (2)   the contract binds or purports to bind the County to pay more than
$1,000.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 5-103) (Bill No. 38-03)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-503.
§ 7-5-104. Employment restriction – Representation or assistance.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided in subsection (b), an employee may not,
other than in the course of the employee's official duties, assist or represent
a person in any matter:
      (1)   before any governmental unit or employee of the County; or
      (2)   in which the County has an interest.
   (b)   Exceptions. Subsection (a) does not apply to:
      (1)   the performance of usual and customary constituent services without
additional compensation;
      (2)   assistance to or representation of an employee without compensation
in an employment-related matter by an employee other than an elected or
appointed employee;
      (3)   assistance or representation that is authorized by law or contract;
or
      (4)   non-compensated board and commission members, except that non-
compensated board and commission members may not assist or represent a person
for contingent compensation in any matter listed in subsection (a).
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 5-104) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 20-20)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-504(a).
§ 7-5-105. Representation by former employees.
   (a)   Generally. A former employee may not assist or represent a party other
than the County in a case, contract, or other specific matter for compensation
if the matter involves the County and:
      (1)   the former employee participated significantly in the matter as an
employee; or
      (2)   the former employee had information not generally available to the
public when the former employee undertook the assistance or representation.
   (b)   County Executive, County Council, department or office heads.
      (1)   Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a former
County Executive, member of the County Council, or department or office head
may not assist or represent another party for compensation in any matter that
is the subject of County legislative action for one year following the date
that the person left office or County employment.
      (2)   Paragraph (1) of this subsection does not apply to assistance or
representation of a municipal corporation, County, or State governmental
entity.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 5-105) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 70-12)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-504(d).
§ 7-5-106. Solicitation or acceptance of gifts or honoraria.
   (a)   Soliciting or making gifts.
      (1)   An employee may not solicit any gift.
      (2)   A lobbyist described in subsection (b)(4) may not knowingly make a
gift, directly or indirectly, to an employee whom the lobbyist knows or has
reason to know is in violation of this section.
      (3)   An employee may not directly solicit or facilitate the solicitation
of a gift from a lobbyist on behalf of another person.
   (b)   Accepting gifts. Except as provided in subsection (c), an employee may
not knowingly accept a gift, directly or indirectly, from any person whom the
employee knows or has reason to know:
      (1)   does or seeks to do business of any kind, regardless of amount,
with the County;
      (2)   engages in an activity that is regulated or controlled by the
employee's governmental unit;
      (3)   has a financial interest that may be substantially and materially
affected, in a manner distinguishable from the public generally, by the
performance or nonperformance of the employee’s official duties;
      (4)   is a lobbyist with respect to matters within the jurisdiction of
the employee; or
      (5)   is an association or an entity acting on behalf of an association
that is engaged only in representing counties or municipal corporations.
   (c)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Notwithstanding subsection (b), an employee may accept a gift
specified in subsection (c)(2) unless:
         (i)   the gift would tend to impair the impartiality and independent
judgment of the employee; or
         (ii)   as to a gift of significant value, the gift would give the
appearance of impairing the impartiality and independent judgment of the
employee, or the employee believes or has reason to believe that the gift is
designed to impair the impartiality and independent judgment of the employee.
      (2)   Subject to subsection (c)(1), subsection (b) does not apply to:
         (i)   occasional meals and beverages of $25 or less consumed in the
presence of the donor or sponsoring entity;
         (ii)   ceremonial gifts or awards of insignificant monetary value;
         (iii)   unsolicited gifts that do not exceed $20 in cost;
         (iv)   trivial gifts of informational value;
         (v)   in return for participation on a panel or a speaking engagement
at a meeting, reasonable expenses for food, travel, lodging, or scheduled
entertainment of the employee if the expenses are associated with the meeting,
except that, if the expenses are to be paid by a lobbyist and are anticipated
to exceed $500, the employee shall notify the Ethics Commission before
attending the meeting;
         (vi)   tickets or free admission extended to an elected employee from
the person sponsoring or conducting a charitable, cultural, or political event,
as a courtesy or ceremony to the office to attend the event;
         (vii) a specific gift or class of gifts exempted from subsection (b)
by the Ethics Commission upon a written finding that acceptance of the gift or
class of gifts would not be detrimental to the impartial conduct of government
and would be purely personal and private in nature;
         (viii)   a gift from an individual related to the employee by blood or
marriage, or a gift from any other individual who is a member of the household
of the employee; or
         (ix)   to the extent provided in subsection (d), honoraria.
   (d)   Honorarium.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(2)(vi), a County Councilmember
may not accept an honorarium.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (d)(1) and subject to subsection
(c)(1), an employee may accept an honorarium if:
         (i)   the honorarium is limited to reasonable expenses for the
employee's food, travel, lodging, and reasonable and verifiable expenses for
care of a child or dependent adult that are actually incurred; or
         (ii)   the honorarium consists of gifts described in subsection (c)(2)
(ii) through (iv).
      (3)   Other than as allowed by subsection (d)(2), an honorarium may not
be accepted, even if permitted by subsection (c)(1), if:
         (i)   the payor of the honorarium has an interest that may be affected
substantially and materially, in a manner distinguishable from the public
generally, by the performance or nonperformance of the employee's official
duties; and
         (ii)   the offering of the honorarium is related in any way to the
employee's official position.
   (e)   Additional exemptions. The Ethics Commission may define further
exemptions from this section by opinion or regulation.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 5-106) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 101-97; Bill No. 38-03;
Bill No. 70-12; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 16-23)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-505.
§ 7-5-107. Use of prestige of office or position.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   An employee may not intentionally use the prestige of office or
public position:
         (i)   for that employee's private gain or the gain of another; or
         (ii)   except as part of the official duties of the employee, to
influence the award of a State or local government contract to a specific
person.
      (2)   An employee may not directly or indirectly initiate a solicitation
for a person to retain the services of a particular lobbyist or lobbying firm.
      (3)   An employee may not use public resources to solicit a political
contribution that is regulated in accordance with the Election Law Article of
the State Code.
   (b)   Limitation. The performance of usual and customary constituent
services, without additional compensation, is not prohibited under subsection
(a).
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 5-107) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-506.
§ 7-5-108. Disclosure or use of confidential information.
   Except in the discharge of an official duty, an employee or former employee
may not disclose or use confidential information acquired by reason of the
employee's or former employee's public position and not available to the public
for personal economic benefit or for the economic benefit of another.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 5-108) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-507.
§ 7-5-109. County Executive.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section:
      (1)   "Close economic association" means:
         (i)   the County Executive's employers, employees, and associates in
business or professional enterprises;
         (ii)   partnerships, limited liability partnerships, or limited
liability companies in which the County Executive has invested capital or owns
an interest;
         (iii)   corporations in which the County Executive owns the lesser of
10% or more of the outstanding capital stock or capital stock with an aggregate
value of $25,000 or more, not including any stock owned through a mutual fund,
exchange-traded fund, retirement plan, or other similar commingled investment
vehicle, the individual investments of which the County Executive does not
control or manage;
         (iv)   corporations or other business entities in which the County
Executive is an officer, director, or agent; and
         (v)   an entity with which the County Executive is negotiating
employment or has arranged prospective employment.
      (2)   "Official action" means any of the following actions by the County
Executive:
         (i)   recommending an ordinance or resolution to the County Council
for consideration;
         (ii)   attempting to influence the vote of the County Council or of a
member of the County Council on any ordinance or resolution; or
         (iii)   approving, vetoing, or not acting on any ordinance or
resolution presented to the County Executive for signature.
   (b)   Presumed conflicts of interest. A conflict of interest shall be
presumed with respect to an official action of the County Executive in any of
the following circumstances:
      (1)   having or acquiring a direct interest, in a manner distinguishable
from the public generally, in a business entity or person that would be
affected by the official action;
      (2)   benefiting financially from a close economic association with a
person whom the County Executive knows has a direct interest in a business
entity, person, or an interest that would be affected by the official action,
differently from other like business entities, persons, or interests;
      (3)   benefiting financially from a close economic association with a
person who is lobbying or has employed a lobbyist to influence an official
action;
      (4)   soliciting, accepting, or agreeing to accept any gift or loan,
other than a loan from a commercial lender in the normal course of business,
from a person who would be affected by or has an interest in a business entity
or person that would be affected by the official action; or
      (5)   any of the restrictions set forth in §
7-5-101.
   (c)   Statement of conflict required. 
      (1)   Whenever the County Executive has a conflict of interest in
connection with an official action as set forth in subsection (b) or arising
under §
7-5-101, the County Executive shall file with the Ethics Commission a sworn
statement in accordance with this subsection sufficiently in advance of taking
action, or as soon as reasonably possible.
      (2)   The statement shall describe the circumstances of the apparent or
presumed conflict and the official action to which it relates and assert that
the County Executive is able to participate fairly, objectively, and in the
public interest.
      (3)   The Ethics Commission shall review the statement prior to the
proposed action by the County Executive if possible and advise the County
Executive if it concurs in the determination that participation can be allowed.
If the Commission is unable to review the statement prior to official action,
it shall review the statement to determine if it concurs with the action of the
County Executive. If the Ethics Commission does not concur, the Ethics
Commission may file a complaint, provide advice, or take other appropriate
action.
   (d)   Written notice of complaint. If a complaint is filed by or with the
Ethics Commission relating to the action and disclosure, the Ethics Commission
shall immediately provide written notice of the complaint to the County
Executive.
   (e)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of §
7-5-101, the County Executive may take official action if:
      (1)   the County Executive files the statement required by subsection
(c); or
      (2)   participation is allowed by regulation of the Ethics Commission, by
opinion of the Ethics Commission, or by another provision of this article.
   (f)   Open records. All statements filed under subsection (c) are a matter
of public record and are subject to §
7-6-107.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 5-109) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 101-97;
Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
State Code reference – See General Provisions Article § 5-512 applicable to
Maryland General Assembly.
§ 7-5-110. Legislative acts of members of County Council.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "close economic association" means:
      (1)   a Councilmember's employers, employees, and associates in business
or professional enterprises;
      (2)   partnerships, limited liability partnerships, or limited liability
companies in which a Councilmember has invested capital or owns an interest;
      (3)   corporations in which a Councilmember owns the lesser of 10% or
more of the outstanding capital stock or capital stock with an aggregate value
of $25,000 or more, not including any stock owned through a mutual fund,
exchange-traded fund, retirement plan, or other similar commingled investment
vehicle, the individual investments of which the Councilmember does not control
or manage;
      (4)   corporations or other business entities for which a Councilmember
is an officer, director, or agent; and
      (5)   an entity in which the Councilmember is negotiating employment or
has arranged prospective employment.
   (b)   Conflicts generally.
      (1)   An interest of a County Councilmember conflicts with the public
interest if the Councilmember's interest tends to impair the Councilmember's
independence of judgment.
      (2)   The conflict disqualifies the County Councilmember from
participating in legislative action or otherwise attempting to influence any
legislation to which the conflict relates.
   (c)   Presumed conflicts of interest. It shall be presumed that an interest
disqualifies a County Councilmember from participating in legislative action in
any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   having or acquiring an interest in an enterprise that would be
affected by the Councilmember's vote on proposed legislation unless the
interest is common to all members of:
         (i)   a profession or occupation of which the Councilmember is a
member; or
         (ii)   the general public or a large class of the general public;
      (2)   benefiting financially from a close economic association with a
person whom the Councilmember knows has an interest in an enterprise or
interest which would be affected by the Councilmember's participation in
legislative action, differently from other like enterprises or interests;
      (3)   benefiting financially from a close economic association with a
person who is lobbying or has employed a lobbyist for the purpose of
influencing legislative action;
      (4)   soliciting, accepting, or agreeing to accept a gift, or loan other
than a loan from a commercial lender in the normal course of business, from a
person who would be affected by or has an interest in an enterprise that would
be affected by the Councilmember's participation in legislative action; or
      (5)   any of the restrictions set forth in §
7-5-101.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 5-110) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
State Code reference – Similar to General Provisions Article, § 5-512.
§ 7-5-111. Suspension of disqualification – County Council.
   (a)   Suspension of disqualification prohibited.
      (1)   (i)   Except as provided in subsection (a)(1)(ii), the
disqualification arising under §
7-5-110 may not be suspended if the conflict is direct and personal to the
County Councilmember, a member of the County Councilmember's immediate family,
or the County Councilmember's employer.
         (ii)   Subsection (a)(1)(i) does not apply to a vote on the annual
operating budget, in its entirety, or the annual capital budget bill, in its
entirety.
      (2)   As to any other conflict in connection with a legislative action,
the disqualification arising under §
7-5-101 or §
7-5-110 is suspended if a Councilmember with an apparent or presumed conflict
files with the Ethics Commission a sworn statement that describes the
circumstances of the apparent or presumed conflict and the legislation or class
of legislation to which it relates and asserts that the Councilmember is able
to vote and otherwise to participate in action relating to the legislation
fairly, objectively, and in the public interest.
   (b)   Commission review and action. The Ethics Commission shall review the
statement prior to the proposed action if possible and advise the member if it
concurs in the member's determination that participation can be allowed. If the
Commission is unable to review the statement prior to member action, it shall
review the statement to determine if it concurs with the action. If the
Commission does not concur with the action, the Commission may file a
complaint, provide advice, or take other appropriate action.
   (c)   Written notice of complaint. If a complaint is filed with the Ethics
Commission relating to a disqualification that has been suspended by the filing
of a statement by a Councilmember, the Ethics Commission shall immediately
provide written notice of the complaint to the Councilmember against whom the
complaint was filed.
   (d)   Report required. A Councilmember shall report the following
information in writing to the Ethics Commission as soon as the Councilmember
becomes aware of it:
      (1)   the name of any business entity subject to regulation by the County
in which the Councilmember and a member of the Councilmember's immediate
family, separately or together, have:
         (i)   the lesser of
            1.   10% or more of the capital stock of any corporation; or
            2.   capital stock of any corporation with a cumulative value of
$25,000 or more; and
         (ii)   any interest in a partnership, limited liability partnership,
or limited liability company;
      (2)   details of any contractual relationship with the County, including
the subject matter and the consideration; and
      (3)   details of any transaction with the County involving a monetary
consideration.
   (e)   Open records. All statements filed under subsection (a) and all
reports filed under subsection (d) are a matter of public record and are
subject to §
7-6-107.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 5-111) (Bill No. 38-03)
State Code reference – Similar to General Provisions Article, § 5-513.
§ 7-5-112. Retaliation prohibited.
   An employee may not retaliate against an individual for reporting or
participating in an investigation of a potential violation of this article.
(Bill No. 16-23)
TITLE 6. FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
Section
   
7-6-101.   Persons required to file statements.
   
7-6-102.   Statements required to be filed.
   
7-6-103.   Statements of candidates.
   
7-6-104.   Content of statement.
   
7-6-105.   Interests attributable to individual making statement.
   
7-6-106.   Members of boards, commissions, and authorities.
   
7-6-107.   Public record.
§ 7-6-101. Persons required to file statements.
   (a)   Generally. Any and all individuals in the following chart shall file
with the Ethics Commission the statements provided for in this title:
Any Branch or Boards, Commissions and Similar Bodies
Any employee in an “acting” capacity for more than 60 days for any of the
offices or positions listed in this subsection
Public Information Officer
Boards, Commissions, and Similar Bodies
Members of the Agricultural Land Preservation Advisory Board
Commissioners of the Amusement Licensing Commission
Members, the Executive Director, and the Secretary-Treasurer of the Anne
Arundel County Recreational Facilities Revenue Authority
Trustees of the Board of Trustees of the Anne Arundel County Retirement and
Pension System
Members, Airport Manager, and Chief Financial Officer of the Anne Arundel
County Tipton Airport Authority
Members of the Board of Appeals
Members of the Board of Electrical Examiners
Members of the Board of Environmental Systems Examiners
Commissioners of the Ethics Commission
Executive Director of the Ethics Commission
Commissioners of the Gas Commission
Commissioners of the Housing Commission of Anne Arundel County
Executive Director of the Housing Commission of Anne Arundel County
Voting members of the Human Relations Commission
Members of the Personnel Board
Members of the Planning Advisory Board
Commissioners of the Plumbing Commission
Executive Director of the Police Accountability Board
Voting member of the Police Accountability Board
Resilience Authority Director
Members of the Video Lottery Facility Local Development Council
Candidates
For County Council
For County Executive
 
Executive Branch
Administrative Hearing Officer
Assistant Budget Officer
Assistant Chief of Police
Assistant Controller
Assistant Correctional Facility Administrator
Assistant Director, Inspections and Permits
Assistant Director, Public Works
Assistant Director of Aging and Disabilities
Assistant Fire Chief
Assistant Personnel Officer
Assistant Planning and Zoning Officer
Assistant to the Chief Administrative Officer
Assistant to the County Executive
Budget Administrator
Budget Officer
Cable Television Administrator
Central Services Officer
Chief, Environmental Facilities and Programs in the Department of Recreation
and Parks
Chief, Information Security
Chief, Information Technology Operations
Chief, Network and Cyber Security
Chief, Recreation and Athletic Programs
Chief, Telecommunication Services
Chief Administrative Officer
Chief of Planning and Construction Programs in the Department of Recreation and
Parks
Chief of Police
Chief of Staff
Controller
Correctional Facility Administrator
County Attorney
County Executive
Deputy Central Services Officer
Deputy Chief Administrative Officer
Deputy County Attorney
Deputy Director, Aging and Disabilities
Deputy Director, Public Works
Deputy Director, Recreation and Parks
Deputy Emergency Communications Director
Deputy Emergency Management Director
Deputy Planning and Zoning Officer
Deputy Police Chief, Exempt Service
Deputy Police Chief in the Classified Service
Director, Equity and Human Relations
Director of Aging and Disabilities
Director of Animal Services
Director of Communications & Policy
Director of Inspections and Permits
Director of Recreation and Parks
Director of Public Works
Economic Development Officer
Emergency Management Director
Executive Director, Partnership for Children, Youth and Families
Facility Superintendent, Trails and Greenways
Financial Operations Supervisor
Fire Chief
Fire Chief of Staff
Fire Deputy Chief in the Classified Service
Fire Division Chief
Human Services Officer
Information Technology Officer
Information Services Manager
Land Use and Environment Officer
Legislative Liaison Officer
Parks Administrator
Personnel Officer
Planning and Zoning Officer
Police Chief of Staff
Police Fiscal Operations and Management Administrator
Police Major (Exempt Service)
Procurement Category Management Manager
Procurement Strategy Manager
Program Specialist II in the Department of Recreation and Parks
Purchasing Agent
Recreation Administrator
Recreation and Parks Operations Administrator
Recreation and Parks Facility Superintendent
Recreation and Parks Project Manager
Recreation Supervisor
Real Estate Manager
Senior Management Assistant in the Department of Recreation and Parks
Superintendent, Detention Center
Transportation Officer
Any other individual employed in the Executive Branch of the County government
who is declared by the County Executive, by executive order, to be in a policy
making or managerial position
 
 
Legislative Branch
Administrative Officer, County Council
Assistant Administrative Officer, County Council
County Auditor
Legislative Chief of Staff
Legislative Counsel to the County Council
Members of the County Council
 
   (b)   Disclosure requirements for other persons. By executive order, the
County Executive may require other persons holding County positions compensated
in whole or in part by public funds and non-compensated County Executive
appointees to disclose annually, as public records, any relevant information
concerning their financial affairs that the County Executive considers
necessary to promote the continued trust and confidence of the people in the
County government.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 6-101) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 88-96; Bill No. 28-97;
Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 20-00; Bill No. 5-01; Bill No. 40-02;
Bill No. 7-03; Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 72-13; Bill No. 98-13; Bill No. 47-15;
Bill 65-15; Bill 66-15; Bill 67-15; Bill No. 68-15; Bill No. 44-16; Bill No.
45-16; Bill No. 62-17; Bill No. 59-18; Bill No. 60-18; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No.
61-19; Bill No. 94-19; Bill No. 48-20; Bill No. 101-20; Bill No. 3-22; Bill No.
16-22; Bill No. 24-22; Bill No. 44-23; Bill No. 67-23; Bill No. 51-24; Bill No.
1-25; Bill No. 25-25; Bill No. 47-25)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-601.
§ 7-6-102. Statements required to be filed.
   (a)   Generally. Each statement required under this title shall:
      (1)   be filed with the Ethics Commission on a form provided by the
Ethics Commission;
      (2)   be filed under oath;
      (3)   be filed on or before April 30 of each year;
      (4)   cover the calendar year immediately preceding the year of filing;
and
      (5)   contain the information required by this title.
   (b)   Filing for persons filling a vacancy. An individual who has not
already filed a statement required by this title and who is appointed to fill a
vacancy for which a statement is required by this title shall file the
statement within 30 days after appointment.
   (c)   Filing for persons whose employment has been terminated.
      (1)   An individual required to file a statement under this title whose
employment is terminated for a reason other than death shall file the required
statement within 60 days after termination.
      (2)   The statement shall cover the calendar year immediately preceding
the year of the termination, unless a statement covering that year has already
been filed, and the portion of the calendar year of the termination.
      (3)   The filing of a statement under this subsection is not required if
the individual has left a position with the County to take a position with the
County for which a statement is required under this title and the disclosure
requirements of the new position are at least as extensive as those of the
prior position.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 6-102) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 17-00; Bill No. 38-03;
Bill No. 70-12; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, §§ 5-602, 5-603, 5-604.
§ 7-6-103. Statements of candidates.
   (a)   Generally. Each candidate required to file a statement under this
title shall file the statement for each calendar year beginning with the year
in which the person's certificate of candidacy is filed through the year of the
election.
   (b)   Limitation. This section does not require the filing of a statement
for any full year covered by a statement otherwise filed under this title.
   (c)   Filing with Board of Election Supervisors. A statement under this
section shall be filed with the Board of Election Supervisors.
   (d)   Filing deadlines.
      (1)   The first statement required under this section shall be filed no
later than the filing of the certificate of candidacy.
      (2)   In the year of the election, the statement shall be filed on or
before the earlier of April 30 or the last day for the withdrawal of a
candidacy.
   (e)   Consequence of late filing. If a statement required by this section is
overdue and is not filed within 8 days after the candidate receives written
notice from the Board of Election Supervisors of the failure to file, the
candidate is deemed to have withdrawn the candidacy.
   (f)   Duties of the Board of Election Supervisors. 
      (1)   The Board of Elections Supervisors may not accept a certificate of
candidacy or certificate of nomination of a candidate covered by this section
unless the candidate has filed the statement required by this title in proper
form.
      (2)   The Board of Elections Supervisors shall forward a filed statement
to the Ethics Commission within 30 days after receipt.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 6-103) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 70-12;
Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-605.
§ 7-6-104. Content of statement.
   (a)   Generally. A statement required by this title shall contain schedules
disclosing the information and interests specified in this section, if known,
for the individual making the statement for the applicable period under this
title. An individual who is required to disclose the name of a business under
this section shall disclose any other names that the business is trading as or
doing business as.
   (b)   Real property interests.
      (1)   The statement shall include a schedule of each interest in real
property wherever located, including each interest held as or with a person or
business entity in which the employee has or had any interest.
      (2)   For each interest, the schedule shall include:
         (i)   the nature of the property;
         (ii)   the street address, mailing address, or legal description of
the property;
         (iii)   the nature and extent of the interest in the property,
including any conditions to the interest and encumbrances on the interest;
         (iv)   the date and manner in which the interest was acquired;
         (v)   the identity of the person from whom the interest was acquired;
         (vi)   if the interest was acquired by purchase, the nature and amount
of the consideration given or to be given for the interest;
         (vii)   if the interest was acquired other than by purchase, the fair
market value of the interest when acquired;
         (viii) if any interest was transferred, in whole or in part, during
the applicable period, a description of the interest transferred, the nature
and amount of the consideration received or to be received for the interest,
and the identity of the person to whom the interest was transferred; and
         (ix)   the identity of any other person with an interest in the
property.
   (c)   Business entity interests.
      (1)   The statement shall include a schedule of each interest held by the
individual in any business entity, whether or not the business entity does
business with the County.
      (2)   For each interest reported, the schedule shall include:
         (i)   the name and address of the principal office of the business
entity and a description of the nature of the business;
         (ii)   the nature and amount of the interest held, including any
conditions to and encumbrances on the interest;
         (iii)   if any interest was acquired during the applicable period:
            1.   the date and manner in which the interest was acquired;
            2.   the identity of the person from whom the interest was
acquired;
            3.   if the interest was acquired by purchase, the nature and the
amount of the consideration given or to be given for the interest; and
            4.   if acquired other than by purchase, the fair market value of
the interest at the time acquired; and
         (iv)   if any interest was transferred, in whole or in part, during
the applicable period, a description of the interest transferred, the nature
and amount of the consideration received or to be received for the interest,
and, if known, the identity of the person to whom the interest was transferred.
      (3)   (i)   As to an equity interest in a corporation, the individual may
satisfy subsection (c)(2)(ii) by reporting, instead of a dollar amount, the
number of shares held and, unless the corporation's stock is publicly traded,
the percentage of equity interest held.
         (ii)   As to an equity interest in a partnership or limited liability
entity, the individual may satisfy subsection (c)(2)(ii) by reporting, instead
of a dollar amount, the percentage of equity interest held.
      (4)   If an interest acquired during the applicable period consists of
additions to existing publicly traded corporate interests acquired by dividend
or dividend reinvestment and the total value of the acquisition is less than
$500, only the manner of acquisition is required to be disclosed under
subsection (c)(2)(iii).
   (d)   Entities doing business with the County.
      (1)   The statement shall include a schedule of each interest in an
entity doing business with the County, other than interests reported under
subsection (c).
      (2)   For each interest reported, the schedule shall include:
         (i)   the name and address of the principal office of the entity;
         (ii)   the nature and amount of the interest held, including any
conditions to and encumbrances on the interest;
         (iii)   if any interest was acquired during the applicable period:
            1.   the date and manner in which the interest was acquired;
            2.   the identity of the person from whom the interest was
acquired;
            3.   if the interest was acquired by purchase, the nature and the
amount of the consideration given or to be given for the interest;
            4.   if acquired other than by purchase, the fair market value of
the interest at the time acquired; and
         (iv)   if any interest was transferred, in whole or in part, during
the applicable period, a description of the interest transferred, the nature
and amount of the consideration received or to be received for the interest,
and, if known, the identity of the person to whom the interest was transferred.
   (e)   Gifts.
      (1)   This subsection does not apply to a gift received from a member of
the immediate family, a child, or a parent of the individual.
      (2)   The statement shall include a schedule of each gift with a value of
at least $20 or a series of gifts from one person with a cumulative value of at
least $50 received during the applicable period by the individual or by another
person at the direction of the individual, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a person that is:
         (i)   a lobbyist;
         (ii)   regulated by the County;
         (iii)   an association or a person acting on behalf of an association
that is engaged only in representing counties or municipal corporations; or
         (iv)   otherwise an entity doing business with the County or an
individual acting on behalf of an entity doing business with the County.
      (3)   For each gift subject to this subsection, the schedule shall
include:
         (i)   the nature and value of the gift; and
         (ii)   the identity of the person from whom or on behalf of whom,
directly or indirectly, the gift was received.
      (4)   This subsection does not authorize any gift not otherwise allowed
by law.
   (f)   Honoraria. The statement shall include a list of all honoraria
received during the applicable period by the individual, including the nature
and value of the honorarium and the identity of the person from whom or on
behalf of whom the honorarium was received.
   (g)   Offices, directorships, employment, and the like.
      (1)   The statement shall include a schedule of all offices,
directorships, and employment, or any similar interest not otherwise disclosed,
in entities doing business with the County.
      (2)   This subsection applies to positions and interests held at any time
during the applicable period by the individual or by the individual's relatives
or the relatives of the individual's spouse.
      (3)   For each position or interest reported, the schedule shall include:
         (i)   the name and address of the principal office of the entity;
         (ii)   the nature of the position or interest and the date it
commenced;
         (iii)   the name of each governmental unit with which the entity is
doing business; and
         (iv)   the nature of the business with the County, which, at a
minimum, shall be specified in reference to the applicable criteria described
in §
7-1-101(7).
   (h)   Debts owed.
      (1)   The statement shall include a schedule, to the extent the
individual may reasonably be expected to know, of each debt, excluding retail
credit accounts, owed at any time during the applicable period to any entity
doing business with the County by the individual, and, if the individual was
involved in the transaction giving rise to the debt or may become liable for
the debt, by any member of the individual's immediate family.
      (2)   For each debt, the schedule shall include:
         (i)   the identity of the person to whom the debt was owed;
         (ii)   the date it was incurred;
         (iii)   the amount owed at the end of the applicable period;
         (iv)   the terms of payment;
         (v)   the extent to which the principal was increased or decreased
during the applicable period; and
         (vi)   any security given.
   (i)   Relatives. The statement shall include a schedule listing all
relatives of the individual making the statement, and all relatives of the
individual's spouse, who were employed by the County in any capacity at any
time during the applicable period.
   (j)   Business names and addresses. The statement shall include a schedule
listing the name and address of each:
      (1)   place of compensated employment of the individual and each member
of the individual's immediate family at any time during the applicable period;
      (2)   business entity of which the individual or a member of the
individual's immediate family was a sole or partial owner, and from which the
individual or family member received or earned income at any time during the
applicable period;
      (3)   entity represented by the individual's spouse before a County
department, agency, or office; and
      (4)   if the individual's spouse is a regulated lobbyist, the entity that
has engaged the spouse for lobbying purposes.
   (k)   Relationship with University of Maryland Medical System, State or
local government, or quasi-governmental entity.
      (1)   The statement shall include a schedule of each financial or
contractual relationship with:
         (i)   the University of Maryland Medical System;
         (ii)   a governmental entity of the State or a local government in the
State; or
         (iii)   a quasi-governmental entity of the State or local government
in the State.
      (2)   For each interest reported, the schedule shall include:
         (i)   a description of the relationship;
         (ii)   the subject matter of the relationship; and
         (iii)   the consideration received during the reporting period.
   (l)   Additional information. The statement may include a schedule listing
additional interests or information that the individual chooses to disclose.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 6-104) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 101-97; Bill No. 38-03;
Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 16-23)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-607.
§ 7-6-105. Interests attributable to individual making statement.
   (a)   Real property and business entity interests. The following are deemed
to be interests of the individual under §
7-6-104(b), (c), and (d):
      (1)   an interest held by a spouse or a child of the individual, if the
interest was controlled, directly or indirectly, by the individual at any time
during the applicable period;
      (2)   an interest held at any time during the applicable period by:
         (i)   a business entity in which the individual held a 10% or greater
interest;
         (ii)   a business entity described in paragraph (i) in which the
business entity held a 25% or greater interest;
         (iii)   a business entity described in paragraph (ii) in which the
business entity held a 50% or greater interest; and
         (iv)   a business entity in which the individual directly or
indirectly, through an interest in one or a combination of other business
entities, holds a 10% or greater interest; and
      (3)   an interest held by a trust or an estate in which, at any time
during the applicable period, the individual held a reversionary interest, was
a beneficiary, or was a settlor of a revocable trust.
   (b)   Limitation. Subsection (a)(2) does not affect:
      (1)   the requirement under §
7-6-104(b) of disclosure of real estate interests held in the name of a
partnership or limited liability entity in which the individual holds an
interest; and
      (2)   the requirement under §
7-6-104(c) of disclosure of all partnerships, limited liability partnerships,
or limited liability companies in which the employee holds an interest.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 6-105) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18;
Bill No. 16-23)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-608.
§ 7-6-106. Members of boards, commissions, and authorities.
   (a)   Limitations for certain entities. Notwithstanding any other provisions
of this title, except for the Board of Appeals, the Planning Advisory Board,
the Board of License Commissioners, the Ethics Commission, and the Anne Arundel
County Tipton Airport Authority, a member of a board, commission, or authority
listed in §
7-6-101 shall file a statement on a form provided by the Ethics Commission
disclosing information about only those interests, gifts, compensated
positions, and liabilities that may create a conflict, as defined in
Title 5, between the member's personal interest and the member's duties as a
member of that board, commission, or authority.
   (b)   Housing Commission. In addition to disclosures required by subsection
(a), a member of the Housing Commission of Anne Arundel County shall disclose
the interests enumerated in §
7-6-104(b).
   (c)   Adoption of regulations. The Ethics Commission shall adopt regulations
specifying the information required to be filed under subsections (a) and (b)
and the circumstances under which it shall be disclosed.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 6-106) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 115-97; Bill No. 5-01;
Bill No. 38-03)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-609.
§ 7-6-107. Public record.
   (a)   Open records; fees.
      (1)   Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), the Ethics Commission
shall maintain the statements submitted under this title and make the
statements available to the public:
         (i)   for examination and copying during normal business hours; or
         (ii)   by electronic transmission at any time.
      (2)   The Ethics Commission may charge a reasonable fee and adopt
regulations for the examination and copying of a statement.
      (3)   The Ethics Commission may not provide public access to a portion of
a statement filed under this title that the filing party has identified as the
filing party’s home address.
      (4)   The Ethics Commission may not provide public access to information
related to consideration received from:
         (i)   the University of Maryland Medical System;
         (ii)   a governmental entity of the State or a local government in the
State; or
         (iii)   a quasi-governmental entity of the State or local government
in the State.
   (b)   Records to be maintained. The Ethics Commission shall maintain a
record of the name and home or business address of each individual who examines
or copies a statement under this section, and the name of the individual whose
statement was examined or copied.
   (c)   Duties of Ethics Commission. The Ethics Commission shall:
      (1)   contact, in writing, the person whose statement was examined or
copied, advising the person of the name and address of the person who examined
or copied the statement; and
      (2)   on request of the individual whose statement was examined or
copied, forward to that individual a copy of the record prepared pursuant to
subsection (b).
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 6-107) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 16-23)
State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-606.
TITLE 7. LOBBYING DISCLOSURE
Section
   
7-7-101.   Scope of title.
   
7-7-102.   Registration required.
   
7-7-103.   Termination of registration.
   
7-7-104.   Compensation not to be contingent.
   
7-7-105.   Activity reports by lobbyists.
   
7-7-106.   Activity reports not filed; penalty.
   
7-7-107.   Other reports.
State Code reference – State Government Article, Title 15, Subtitle 8.
§ 7-7-101. Scope of title.
   (a)   Applicability. This title does not apply to:
      (1)   professional services in drafting bills or in advising and
rendering opinions to clients as to the construction and effect of proposed or
pending legislation if these services do not otherwise constitute activities as
a lobbyist;
      (2)   appearances before the County Council at its specific invitation or
request, but only if the person engages in no further or other activities in
connection with the passage or defeat of legislation;
      (3)   activities as part of the official duties of an elected or
appointed official or employee of the State, the County, another political
subdivision of the State, or the United States, and not on behalf of any other
entity;
      (4)   actions of a publisher or working member of the press, radio, or
television in the ordinary course of the business of disseminating news or
making editorial comment to the general public if that person does not engage
in lobbying that would directly and specifically benefit the economic,
business, or professional interests of that person or that person's employer;
      (5)   activities at the specific invitation or request of a lobbyist if
no other act is undertaken for which reporting is required and if the person is
appearing before the County Council, states to the County Council that the
person is appearing at the request of the lobbyist;
      (6)   representation of a bona fide religious organization solely for the
purpose of protecting the right of its own members to practice the doctrine of
the organization;
      (7)   activities as part of the official duties of an officer, director,
member, or employee of an association engaged exclusively in lobbying for
counties and municipalities and not on behalf of any other entity; and
      (8)   activities undertaken by an employee in connection with the
employee's official duties, and not on behalf of any other entity.
   (b)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection (b)(2), and except for providing
the authorization required by §
7-7-102, a person who employs one or more lobbyists, who reasonably believes
that all expenditures requiring registration will be reported by the lobbyist,
and who engages in no other act that would require registration is exempt from
this title.
      (2)   Failure of a lobbyist to report any information required by this
title makes the lobbyist's employer immediately subject to this title.
   (c)   Compensation. For the purposes of this title, if lobbying is only a
portion of a person's employment, "compensation" means a prorated amount that
is based on the time devoted by the person to lobbying compared to the time
devoted to other employment duties.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 7-101) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-702(b).
§ 7-7-102. Registration required.
   (a)   Generally. Unless exempted by §
7-7-101, all lobbyists shall register with the Ethics Commission before
undertaking any lobbying activity.
   (b)   Time registration is valid. The registration required by this section
shall run from January 1 to December 31 of each year. If registration is filed
after January 1, the registration is valid only through December 31 of that
year.
   (c)   Required information. Each lobbyist required to register under this
section shall provide the following information on a form provided by the
Ethics Commission:
      (1)   the lobbyist's name, permanent address, and telephone number;
      (2)   the name, address, telephone number, and nature of business of any
person on whose behalf the lobbyist acts;
      (3)   the identification, by formal designation if known, of matters on
which the lobbyist expects to act; and
      (4)   the written authorization of any person or entity on whose behalf
the lobbyist acts, on a separate form provided by the Ethics Commission,
providing the following information:
         (i)   the name, address, and telephone number of both the employer of
the lobbyist and the lobbyist;
         (ii)   the period of time during which the lobbyist is authorized to
act, unless sooner terminated; and
         (iii)   the subject matter upon which the lobbyist represents the
employer.
   (d)   Corporations. If the authorization to act is by a corporation, the
authorization shall be executed by any authorized officer or agent who is not a
lobbyist.
   (e)   Signed under oath. The lobbyist registration form and the
authorization form shall be signed under oath.
   (f)   Lobbying for more than one person. Any person who engages in lobbying
on behalf of more than one person shall file a separate registration for each
such person.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 7-102) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, §§ 5-703, 5-704.
§ 7-7-103. Termination of registration.
   (a)   Written notice. A lobbyist may terminate registration by ceasing all
lobbying and providing written notice to the Ethics Commission. The notice
shall provide the date on which the termination is to become effective.
   (b)   Final activity report. A final lobbyist activity report shall be filed
within 10 days after termination covering the entire period since the last
lobbyist activity report was filed.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 7-103) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03;
Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-704(f).
§ 7-7-104. Compensation not to be contingent.
   A person may not be employed as a lobbyist for compensation dependent in any
manner on the passage or defeat of any proposed legislation or on any other
contingency connected with any legislative action or executive action.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 7-104) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-714.
§ 7-7-105. Activity reports by lobbyists.
   (a)   Activity reports required. Each lobbyist shall file with the Ethics
Commission an activity report on or before May 31 for the preceding November 1
through April 30, and on or before November 30 for the preceding May 1 through
October 31 in which the lobbying activities were conducted. If the lobbyist is
not an individual, an authorized officer or agent shall sign the report. A
separate activity report shall be filed for each person on whose behalf the
lobbyist acts.
   (b)   Information required. The report shall be under oath and notarized,
and shall include the following information:
      (1)   a complete and current statement of the information required to be
supplied under §
7-7-102(c);
      (2)   total expenditures on acts requiring registration in each of the
following categories:
         (i)   total compensation paid to the lobbyist, with prorated amounts
labeled as such, excluding expenses reported under subsection (b)(2)(ii)
through (b)(2)(viii);
         (ii)   office expenses of the lobbyist not reported in subsection (b)
(2)(i) including salaries, compensation, and reimbursed expenses for the staff
of the lobbyist;
         (iii)   the amount paid for professional and technical research and
assistance not reported in subsection (b)(2)(i);
         (iv)   the amount paid for publications that expressly encourage
persons to communicate with employees;
         (v)   the names of witnesses and the fees and expenses paid to each;
         (vi)   the amount paid for meals and beverages for employees or their
immediate families;
         (vii)   the amount paid for special events, including parties,
dinners, athletic events, entertainment, and other functions to which any
employee was invited;
         (viii)   the expenses paid for food, lodging, and scheduled
entertainment of employees who attended a meeting and were provided in return
for participation in a panel or speaking engagement at the meeting;
         (ix)   the amount paid for other gifts, including their itemized
description, to or for employees and their immediate families; and
         (x)   the amount paid for other expenses, including their itemized
description; and
      (3)   (i)   the name of each employee, or member of the employee's
immediate family, who has benefited from gifts with a cumulative value of $50
or more during the reporting period, given by the lobbyist or anyone acting on
behalf of the lobbyist, whether or not the gifts were given in connection with
the lobbying activities.
         (ii)   if the cumulative value of $50 is attained or exceeded, each
gift shall be itemized by date, beneficiary, value, and nature of the gift.
   (c)   Proration of compensation. If lobbying is only a portion of a person's
employment, compensation shall be determined by a prorated amount based on time
devoted to lobbying compared to the time devoted to other employment duties.
   (d)   Allocation of expenses. Expenses reported in subsection (b) shall be
allocated to individual employees, and for each such expenditure, the date,
location, and total expenses incurred by the lobbyist shall be stated.
   (e)   Additional or supplementary reports. The Ethics Commission may require
any lobbyist to file additional or supplementary reports as the Ethics
Commission considers necessary and specifies in writing to the lobbyist.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 7-105) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03;
Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-705.
§ 7-7-106. Activity reports not filed; penalty.
   If a fully completed activity report required by §
7-7-105 is not filed by the dates specified in §
7-7-105, the Ethics Commission may revoke the lobbyist's registration upon 20
days' prior written notification.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 7-106) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03)
§ 7-7-107. Other reports.
   By regulation, the Ethics Commission may require submission of such other
reports as it considers necessary.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 7-107) (Bill No. 95-94; Bill No. 38-03)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-712.
TITLE 8. ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
7-8-101.   Petition by Commission.
   
7-8-102.   Judicial relief.
   
7-8-103.   Disciplinary action.
§ 7-8-101. Petition by Commission.
   To compel compliance with an order or to seek other relief authorized by
this title, the Ethics Commission may file a petition in a circuit court with
venue over the proceeding.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 8-101) (Bill No. 38-03)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-901.
§ 7-8-102. Judicial relief.
   (a)   Compelling compliance. The court may compel compliance with the
Commission's order by issuing an order to cease and desist from the violation
or by granting other injunctive relief.
   (b)   Additional remedies.
      (1)   In addition, the court may:
         (i)   impose a fine not exceeding $5,000 for a violation of this
article, with each day that the violation occurs being a separate offense; or
         (ii)   except as provided in subsection (b)(2), void an official act
of an employee if:
            1.   the employee had a conflict of interest that is prohibited by
this title;
            2.   the act arose from or concerned the subject matter of the
conflict;
            3.   the proceeding was brought within 90 days after the act
occurred; and
            4.   the court determines that the conflict had an impact on the
act.
      (2)   The court may not void an official act that appropriates public
funds, levies a tax, or provides for the issuance of a bond, note, or other
evidence of public obligation.
   (c)   Relief granted. After hearing the case, the court may grant all or
part of the relief sought.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 8-102) (Bill No. 38-03; Bill No. 80-18)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-902.
§ 7-8-103. Disciplinary action.
   In addition to any other penalty under this title, an employee found by the
Ethics Commission or a court to have violated this title may be subjected to
disciplinary action and, if subject to an order of the Commission or a court
directing compliance, may not receive salary or other compensation pending full
compliance with the order.
(1985 Code, Art. 9, § 8-104) (Bill No. 38-03)
   State Code reference – General Provisions Article, § 5-904.
ARTICLE 8. PURCHASING
   Title
      
1.   DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   PROCUREMENT
      
3.   ACQUISITION, DISPOSITION, AND LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
TITLE 1. DEFINITION; GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
8-1-101.   Definitions.
   
8-1-102.   Scope.
   
8-1-103.   Purposes.
   
8-1-104.   Rules of construction.
   
8-1-105.   Powers and duties of Purchasing Agent.
   
8-1-106.   Unauthorized purchases.
   
8-1-107.   Cooperative purchasing.
   
8-1-108.   Contracts.
§ 8-1-101. Definitions.
   In this article, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)    “Capital improvement” means any public improvement undertaken by
the County, including the construction or reconstruction in whole or in part of
any road, bridge, street, building, waterway or water, sewer, or stormwater
facility, or any similar physical structure or facility necessary in carrying
out the activities of the County government.
      (2)   “Cooperative procurement” means a procurement conducted by or on
behalf of two or more government entities to obtain the benefits of volume
purchases and to reduce administrative time and expenses.
      (3)   “Evaluated bid price” means the dollar amount of a bid after bid
price adjustments are made under objective measurable criteria, set forth in
the invitation for bids, that affect the economy and effectiveness in the
operation or use of the product, such as reliability, maintainability,
operating costs, useful life, and residual value.
      (4)   “Goods” means all tangible things that are or may be produced for
or furnished to the County.
      (5)   “Intergovernmental agreement” means an agreement between or among
two or more governmental entities to procure or provide goods and services.
      (6)   “Piggyback procurement” means a procurement in which a vendor
provides the same goods or services at the same price and under the same
material terms and conditions of the underlying contract between the vendor and
another government entity.
      (7)   “Professional services” means the services of individuals or
organizations possessing a high degree of professional or technical skill and
the appropriate licensing, certification, accreditation, or training to provide
the services.
      (8)   “Quasi-governmental entity” means a business entity that, by law or
contract, monitors, expends, disburses, or otherwise manages public funds for
the federal, a State, or a local government.
      (9)   “Responsible” means that, in the judgment of the Purchasing Agent,
a vendor is capable of providing the goods or services that are sought by the
County and has the legal capacity to offer the goods or services and enter into
a contract at the time of an award.
      (10)   “Responsive” means that, in the judgment of the Purchasing Agent,
the response to a procurement solicitation meets all of the requirements set
forth in the procurement solicitation.
      (11)   “Services” means all types of services required by the County that
are not furnished by County employees. “Services” includes professional
services.
      (12)   “Single source procurement” means a procurement used in the manner
prescribed by the purchasing regulations, when only one responsive, responsible
vendor responds to a competitive solicitation under §§
8-2-104,
8-2-105,
8-2-109, or
8-2-114(f). A single source procurement is not a sole source procurement.
      (13)   “Sole source procurement” means a procurement used when, in the
manner prescribed by the purchasing regulations, the Purchasing Agent
determines in writing, prior to competitive solicitation under §§
8-2-104,
8-2-105,
8-2-109, or
8-2-114(f), that there is only one source for the required goods or services. A
sole source procurement is not a single source procurement.
      (14)   “Underlying contract” means a contract entered into by a vendor
and a government entity other than the County that is used for a piggyback
procurement by the County.
      (15)   “Using agency” means any department, division, office, agency,
board, commission, bureau, or other unit in the County government, or other
agency using goods or services paid for in whole or in part by County funds,
including the Department of Health and departments and agencies created by or
operating under the public general laws of the State to the extent that the
provisions of this article may apply to them by law or to the extent that such
departments and agencies request that the provisions of this article apply to
them.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 1-101) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 77-95; Bill No. 58-08;
Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 51-18; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-1-102. Scope.
   (a)   Expenditure of funds. This article applies to every expenditure of
public funds regardless of their source, including federal and State assistance
moneys, except where federal or State law or the terms of the assistance
instruments override the requirements of this article. Nothing in this article
prevents the County from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant,
gift, bequest, or cooperative agreement.
   (b)   Additional applicability of article. This article also applies to the
disposition of surplus, excess, obsolete, and waste goods, and to contracts for
the acquisition of revenue-producing services even if there is no expenditure
of funds contemplated.
   (c)   Exemptions from this article.
      (1)   The following purchases are exempt from §§
8-2-104 through
8-2-110 and
8-2-114 of this article:
         (i)   renewal of previously procured software licenses;
         (ii)   training of County employees;
         (iii)   rentals of venues or equipment for public events or public
programs;
         (iv)   professional certifications, accreditations, and licenses;
         (v)   purchases from other governmental or quasi-governmental agencies
unless those purchases are pursuant to an executed cooperative or piggyback
purchase; and
         (vi)   purchases of public utilities, including water, gas,
electricity, and fiber or cable for the purposes of data or voice
communications.
      (2)   The purchasing regulations shall include provisions for the
purchases in paragraph (1).
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 1-102) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 37-93; Bill No. 58-08;
Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-1-103. Purposes.
   The purposes of this article are to provide for public confidence in the
procedures followed in public procurement; to ensure the fair and equitable
treatment of all persons who deal with the procurement system; to provide
economy in procurement activities and to maximize, to the fullest extent
practicable, the purchasing value of public funds; to foster effective broad-
based competition within the free enterprise system; to provide safeguards for
the maintenance of a procurement system of quality and integrity; and to
provide effective response to user groups.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 1-103) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 8-17)
§ 8-1-104. Rules of construction.
   This article shall be construed and applied to promote its purposes as set
forth in this article. Unless displaced by the particular provisions of this
article, the principles of law and equity, including the State Uniform
Commercial Code, the law merchant, and law relative to capacity to contract,
agency, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion, mistake, and bankruptcy,
shall supplement the provisions of this article.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 1-104) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 58-08)
§ 8-1-105. Powers and duties of Purchasing Agent.
   (a)   Duties. The Purchasing Agent shall:
      (1)   supervise and control all County warehouses and storerooms, except
storerooms as may be set up to meet the needs of individual using agencies,
direct the activities of personnel assigned, and control and account for the
goods stocked;
      (2)   on or before October 1 of each year, submit to the Council, through
the Central Services Officer, the Chief Administrative Officer, and the County
Executive, a report summarizing the County's purchasing activities for the
previous fiscal year and the progress in carrying out this title;
      (3)   cause using agencies to report in advance as to their requirements
in order to secure quantity discounts by the grouping of requisitions and bulk
buying whenever practicable; and
      (4)   perform the additional purchasing duties assigned by the Central
Services Officer.
   (b)   Using agencies. Using agencies shall inspect and certify delivery of
goods and supervise and determine proper performance of services in accordance
with the Purchasing Regulations.
   (c)   Assistant Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing Agent may delegate to the
Assistant Purchasing Agent the power to act as Purchasing Agent for a specific
time period or under specific circumstances.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, §§ 1-105, 1-106) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 13-89; Bill No.
58-08; Bill No. 8-17)
Charter reference – §
902.
§ 8-1-106. Unauthorized purchases.
   (a)   Prohibition. A County officer or employee may not order the purchase
of any goods or services except under the requirements and conditions of this
article. Any purchase order or contract made contrary to the provisions of this
article is voidable by the Purchasing Agent with the approval of the County
Executive, and the County shall not be bound thereby.
   (b)   Violation. If any officer, agent, or employee of the County knowingly
violates or assists in the violation of any provision of this article, such
officer, agent, or employee may be subject to disciplinary actions as
prescribed in the Charter, this Code, and personnel regulations, and may be
deemed personally responsible for any costs incurred as a result of an
unauthorized purchase.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 1-108) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 8-17)
§ 8-1-107. Cooperative purchasing.
   (a)   Cooperative procurements. The Purchasing Agent may undertake or
participate in cooperative procurements. Any resulting contract must be
procured in a manner consistent with this article and the Purchasing
Regulations.
   (b)   Piggyback procurements.
      (1)   The Purchasing Agent may procure through a piggyback procurement if
the underlying contract was established in a manner consistent with the
purposes of this article and the vendor extends in writing to the Purchasing
Agent an agreement to sell based on the terms of the underlying contract or the
underlying contract expressly extends its terms to other public jurisdictions.
      (2)   The Purchasing Agent may allow procurement from a federal supply
schedule if the vendor under the schedule has a contract with the County for
other related goods or services.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 1-109) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 8-17)
§ 8-1-108. Contracts.
   (a)   Contracts. All procurement contracts shall be signed on behalf of the
County by the County Executive, the Chief Administrative Officer, or the County
Executive’s designee, unless otherwise provided by County law. All contract
forms and contracts shall be approved by the County Attorney or the County
Attorney’s designee for form and legal sufficiency.
   (b)   Availability of funds. A contract or purchase order in excess of
$10,000 may not be issued unless the Controller first certifies that funds for
the designated purchase are available.
   (c)   Terms and conditions. If a vendor accepts the County’s established
terms and conditions, a separate contract may not be required.
   (d)   Scope of work. The scope of work in a contract shall describe fully
any milestones, reporting requirements, deliverables, and goods and services
that are expected to be provided by the contracting party. If the County
requires a change in the scope of work, and it is in the best interests of the
County, the Purchasing Agent, with written justification, may allow changes to
the scope of work so long as the change is only an increase to or decrease of
the original scope of work and the change is agreed to in writing by the
parties.
(Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 59-24)
TITLE 2. PROCUREMENT
Section
   
8-2-101.   Purchasing regulations.
   
8-2-102.   Procurement methods.
   
8-2-103.   Participation in procurement.
   
8-2-104.   Competitive sealed bidding.
   
8-2-105.   Competitive sealed proposals.
   
8-2-106.   Small procurements.
   
8-2-107.   Sole source procurements.
   
8-2-108.   Single source procurements.
   
8-2-109.   Emergency procurements.
   
8-2-110.   Expedited procurements.
   
8-2-111.   Professional services procurements.
   
8-2-112.   Group Health Plan contracts.
   
8-2-113.   Multi-term contracts.
   
8-2-114.   Types of contracts.
   
8-2-115.   Capital improvement contracts.
   
8-2-116.   Prevailing wage.
   
8-2-117.   Local hiring.
   
8-2-118.   Mandatory clauses.
   
8-2-119.   Bonding.
   
8-2-120.   Disposition of supplies.
   
8-2-121.   Contract awards; public disclosure.
   
8-2-122.   Investment options for Employee Retirement Savings Plans.
   
8-2-123.   Transition to hybrid and zero-emission County vehicles.
§ 8-2-101. Purchasing regulations.
   (a)   Preparation. The Central Services Officer shall prepare rules and
regulations governing the operations of the County procurement system. The
rules and regulations shall be referred to as the "Purchasing Regulations" and
shall represent a complete statement of all rules and regulations under the
County's purchasing system.
   (b)   Adoption by County Council. The Purchasing Regulations shall be
submitted, with the approval of the County Executive and the Chief
Administrative Officer, for approval and adoption by ordinance of the County
Council. After adoption of the Purchasing Regulations by the County Council,
the Central Services Officer shall issue the Purchasing Regulations to using
agencies and shall secure compliance with the Purchasing Regulations by the
using agencies.
   (c)   Amendments.
      (1)   Amendments to the Purchasing Regulations governing emergency
purchases, emergency contracts, and those involving goods or services of an
unusual or noncompetitive nature and that are not inconsistent with the basic
purchasing policy of the County as contained in the Charter and the ordinance
enacted by the County Council may be made by the Central Services Officer with
the written approval of the County Executive or the Chief Administrative
Officer. The amendments shall be effective until the next annual legislative
session of the County Council when they shall be cumulatively submitted to the
County Council for approval by ordinance.
      (2)   Amendments to the Purchasing Regulations not governing emergency
purchases, emergency contracts, and those not involving goods or services of an
unusual or noncompetitive nature and that are not inconsistent with the basic
purchasing policy of the County as contained in the Charter and the ordinances
enacted by the County Council may be made by the Central Services Officer with
the written approval of the County Executive or Chief Administrative Officer.
The amendments shall be effective on approval of the County Attorney.
   (d)   Contents. The rules and regulations shall include provisions to
govern:
      (1)   the handling of bids and proposals, including their advertising,
custody and safeguarding, opening and tabulation, and rejection;
      (2)   procedures for determining the lowest responsive and responsible
bidder or the best offer; procedures for resolving protests and disputes; and
procedures governing the use of contract clauses;
      (3)   procedures for securing from bidders or offerors and prospective
bidders or offerors the data necessary to determine whether they are
responsible bidders or offerors;
      (4)   the conditions under which informalities and defects in bids may be
waived or cured and the conditions under which mistakes in bids may be
corrected or the withdrawal of bids permitted;
      (5)   the conditions and criteria under which competitive sealed bidding
may be determined impractical, or otherwise not advantageous, for purposes of
using the competitive sealed proposal / competitive negotiation method;
      (6)   procedures for reporting receipt of goods and services;
      (7)   procedures for submission, examination, and approval of invoices
for goods and services delivered or rendered to using agencies;
      (8)   procedures to be observed by using agencies and the Purchasing
Agent in the development of a program for bulk purchases, including requiring
using agencies to file with the Purchasing Agent detailed estimates of future
needs for such periods as the Purchasing Agent may prescribe;
      (9)   procedures facilitating reduction, to the maximum extent possible,
in the number of purchase transactions by combining into bulk orders and
contracts the requirements of using agencies for common-use goods and services
purchased repeatedly;
      (10)   procedures involving the development and use of those types of
contracts and purchase orders that will reduce to the minimum the accompanying
paper work and that, in other respects, will be most advantageous to the
County;
      (11)   the terms and conditions under which using agencies may submit
requisitions to the Purchasing Agent for goods or services available under
contracts made by the Purchasing Agent;
      (12)   procedures to be observed by using agencies and the Purchasing
Agent in obtaining full and open competition wherever possible, on all
purchases and sales;
      (13)   procedures under which, by express authorization in writing of the
Purchasing Agent, a using agency may be exempted from the rules and regulations
for specified goods or services;
      (14)   procedures to be observed by using agencies and by warehouse
personnel in accounting for the receipt and disbursement of goods, including:
         (i)   the classification of inventory items and their positive
identification by means of standard nomenclature or code or part numbers;
         (ii)   provision of adequate storage facilities and supervision;
         (iii)   maintenance of an accurate perpetual inventory record, showing
receipts, allotments, disbursements and available balances in stores, supported
by periodic physical inventory counting or stock-taking;
         (iv)   following an established cost system and accounting procedure
to interpret the physical or unit quantity records into financial terms,
including periodic reconciliation of inventory with books and records
maintained by the Controller; and
         (v)   analysis of inactive goods to determine their disposition and to
avoid the accumulation of surplus, old, and obsolete goods;
      (15)   procedures for procurement of revenue-producing services;
      (16)   procedures for use of e-commerce, online sales, and other
procurement tools and methods;
      (17)   procedures for small, sole source, and single source procurements;
      (18)   purchases exempt from §
8-2-104 through
8-2-110 and
8-2-114; and
      (19)   any other matters necessary to give effect to the rules and
regulations and the provisions of
Article IX of the Charter.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-101) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 58-08;
Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-102. Procurement methods.
   (a)   Competitive sealed bidding required; exceptions. All County
procurement contracts shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, except as
otherwise provided in:
      (1)   §
8-1-107(a), "Cooperative procurements";
      (2)   §
8-1-107(b), "Piggyback procurements";
      (3)   §
8-2-105, "Competitive Sealed Proposals";
      (4)   §
8-2-106, "Small Procurements";
      (5)   §
8-2-107, "Sole Source Procurements";
      (6)   §
8-2-109, “Emergency Procurements”;
      (7)   §
8-2-110, “Expedited Procurements”; and
      (8)   §
8-2-111, “Professional Services Procurements”.
   (b)   Certain multiple contracts. Multiple contracts for the same goods or
services may be awarded to responsive and responsible vendors under any lawful
procurement method if it is in the County's best interests, such as when awards
to two or more vendors are needed for adequate delivery, service, or
availability, or for product compatibility.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-103) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 8-17)
§ 8-2-103. Participation in procurement.
   (a)   Scope of section. This section applies to:
      (1)   any person who assists the County in the drafting, development, or
issuance of any aspect of specifications, an invitation for bids, a request for
proposals, a request for qualifications, or any other document related to the
solicitation of a procurement; and
      (2)    any person who employs an individual described in subsection (a)
(1).
   (b)   Prohibited conduct. A person described in subsection (a) may not:
      (1)   submit a response to the solicitation of the procurement; or
      (2)   directly or indirectly assist or represent another person who is
submitting a response to the solicitation of the procurement.
   (c)   Exceptions. For the purposes of this section, the following do not
constitute assisting the County in the drafting, development, or issuance of
any aspect of specifications, an invitation for bids, a request for proposals,
a request for qualifications, or any other document related to the solicitation
of a procurement:
      (1)   providing descriptive literature, such as catalog sheets,
brochures, technical data sheets, or standard specification "samples", whether
or not solicited by the County;
      (2)   submitting comments on specifications, an invitation for bids, a
request for proposals, a request for qualifications, or any other document
related to the solicitation of a procurement if comments have been solicited
from two or more persons as part of a request for information by the County or
a pre-bid or pre-proposal process; or
      (3)   providing specifications for:
         (i)   an emergency procurement;
         (ii)   a sole source procurement; or
         (iii)   a professional services procurement of architect or
engineering services and information technology services through an open end
agreement made in accordance with Article 8 of this Code and the Purchasing
Manual.
(Bill No. 80-18)
   State law reference – State Financing and Procurement Article, § 13-212.1.
   Editor's note – Section 8-2-103 was originally codified as § 7-5-112.
Similar state law provision was codified as General Provisions Article, § 5-
508, which was repealed by Acts 2015, c. 271, § 1, eff. Oct. 1, 2015, and
reenacted as State Finance and Procurement Article, § 13-212.1. As a result of
this reenactment, the provisions in § 7-5-112 were reenacted as § 8-2-103.
§ 8-2-104. Competitive sealed bidding.
   (a)   Contracts over $100,000. Except as otherwise provided in §
8-2-102, contracts estimated to be over $100,000 shall be awarded by
competitive sealed bidding.
   (b)   Invitation for bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall
include a purchase description and all contractual terms and conditions
applicable to the procurement.
   (c)   Notice. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be
given at a reasonable time before the date set forth in the notice for the
opening of bids in accordance with the Purchasing Regulations. Notice shall
include print and online publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
the County for a reasonable time prior to bid opening. Additionally, the
Purchasing Agent shall solicit sealed bids from among prospective bidders
identified with the assistance of the using agency by sending them a copy of a
bid notice. The bid notice shall also be posted on the Purchasing Division
website and advertised digitally on a website or web-based platform generally
accepted in the industry from which the goods or services are sought. The date
of advertising shall be the date on which the bid notice is posted on the
Purchasing Division website.
   (d)   Uniform bidding; statement under oath. The Purchasing Agent shall
discourage uniform and collusive bidding by every possible means and endeavor
to obtain competition on purchases and sales that is as full and open as
possible. The Purchasing Agent shall require each bidder to accompany a bid
with a statement made under oath that the bidder has not been a party with
other bidders to an agreement to bid a fixed or uniform price or to share price
bid information.
   (e)   Bid rendered void; violation of this section. A bid is rendered void
if a bidder violates the statement submitted with the bid or discloses or
acquires the terms or conditions of the bid submitted by another bidder before
the opening of the bids.
   (f)   Sealed; bonds. 
      (1)   Bids shall be submitted sealed to the Purchasing Agent and
identified as bids on the envelope.
      (2)   When considered necessary by the Purchasing Agent, bid deposits
shall be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids in the amounts set forth
in §
8-2-117(d).
      (3)   Unsuccessful bidders are entitled to a return of their bid deposits
within 10 days of the opening of bids.
      (4)   If a successful bidder fails to execute a contract within 10 days
after the award, the bid deposit may be retained by the County and considered
as liquidated damages, and not as a penalty, for failure of the bidder to
execute the contract. On proper execution of a contract by a successful bidder,
the bid deposit shall be returned to the successful bidder.
   (g)   Summary and tabulation. A summary of the information read at the bid
opening shall be posted on the County website within 24 hours of the bid
opening. A final tabulation of all bids received shall be posted on the County
website after the award is made.
   (h)   Rejection. The Purchasing Agent may reject all bids, parts of all
bids, or all bids for any one or more goods or services included in the
proposed contract when, in the Purchasing Agent's judgment, the public interest
will be served thereby.
   (i)   Tie bids. If two or more bidders are tied for the lowest bid, the
Purchasing Agent shall award the contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing
lots in public.
   (j)   One bid or no responsive bids. In the event that only one or no
responsive bids are received and re-issuance of the invitation for bids is not
practicable or in the best interest of the County, the Purchasing Agent may
award the bid to the single bidder or negotiate a sole source contract in
accordance with §
8-2-107.
   (k)   Bids exceed allocated funds. If responsive bids are received from two
or more responsible bidders and all prices received exceed allocated funds, the
Purchasing Agent may reduce or otherwise modify the scope of work and may
either solicit revised bids from those responsive and responsible firms
responding to the original solicitations or the Purchasing Agent may re-
advertise for new bids.
   (l)   Responsive and responsible bidder. The Purchasing Agent shall award
all contracts to the responsive and responsible bidder having the lowest bid
price or lowest evaluated bid.
   (m)   Considerations. In determining a bidder's responsibility, the
Purchasing Agent may consider all information that may be secured by the
Purchasing Agent having a bearing on the decision to award. The Purchasing
Agent shall consider:
      (1)   the ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required;
      (2)   whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
      (3)   the character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and
efficiency of the bidder;
      (4)   the quality of performance under previous contracts;
      (5)   the previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service; and
      (6)   whether the bidder is in arrears to the County on debt or a
contract, is a defaulter on security to the County, or is delinquent in
Federal, State, or County taxes or assessments.
   (n)   Contract not awarded to lowest bidder. If the contract is not awarded
to the lowest bidder in price, the Purchasing Agent shall make a written
statement of reasons for the award and maintain a copy of the statement in the
contract or bid file.
   (o)   Specifications. Specifications shall be developed in accordance with
the following.
      (1)   The Purchasing Agent shall obtain expert advice and assistance from
personnel of using agencies in the development of specifications and may
delegate to the using agency the authority to prepare its own specifications.
      (2)   Any unresolved disagreements between the Purchasing Agent and the
using agency with regard to adequacy of specifications shall be referred to the
Central Services Officer for resolution.
      (3)   All specifications shall seek to promote overall economy for the
purposes intended, shall encourage competition in satisfying the County's needs
to the maximum extent practicable, and shall not be unduly restrictive.
Performance or functional specifications shall be the preferred type.
      (4)   When the County requires goods that are produced by only one
manufacturer, the Purchasing Agent shall specify the manufacturer's make or
brand in the invitations to bid and shall obtain competitive bids from
authorized dealers or distributors of the manufacturer. If the manufacturer is
the sole bidder and the sole source of supply, the Purchasing Agent may
negotiate a sole source procurement with the manufacturer at prices and on
terms most advantageous to the County.
      (5)   When the County requires goods that are patented or proprietary and
that are obtainable in two or more equally satisfactory and competitive makes,
brands, or types, the Purchasing Agent shall list the acceptable and
competitive makes, brands, or types in the invitations to bid. The lists shall
also include the phrase "or approved equal" or a similar phrase to permit
bidders to bid on alternate or additional makes, brands, or types. It is
incumbent on each bidder to prove to the satisfaction of the County that the
alternate or additional make, brand, or type is equal in quality or performance
to those listed in the invitation to bid.
   (p)   Multi-step bidding.
      (1)   Multi-step sealed bidding may be conducted in which bidders submit
unpriced technical offers or samples or both in the first step of the process
and price bids in the second step. Once bidders have been evaluated for
responsibility and technical offers or samples or both have been evaluated for
responsiveness, price bids shall be solicited only from those bidders who have
been deemed responsible and whose technical offers or samples or both have been
deemed responsive.
      (2)   A multi-step sealed bidding method under which both technical
proposals and sealed price bids are submitted separately but simultaneously may
be used. The sealed price bids may not be opened until the evaluation for
responsibility of bidders and responsiveness of technical proposals is
complete. Sealed price bids of bidders deemed not responsible or whose
technical offers or samples are deemed not responsive shall not be opened and
shall be returned sealed to the bidders.
   (q)   Waiver; cure. In accordance with the Purchasing Regulations, the
Purchasing Agent, with the approval of the Central Services Officer, may waive
formalities or permit the cure of defects in bids that do not affect the
integrity of the bid.
   (r)   Mistakes in bids. If, after bids are opened, the bidder alleges a
mistake in the bid, the bid may be withdrawn or corrected only with the
approval of the Purchasing Agent and the Central Services Officer and only if
the mistake is clearly evident from the bid, such as a typographical error, an
error in extending unit pricing, a transposition error, or an arithmetical
error. The Purchasing Agent shall document in writing all grants or denials of
bid corrections or withdrawals based on claims of mistake, including the
reasons for the grant or denial, and the document shall be maintained as part
of the file related to the procurement.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-104) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 8-03; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 14-05; Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18 ; Bill No. 19-19
; Bill No. 1-21 )
§ 8-2-105. Competitive sealed proposals.
   (a)   When allowed. When the Purchasing Agent determines, in accordance with
the Purchasing Regulations, that competitive sealed bidding is not practical or
not advantageous to the County, a contract may be entered into by competitive
sealed proposals.
   (b)   Notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be
given in the manner provided in §
8-2-104(c).
   (c)   Contents of request; evaluation. The request for proposals shall state
the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. Price may not be
the sole evaluation factor. Numerical ratings may be used at the discretion of
the Purchasing Agent.
   (d)   Uniform bidding; statement under oath. The Purchasing Agent shall
discourage uniform and collusive bidding by every possible means and endeavor
to obtain competition on purchases and sales that is as full and open as
possible. The Purchasing Agent shall require each bidder to accompany a bid
with a statement made under oath that the bidder has not been a party with
other bidders to an agreement to bid a fixed or uniform price or to share price
bid information.
   (e)   Opening of proposals; register. Proposals shall be opened so as to
avoid disclosure of contents to competing offerors during the process of
negotiation. A register of proposals shall be prepared showing the names of
offerors who have submitted proposals and shall be open for public inspection.
   (f)   Negotiation. As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may
be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined by the
Purchasing Agent to have a reasonable possibility of award. Discussions may be
held for purposes of clarification to ensure full understanding of and
responsiveness to the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded
fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and
revisions of proposals, and revisions may be permitted after submissions and
before award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting
discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from
proposals submitted by competing offerors.
   (g)   Multi-step method. A multi-step method may be used in the evaluation
process with qualifications and technical and price proposals being obtained
and evaluated either separately or concurrently.
   (h)   Demonstration or testing. If the Purchasing Agent determines that use
of proposed goods or services is required before technical evaluation of the
proposed goods or services, each responsive, responsible offeror shall be
provided with an opportunity to provide goods or services for a time period
determined by the Purchasing Agent before technical evaluation of the proposals
and before opening of cost proposals.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-105) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 8-03; Bill No. 58-08;
Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18)
§ 8-2-106. Small procurements.
   All procurements initially estimated not to exceed $100,000 for a single
purchase or for the lesser of each term or year of a contract shall be
considered a small procurement and are not subject to the requirements of §§
8-2-104 and
8-2-105. The Purchasing Agent, wherever practical when the amount
exceeds$10,000, shall attempt to secure at least three quotations on all small
procurements. Oral quotations may be solicited and shall be confirmed in
writing by the bidders or offerors in paper or electronic format. The
Purchasing Agent shall include, in writing, consideration and comparison of
prices from sellers on the Internet.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-106) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 14-05;
Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 19-19; Bill No. 1-21;
Bill No. 98-24)
§ 8-2-107. Sole source procurements.
   (a)   Use. A sole source procurement may be used when:
      (1)   only one source exists meeting the County’s requirements;
      (2)   compatibility of equipment, accessories, or replacement parts is a
paramount consideration;
      (3)   a sole vendor’s item is needed for trial use or testing;
      (4)   the item is for resale by the County at the same price;
      (5)   the service is a professional service in accordance with §
8-2-111;
      (6)   it is impossible to determine the scope or extent of services
required until the work commences, such as when internal engine damage or
underground conditions cannot be ascertained until the engine is dismantled or
excavation is made; or
      (7)   competition is precluded due to patents, copyrights, or similar
circumstances.
   (b)   Purchasing regulations. The purchasing regulations shall include
provisions for utilizing a sole source procurement.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-107) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 8-17;
Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-108. Single source procurements.
   (a)   Use. A single source procurement may only be used when only one
responsive, responsible vendor responds to a competitive solicitation.
   (b)   Purchasing regulations. The purchasing regulations shall include
provisions for utilizing a single source procurement.
(Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-109. Emergency procurements.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “emergency” means a breakdown in
machinery, a threatened termination of essential services, a dangerous
condition, or any unforeseen circumstance that causes curtailment or diminution
of an essential service.
   (b)   Purchasing Regulations. The Purchasing Regulations shall provide for
the specific terms and conditions under which emergency purchases may be made.
   (c)   Emergency during business hours. If an emergency occurs during regular
County business hours, the using agency shall immediately notify the Purchasing
Agent, who shall either purchase the required goods or services or authorize
the using agency to do so.
   (d)   Emergency outside business hours. If an emergency occurs at a time
other than regular business hours, the using agency may purchase directly the
required goods or services. Whenever practicable, the using agency shall secure
competitive telephone quotations, which shall be confirmed in writing by
vendors in paper or electronic format, and order delivery to be made by the
lowest responsible vendor. Not later than the next regular County business day
thereafter, the using agency shall submit to the Purchasing Agent a
requisition, a tabulation of quotations received, a copy of the delivery
record, and a written explanation of the circumstances of the emergency.
   (e)   Records. A complete, current file record shall be maintained by the
Purchasing Agent explaining or otherwise supporting the particular basis on
which each emergency purchase was made. Records shall be available for public
inspection during regular County business hours in the Purchasing Agent’s main
offices.
   (f)   Report to County Council. The Purchasing Agent shall submit monthly to
the County Council, through the Central Services Officer, the Chief
Administrative Officer, and the County Executive, a report covering a
tabulation of all emergency purchases in excess of $5,000 with an explanation
of the circumstances of the purchases.
   (g)   Limits on emergency orders. The Purchasing Agent shall seek to limit
emergency orders by use of existing County contracts, including blanket
purchase orders, whenever it is determined to be in the best interest of the
County.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-108) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 14-05;
Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-110. Expedited procurements.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “expedited procurement” means a
procurement involving an amount over $100,000 made with the advance written
approval of the Purchasing Agent, approved by the Central Services Officer and
the Chief Administrative Officer, in which prompt action best serves the public
interest and the procurement is not an emergency but an expedited procurement
process outweighs the benefits of either competitive sealed bidding under §
8-2-104 or competitive sealed proposals under §
8-2-105. An expedited procurement may include situations in which federal or
State revenues to the County may be lost if rapid procurement actions are not
taken or situations that would have an adverse impact on the economic welfare
of the County or important economic development in the County.
   (b)   Approval by Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing Agent may approve
expedited procurements either on a contract-by-contract or a project-by-project
basis.
   (c)   Procedure. To the extent practicable, the procedures prescribed in §§
8-2-104 and
8-2-105, as applicable, shall be utilized when making an expedited procurement,
except that the Purchasing Agent may waive the public notice or advertising
requirements. The Purchasing Agent shall justify in writing a selection based
on three price quotes if competitive solicitations as prescribed in §§
8-2-104 and
8-2-105 cannot be made due to insufficient time between when the need to make
an expedited procurement first became known and when the contract must be
performed or for such other reasons that preclude the use of competition.
   (d)   Report to County Council. Each expedited procurement shall be reported
monthly in the same manner as prescribed for reporting emergency procurements
under §
8-2-108.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-109) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 14-05; Bill No. 58-08;
Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 19-19; Bill No. 1-21; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-111. Professional services procurements.
   (a)   Professional service procurement. The Purchasing Agent may procure
professional services in accordance with this article and the Purchasing
Regulations whenever he determines that such services are required. If a
professional service is required to be licensed by the State of Maryland, those
services shall be procured from a professional who is licensed and whose
license is in good standing with the applicable licensing authority.
   (b)   Prequalified professional services providers. The Purchasing Agent may
maintain lists of prequalified professional services providers. The Purchasing
Agent shall enter into professional services procurements in accordance with
the Purchasing Regulations.
   (c)   Architect and engineer professional services. Services of architects
and engineers shall be procured using one of the following methods in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the Purchasing Regulations: (1)
open-end agreements; (2) technical- and price-based evaluation; or (3)
qualification-based selection.
   (d)   Information technology professional services. Services of information
technology professionals may be procured in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the Purchasing Regulations for technical- and price-based evaluation.
   (e)   Independent auditor. The independent firm of certified public
accountants retained to perform the financial audit of County agencies for the
preceding fiscal year under §
311 of the County Charter shall be selected by resolution of the County Council
after receiving the recommendation of an Evaluation Committee appointed by the
Chairman of the County Council.
   (f)   Group Health Plan contracts. The Personnel Officer shall solicit
competitive sealed proposals or invite competitive sealed bids for health
insurance plans for the provision of benefits as determined pursuant to §
6-1-308 at least every six years, and each proposal or bid shall include at a
minimum an essential health benefits package as required by the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-110) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 92-15;
Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 24-19; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-112. Group Health Plan contracts.
   The Personnel Officer shall solicit competitive sealed proposals or invite
competitive sealed bids for health insurance plans for the provision of
benefits pursuant to §
6-1-308 of this Code at least every six years. Any qualified bid or proposal
shall, at a minimum, provide for an essential health benefits package as
required by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
(Bill No. 85-13; Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-113. Multi-term contracts.
   (a)   When allowed. Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for goods
or services may be entered into for any period of time considered to be in the
best interests of the County if the term of the contract and conditions of
renewal or extension, including prices or an objective means of determining
prices for the periods of extension, are included in the solicitation and funds
are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment
and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods are subject to the
availability and appropriation of funds.
   (b)   Funds unavailable in subsequent fiscal period. When funds are not
appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance
in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be canceled and the
contractor shall be reimbursed for the reasonable value of any nonrecurring
costs incurred at the direction of an authorized agent of the County but not
amortized in the price of the goods or services delivered under the contract
prior to cancellation of the contract. The cost of cancellation may be paid
from any appropriations available for such purposes.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-111) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 85-13;
Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-114. Types of contracts.
   (a)   Generally. Subject to the provisions of subsections (b) and (c), any
type of contract that will promote the best interests of the County may be
used.
   (b)   Cost-reimbursement contract. A cost-reimbursement contract may be used
only when the Purchasing Agent concludes that such a contract is likely to be
less costly to the County than any other type or that it is impractical to
obtain the goods or services required except under a cost reimbursement
contract.
   (c)   Cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract. The use of a cost-plus-a-
percentage-of-cost contract is prohibited. A contract with pricing based on
percentage discounts from, or percentages added to, prices listed in a
manufacturer’s published price list in general distribution or with pricing
including a mark-up on materials or rented equipment used for maintenance,
repairs, or new installations on County property is not considered to be cost-
plus-percentage-of-cost contract.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-112) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 85-13;
Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-115. Capital improvement contracts.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   “High performance building” means a building that meets or exceeds
the current version of the U.S. Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy
and Environmental Design (“LEED”) Green Building Rating System Silver rating.
      (2)   “Major renovation” means the renovation of a building in which, at
the time of the initial planning of a capital improvement project, it is
anticipated that:
         (i)   the building shell will be reused;
         (ii)   the electrical, plumbing, and heating, ventilating, and air
conditioning (HVAC) systems will be replaced; and
         (iii)   the scope of the renovation will be 10,000 square feet or
greater.
   (b)   Generally. Whenever a capital improvement project is to be undertaken
by the County, the Director of Public Works shall cause plans, specifications,
and estimates to be prepared. The Chief Administrative Officer shall determine
whether the capital improvement project is to be constructed by contract or by
the County’s force account labor.
   (c)   High performance buildings. Except as provided in subsections (d) and
(e), a capital improvement project for construction of a County-owned building
of 10,000 square feet or more or for a major renovation of a County-owned
building shall be constructed or renovated to be a high performance building.
   (d)   Exempted buildings. The following buildings are exempt from the
requirements of subsection (c):
      (1)   warehouses and storage facilities;
      (2)   garages;
      (3)   maintenance facilities;
      (4)   transmitter buildings;
      (5)   pumping stations;
      (6)   water and wastewater treatment facilities; and
      (7)   other similar types of buildings, as determined by the Director of
Public Works.
   (e)   Waiver.
      (1)   The Chief Administrative Officer may waive the requirements of
subsection (c) if the Director of Public Works recommends doing so because
achieving a high performance building in a proposed capital improvement project
is not practicable.
      (2)   Any waiver granted under this subsection shall be in writing, state
the reasons for the waiver, and be included with the records for the capital
improvement project.
   (f)   Cost exceeds $100,000. If the capital improvement project is to be
constructed by contract and the estimated cost exceeds $100,000, competitive
bids or proposals shall be secured and the contract shall be awarded in
accordance with the provisions of §
8-2-104 or §
8-2-105, as applicable, except that an award of any capital improvement
contract may not be made without the written approval of the Department of
Public Works, the Controller, and one of the following: the County Executive,
the Chief Administrative Officer, or the County Executive’s designee. All
contracts for capital improvements shall be approved by the County Attorney as
to form and legal sufficiency and, following approval, shall be executed on
behalf of the County by the County Executive, the Chief Administrative Officer,
or the County Executive’s designee.
   (g)   Appropriation. If bidding results in, or subsequent changes to the
contract require, additional expenditure in excess of the appropriation, the
additional amount is subject to approval by the County Council by supplementary
or emergency appropriation ordinance as provided for in §
712 of the Charter.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-113) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 14-05; Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 53-09; Bill No. 85-13; Bill No. 8-17;
Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 19-19; Bill No. 1-21; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-116. Prevailing wage.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   “Apprentice” means an individual who:
         (i)   is at least 16 years old;
         (ii)   has signed an agreement with an employer or employer’s agent,
an association of employers, an organization of employees, or a joint committee
with members from two or more different organizations, that includes a
statement of:
            1.   the trade, craft, or occupation that the individual is
learning; and
            2.   the beginning and ending dates of the apprenticeship; and
         (iii)   is registered in a program of a council or bureau of
apprenticeship and training of the United States Department of Labor or a
federally approved State equivalent.
      (2)   “Capital project” has the meaning stated in §
702(b) of the County Charter.
      (3)   (i)   “Capital improvement contract” means a contract related to:
            1.   a County capital project with a value over $250,000; or
            2.   a capital project to which the County contributes funding with
a value over $5,000,000.
         (ii)   “Capital improvement contract” does not include a blanket
contract or open-end agreement in which the individual purchase order issued
does not have a value over $250,000.
      (4)   “Contractor” includes all subcontractors to a contractor on a
capital improvement contract.
      (5)   “Department” means the department designated by the County
Executive to administer and enforce the County prevailing wage requirements
under this title.
      (6)   “Director” means the director of the department that administers
and enforces the County prevailing wage requirements or the director’s
designee.
      (7)   (i)   “Employee” means an apprentice, laborer, or mechanic employed
by a contractor on a capital improvement contract.
         (ii)   “Employee” does not include an individual employed by the
County.
      (8)   “Overtime rate” means the rate a contractor shall pay an employee
at a rate equal to or more than the regular prevailing wage rate for overtime
for the type of work performed for each hour that the employee performs direct
and measurable work:
         (i)   more than eight hours in any single calendar day;
         (ii)   more than 40 hours in a work week; or
         (iii)   on a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (9)   “Prevailing wage” means the basic hourly rate and fringe benefit
rate established annually by the State Commissioner of Labor and Industry for
State-funded construction contracts in the County at the time of the award of
the capital improvement contract.
   (b)   Applicability.
      (1)   This section applies to capital improvement contracts.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a capital improvement contract:
         (i)   subject to a federal or State prevailing wage law;
         (ii)   awarded without competition;
         (iii)   with another governmental entity;
         (iv)   to the extent that the contractor is expressly precluded from
complying with this section by the terms of any federal or State law, contract,
or grant;
         (v)   entered into pursuant to §
8-1-107(b);
         (vi)   entered into as a joint or cooperative purchase; or
         (vii)   entered into as an emergency purchase.
   (c)   Prevailing wage required. A contractor that performs direct and
measurable construction work on a capital improvement contract shall pay each:
      (1)   employee at a rate equal to or more than the prevailing wage rate
currently in effect for the type of work performed; and
      (2)   apprentice at least the rate that the State’s apprenticeship and
training council sets for an apprentice in the trade involved, based on a
percentage of the prevailing wage rate in that trade.
   (d)   Wage deductions permitted. A contractor may only make fair and
reasonable deductions that are:
      (1)   required by law;
      (2)   authorized in a written agreement between the employee and the
contractor signed at the beginning of employment that:
         (i)   concerns food, sleeping quarters, or similar items; and
         (ii)   is submitted by the contractor to the Director; or
      (3)   required or allowed by a collective bargaining agreement between a
bona fide labor organization and a contractor.
   (e)   Contract requirements. A capital improvement contract:
      (1)   shall require the contractor to comply with this section;
      (2)   shall specify that an aggrieved employee or apprentice, as a third-
party beneficiary, may by a civil action against the contractor, recover the
difference between the prevailing wage for the type of work performed and the
amount actually received, with interest and reasonable attorney’s fees, as
applicable; and
      (3)   may specify the payment of liquidated damages owed to the County by
the contractor for noncompliance with this section of not more than three times
the amount of wages owed to an employee or apprentice.
   (f)   Prohibitions. A contractor may not:
      (1)   split or subdivide a capital improvement contract or a subcontract
awarded pursuant to the capital improvement contract, pay an employee through a
third-party, or treat an employee as a subcontractor or independent contractor
to avoid any requirement of this section; or
      (2)   employ an individual classified as a helper or trainee to perform
direct and measurable work under a capital improvement contract.
   (g)   Notice required. A contractor shall prominently post at the worksite a
clearly legible statement in English and any other language that is primarily
spoken by the employees at the worksite that states each prevailing wage rate.
   (h)   Records.
      (1)   A contractor shall submit a certified complete copy of its payroll
records for a capital improvement contract covered by this section to the
Director within 14 days after the end of each payroll period.
      (2)   The payroll records shall contain a statement signed by the
contractor certifying that:
         (i)   the payroll records are complete and correct;
         (ii)   the wage rates paid are not less than those required by this
section; and
         (iii)   the rate of pay and classification for each employee
accurately reflects the work the employee performed.
      (3)   Payroll records shall include:
         (i)   the name, address, telephone number, and e-mail of the
contractor;
         (ii)   the name and location of the job; and
         (iii)   each employee’s:
            1.   name;
            2.   current address, unless previously reported;
            3.   specific work classification;
            4.   daily basic time and overtime hours;
            5.   total basic time and overtime hours for the payroll period;
            6.   rate of pay;
            7.   fringe benefits by type and amount; and
            8.   gross wages.
      (4)   A contractor shall:
         (i)   maintain payroll records covering a capital improvement contract
covered by this section for not less than five years after the work is
completed; and
         (ii)   subject to reasonable notice, permit the Director to inspect
the payroll records at a reasonable time and as often as necessary.
      (5)   The Director shall:
         (i)   maintain payroll records covering a capital improvement contract
covered by this section for not less than five years after the work is
completed; and,
         (ii)   subject to any required exemptions or denials under the
Maryland Public Information Act or any other applicable open public records
laws, shall make the records available for public inspection during regular
business hours.
   (i)   Audits. The Director may perform random or regular audits and
investigate any complaint of a violation of this section.
   (j)   Violations.
      (1)   If the Director determines that a provision of this section has
been violated, the Director:
         (i)   shall issue a written decision, including appropriate sanctions;
and
         (ii)   may withhold from payment due the contractor, pending a final
decision, an amount sufficient to:
            1.   pay each employee of the contractor the full amount of wages
due under this section; and
            2.   satisfy a liability of a contractor for liquidated damages as
permitted in this section.
      (2)   (i)   A contractor may appeal a written decision of the Director
that the contractor violated a provision of this section to the Purchasing
Agent within 10 working days after receiving a copy of the decision.
         (ii)   Within a reasonable time of receipt of a timely appeal, the
Purchasing Agent may investigate, request written testimony, or conduct a
hearing, as the Purchasing Agent deems necessary for the review of the appeal.
The decision of the Purchasing Agent on the appeal is final and not subject to
appeal.
         (iii)   If the contractor does not appeal the Director’s decision
within 10 working days after receipt, the decision of the Director is deemed
final and not appealable.
      (3)   If the final decision of the Director or, after appeal, the
Purchasing Agent, is that the contractor has violated the provisions of this
section and that the violation was intentional, at the discretion of the
Director, the contractor, any of its principals, or any firm, corporation,
partnership, or other business entity in which that contractor has an interest,
may not be awarded a County contract and may not perform any work on any County
contract for one year from the date of the final decision.
      (4)   A contractor may not discharge or otherwise retaliate against an
employee for asserting any right under this section or for filing a complaint
of a violation.
      (5)   A contractor is jointly and severally liable for a subcontractor’s
noncompliance with this section.
      (6)   If a contractor is late in submitting copies of payroll records
required to be submitted under this section, the County may deem the invoices
deficient until the contractor provides the required records and may postpone
processing payments due under the contract.
   (k)   Report. The Director shall annually publish and post on the County’s
website a report on the operation of and compliance with this section.
   (l)   Policies and guidelines. The Director may promulgate draft policies
and guidelines for the proper implementation and enforcement of this section.
The draft policies and guidelines shall be posted for public comment on the
County’s website for a period of at least 30 days. If there are no comments,
the policies and guidelines become effective no earlier than the expiration of
the 30-day comment period. If there are comments and the Director makes
revisions, the revised policies and guidelines become effective no earlier than
the date upon which they are posted on the County’s website.
(Bill No. 72-21; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-117. Local hiring.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following terms have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   “Contractor” means a contractor who:
         (i)   has a capital improvement contract with the County for more than
$1,000,000; or
         (ii)   has a contract for a capital project to which the County
contributes funding with a value over $5,000,000.
      (2)   “Capital improvement contract” and “capital project” have the
meanings stated in §
8-2-116.
      (3)   “Department” means the department that the County Executive
designates to administer and enforce the County local hiring requirements under
this title.
      (4)   “Director” means the director of the department that administers
and enforces the County local hiring requirements or the director’s designee.
   (b)   Local hiring. A contractor shall make best efforts to fill at least
51% of new jobs required to complete the capital improvement contract or
capital project with Anne Arundel County residents.
   (c)   Reporting. The contractor shall submit quarterly reports to the
Department, on the form designated by the Director, which includes the
following with respect to the capital improvement contract or capital project:
      (1)   the number of new hires needed for the contract during the
reporting period;
      (2)   the total number of Anne Arundel County residents hired during the
reporting period;
      (3)   the total number of all employees hired during the reporting
period;
      (4)   describe efforts made to fill the open positions with local County
residents; and
      (5)   for a new hire during the reporting period, the new hire’s:
         (i)   name;
         (ii)   last four numbers of their social security number;
         (iii)   job title;
         (iv)   hire date;
         (v)   address; and
         (vi)   referral source.
   (d)   Violations.
      (1)   If the Director determines that a contractor has not made best
efforts or reported as required under this section, the Director shall issue a
written decision detailing the basis for the determination.
      (2)   (i)   A contractor may appeal a written decision of the Director
that the contractor violated a provision of this section to the Purchasing
Agent within 10 working days after receiving a copy of the decision.
         (ii)   Within a reasonable time of receipt of a timely appeal, the
Purchasing Agent may investigate, request written testimony, or conduct a
hearing, as the Purchasing Agent deems necessary for the review of the appeal.
The Purchasing Agent’s decision on the appeal is not subject to appeal.
         (iii)   If the contractor does not appeal the Director’s decision
within 10 working days after receipt, the decision of the Director is deemed
final and not appealable.
      (3)   If the final decision of the Director or, after appeal, the
Purchasing Agent is that the contractor has violated the provisions of this
section and that the violation was intentional, at the discretion of the
Director, the contractor, any of its principals, or any firm, corporation, or
partnership in which that contractor has an interest, may not be awarded a
County contract and may not perform any work on any County contract for one
year from the date of the final decision.
      (4)   If a contractor is late in submitting reports required to be
submitted under this section, the County may postpone processing payments due
under the contract until the required reports are submitted.
(Bill No. 72-21; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-118. Mandatory clauses.
   (a)   Scope. The provisions of this section are not applicable to small
procurements that are within the provisions of §
8-2-106.
   (b)   Clauses required by law or necessary to protect County’s interests.
The Purchasing Agent may include in any contract the clauses required by law or
considered necessary to protect the County’s best interests in accordance with
the Purchasing Regulations.
   (c)   Equal employment opportunity. Contracts shall contain a provision
requiring compliance by the contractor or any subcontractor with Executive
Order 11246, entitled “Equal Employment Opportunity”, as amended, and as
supplemented by U.S. Department of Labor Regulations 41 CFR Part 60.
   (d)   Remedies and sanctions or penalties. Contracts shall contain
provisions or conditions that allow for administrative, contractual, or legal
remedies in instances where contractors violate or breach contract terms and
provide for such sanctions and penalties as may be appropriate.
   (e)   Grant funds. Contracts that anticipate the expenditure of federal or
State grant funds shall contain either, or both as applicable, the mandatory
requirements of Federal Management Circular A-102, Attachment O, or such terms
and conditions as prescribed by the federal or State grantor agency.
   (f)   Access to records. Contracts shall include provisions allowing the
County access to the records of the contractor for purposes of auditing or
verifying the contractor’s costs in connection with the contract.
   (g)   Affidavit. Pursuant to the State Finance and Procurement Article, §
16-311, of the State Code, each business entity or person submitting a bid or
otherwise applying for a contract shall submit an affidavit stating to its best
knowledge whether it or any of its officers, directors, or partners, or any of
its employees who are directly involved in obtaining contracts with the State
or with any County or other subdivision of the State, has been convicted of
bribery, attempted bribery, or conspiring to bribe under the laws of any state
or the federal government. The affidavit is satisfactory if it incorporates by
reference the statements contained in an affidavit filed with the same
procurement agency within the previous 12 months pursuant to the requirements
above and states that those statements remain accurate.
   (h)   Non-discrimination.  A contract may not be awarded to any contractor
unless the contract contains provisions obligating the contractor not to
discriminate in any manner against any employee or applicant for employment on
the basis of race, creed, color, or national origin or on any other basis that
would be a violation of federal or State law, and obligating the contractor to
include a similar clause in all subcontracts. Contractors and subcontractors
shall agree to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and
applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of the
nondiscrimination clause.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-114) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 8-03; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 86-11; Bill No. 85-13; Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18;
Bill No. 56-19; Bill No. 72-21; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-119. Bonding.
   (a)   Construction contract for less than $50,000. For every construction
contract in an amount less than or equal to $50,000, the Purchasing Agent may
require bid, performance, and payment security in the amounts and form as
determined necessary to protect the County’s interests and the interests of all
persons supplying labor and materials in the prosecution of the work provided
for in the contract. However, any such bid, performance, and payment security
shall be in an amount not to exceed 50% of the contract amount. The Purchasing
Agent may require a contractor to furnish a waiver of mechanics’ liens to the
County prior to payment of a progress or final payment.
   (b)   Construction contract for more than $50,000. For every construction
contract in excess of $50,000, the Purchasing Agent shall require a performance
bond in an amount adequate to cover the completion of work in the event of
default for the protection of the County. The Purchasing Agent also shall
require a payment bond for the protection of all persons supplying labor and
materials in the prosecution of the work provided for in the contract. The
payment bond shall be in an amount not less than 50% of the total amount
payable by the terms of the contract. Any contractor covered by a payment bond
is not required to furnish a waiver of mechanics’ liens to the County. Prior to
receiving a progress or final payment under a contract subject to this
subsection, a contractor shall certify in writing that the contractor has made
payment from proceeds of prior payments and that the contractor will make
timely payments from the proceeds of the progress or final payment then due to
the subcontractors and suppliers in accordance with their contractual
arrangements.
   (c)   Other contracts. Except as provided in subsections (a) and (b), the
Purchasing Agent may require a performance bond or other form of security in
the amounts considered adequate to protect the County’s interests in supply,
maintenance, service, or other procurements.
   (d)   Bid bonds. A bid bond or other form of security acceptable to the
Purchasing Agent in an amount of at least 5% of the bid is required when
capital contract bids are estimated to exceed $50,000, and may be required by
the Purchasing Agent in the amounts considered appropriate when bids or
proposals are for other than construction contracts that exceed $50,000.
   (e)   Security other than a bond. The Purchasing Agent may accept, in lieu
of bonds, other forms of security, such as irrevocable letter of credit, pledge
of securities backed by the full faith and credit of the federal government or
State bonds, money order, or bank, certified, cashier’s, or treasurer’s check.
   (f)   Bid deposit return.
      (1)   Unsuccessful bidders or offerors are entitled to a return of their
bid bonds within 10 days of award.
      (2)   If a successful bidder or offeror fails to execute a contract
within 10 days after the award, the bid deposit or bond may be retained by the
County and considered as liquidated damages, and not as a penalty, for failure
of the bidder or offeror to execute the contract. On proper execution of a
contract by a successful bidder or offeror, the bid deposit or bond shall be
returned to the successful bidder or offeror.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-115) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 58-08; Bill No. 85-13;
Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 72-21; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-120. Disposition of supplies.
   (a)   When allowed. The Purchasing Agent may dispose of goods that cannot be
used by a using agency or that have become unsuitable for County use.
   (b)   Methods. In disposing of goods, the Purchasing Agent shall authorize
any of the following methods that the Purchasing Agent determines will result
in the highest monetary return to or otherwise be in the best interest of the
County:
      (1)   competitive sealed bids;
      (2)   trade-in or exchange for new goods;
      (3)   spot bid sales;
      (4)   auction;
      (5)   sale or transfer to any department, office, or other unit of County
government or any agency of State government funded in whole or in part by
County funds;
      (6)   donation to an organization, institution, association, society, or
corporation that is exempt from taxation under § 501(c)(3) or § 501(c)(4) of
the Internal Revenue Code;
      (7)   scrap, if the property is of minimal value or not appropriate for
disposal by other methods; and
      (8)   any other appropriate method designated in the Purchasing
Regulations.
   (c)   When open market contract allowed. When use of the methods set forth
in subsection (b) fails to result in a fair and reasonable monetary return, the
Purchasing Agent may negotiate an open market contract.
   (d)   Notice if estimated value exceeds $10,000. Whenever the value of the
surplus, obsolete, and waste goods is estimated to exceed $10,000, public
notice shall be given prior to the sale in the manner prescribed in §
8-2-104(c).
   (e)   When bid or offer by County employee prohibited. A County employee of
the using agency disposing of the goods may not submit bids or offers in
competition with the general public for the purchase of surplus, obsolete, and
waste goods.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 2-118) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 11-94; Bill No. 58-08;
Bill No. 85-13; Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 72-21; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-121. Contract awards; public disclosure.
   (a)   Website requirements. The County Purchasing Agent shall cause to be
published on the Anne Arundel County website all awards of contracts for
capital improvements, contractual services, professional services, or supplies
of $5,000 or greater awarded by the County. The website shall provide the
following information:
      (1)   the name and address of the entity receiving the award, and any
affiliated company providing goods or services under the agreement;
      (2)   the amount of the award;
      (3)   the method or type of procurement;
      (4)   the name of the department responsible for the contract;
      (5)   the budget funding source;
      (6)   the purpose of the award;
      (7)   any known affiliation that the entity receiving the award may have
with a County employee or official that is disclosed by the entity through the
procurement process;
      (8) for business entities, the names and titles of persons executing the
contract on behalf of the business entity; and
      (9)   a list of the bids or offers received, the name of each bidder or
offeror, the amount of the bid or offer, and reasons for rejection of bids or
offers.
   (b)   Initialization, updates and duration. The website shall list all
applicable awards and be updated on a monthly basis. The information regarding
each individual award shall be preserved on the website for a period of one
year.
   (c)   Confidential information. This section may not be used to require the
disclosure of information that is confidential under County, State or federal
law.
(Bill No. 10-08; Bill No. 85-13; Bill No. 8-17; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 19-19;
Bill No. 72-21; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-122. Investment options for Employee Retirement Savings Plans.
   The Personnel Officer shall solicit competitive sealed proposals or invite
competitive sealed bids for banks, trust funds, insurance companies, and
regulated investment companies offering mutual funds for the provision of
investment options for the Anne Arundel County Employee Retirement Savings Plan
pursuant to §
6-6-206 of this Code at least every ten years. Any qualified bid or proposal
shall, at a minimum, provide for a combination of investment options offering
reasonable opportunities for capital appreciation, preservation of capital, and
liquidity as required under § 6-6-205 of this Code.
(Bill No. 95-17; Bill No. 80-18; Bill No. 72-21; Bill No. 60-24)
§ 8-2-123. Transition to hybrid and zero-emission County vehicles.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to the procurement of passenger
vehicles; multi-purpose passenger vehicles; and trucks with a load capacity of
3/4 ton or less and a gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or less.
   (b)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   “Hybrid vehicle” means a vehicle using two different forms of
power, such as an electric motor and an internal combustion engine or an
electric motor with a battery and fuel cells for energy storage.
      (2)   “Zero-emission vehicle” has the meaning stated in § 23-206.4 of the
Transportation Article of the State Code.
   (c)   Replacement of County vehicles.
      (1)   Beginning on February 28, 2021, as County-owned or leased internal
combustion engine vehicles require replacement or as the County adds vehicles
to its fleet, the Office of Central Services shall procure hybrid vehicles or
zero-emission vehicles so long as the Purchasing Agent determines that the
vehicles meet the financial, operational, and technological needs of the using
agencies.
      (2)   In fiscal year 2035, and in each year thereafter, all newly
procured County vehicles subject to this section shall be zero-emission
vehicles so long as the Purchasing Agent determines that the vehicles meet the
financial, operational, and technological needs of the using agencies.
      (3)   When the Purchasing Agent determines that hybrid or zero-emission
vehicles do not meet the financial, operational, or technological needs of the
using agencies, the Purchasing Agent shall purchase or lease vehicles with the
lowest emissions that meet the financial, operational, and technological needs
of the using agencies.
      (4)   By August 31 of each year, the Purchasing Agent shall submit to the
County Executive and the County Council a report that describes procurements
made under this section during the preceding fiscal year.
   (d)   Plan required. By the end of fiscal year 2025, the Office of Central
Services shall complete a plan that outlines the long-term infrastructure,
charging, and maintenance needs, as well as any staff, training, equipment, or
contracted resources necessary to meet the requirements of subsection (c).
(Bill No. 106-20; Bill No. 72-21; Bill No. 60-24)
TITLE 3. ACQUISITION, DISPOSITION, AND LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
Section
Subtitle 1. Acquisition of Real Property
   
8-3-101.   Acquisition of real property.
Subtitle 2. Disposition of Real Property
   
8-3-201.   Disposition of County-owned real property.
   
8-3-202.   Disposition of County-owned non-buildable real property.
   
8-3-203.   Disposition of County-owned real property to a governmental entity.
   
8-3-204.   Duration of surplus declaration.
   
8-3-205.   Disposition of capital improvement project property.
   
8-3-206.   Report to County Auditor.
Subtitle 3. Lease of Real Property
   
8-3-301.   Lease of real property.
SUBTITLE 1. ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY
§ 8-3-101. Acquisition of real property.
   (a)   Generally. On behalf of and in the name of the County, the County
Executive may accept a dedication of real property for the purposes set forth
in Articles 16 and 17 of this Code or, except as otherwise set forth herein,
purchase real property by agreement or eminent domain if an adequate
appropriation has been made by the County Council.
   (b)   Gifts of real property. All gifts of real property to the County,
other than those acquired pursuant to subsection (a), must be approved by the
County Council by ordinance. Before submitting an ordinance seeking the County
Council's approval of acceptance of a gift of real property, the County
Executive shall:
      (1)   identify a public purpose for which the property may be used;
      (2)   ensure the Director of Public Works conducts an environmental
assessment and provides a written determination of any potential hazard or
future remediation expense; and
      (3)   ensure the Budget Officer provides a written assessment of the
fiscal impact of the gift, including any impact on future expenditures.
   (c)   Condemnation. If the County Executive is unable to acquire real
property by agreement, the County may not acquire property by condemnation
unless:
      (1)   the ordinance appropriating the funds for acquisition has
designated the public purpose for which the property is to be acquired and has
described with reasonable accuracy the location or nature of the property to be
acquired; or
      (2)   before acquisition by condemnation, the County Council by
resolution identifies the property and determines and declares its acquisition
to be necessary for a public purpose.
   (d)   Funds in budget.
      (1)   Notwithstanding an award of a condemnation jury, real property or
an interest in real property may not be purchased, by condemnation or
otherwise, unless adequate funds have been included in the capital budget.
      (2)   Each agreement for purchase of real property utilizing funds from
the Advance Land Acquisition Capital Project, Project No. C106700, shall be
contingent upon approval of the purchase by resolution of the County Council.
Prior to approval of the purchase by resolution, the County Council shall
require an independent appraisal, an environmental study, and a feasibility
study for the real property to be purchased.
   (e)   Other law. Any condemnation of real property shall be in accordance
with budgetary procedures set forth in the Charter, the Real Property Article,
Title 12, of the State Code, and the Maryland Rules of Procedure.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 3-101) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 31-08; Bill No. 53-18)
State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-312; Real Property
Article, §§ 12-101 et seq.
SUBTITLE 2. DISPOSITION OF REAL PROPERTY
§ 8-3-201. Disposition of County-owned real property.
   (a)   Applicability. Except as set forth in §§ 8-3-201 through
8-3-203, real property owned by the County shall be disposed of as set forth in
this section.
   (b)   Procedure. If the County Executive seeks to dispose of real property
owned by the County, the procedure shall be as follows.
      (1)   The Central Services Officer shall make a preliminary determination
as to whether the real property may be surplus.
      (2)   (i)   The Real Estate Division shall poll the Office of Central
Services, the Office of Planning and Zoning, the departments listed in §
2-1-103(b) of this Code, Arundel Community Development Services, Inc., and the
Housing Commission of Anne Arundel County as to a need for the real property;
         (ii)   An agency head or the agency head’s designee may respond on
behalf of the agency; and
         (iii)   Based on the polling results, the Chief Administrative Officer
shall make a final decision as to whether the real property is surplus,
contingent on approval of the County Council as required in this section.
      (3)   (i)   If the real property is determined to be surplus, the Real
Estate Division shall establish the value of the real property through one
independent appraisal if the estimated value is less than $100,000, or by the
average of two or more independent appraisals if the estimated value is
$100,000 or more.
         (ii)   Appraisals shall be valid for 18 months from the date of the
appraisal.
      (4)   The Real Estate Division shall choose a method of sale for the real
property, as follows:
         (i)   If the appraised value of the real property is less than
$100,000 the property shall be sold through a competitive solicitation of
offers or through the negotiation of a private disposition; and
         (ii)   If the appraised value of the real property is $100,000 or
more, the real property may be sold at auction, through a competitive
solicitation of offers, through a real estate broker chosen by the Real Estate
Division, or through the negotiation of a private disposition.
      (5)   Prior to conducting the sale, the Real Estate Division shall give
notice that the County is planning to surplus the real property and dispose of
it through the specified method of sale to: the owners of real property within
300 feet of the lot lines of the County-owned real property; the community
association or homeowners association for the community in which the county-
owned real property is located, if any; and the Councilmember representing the
district in which the County-owned real property is located.
      (6)   The Real Estate Division shall advertise the sale of the real
property on the County’s website, including the method of sale, information on
how to participate in the purchase and sale of the real property, all deadlines
for participating in the purchase and sale of the real property, and a
statement that the sale is contingent on the approvals required under this
section.
      (7)   Once the sale process has concluded, the Real Estate Division shall
obtain the approval of the Chief Administrative Officer for the proposed
disposition of the real property.
      (8)   If there are no offers for the real property or if the Chief
Administrative Officer does not approve the proposed disposition of the real
property, the County Executive may seek approval of the County Council by
resolution of the determination of the real property as surplus.
      (9)   If the Chief Administrative Officer and the County Executive
approve the proposed disposition of the real property:
         (i)   the Real Estate Division shall give notice of the proposed
disposition to the owners of real property within 300 feet of the lot lines of
the County-owned real property, the community association or homeowners
association for the community in which the County-owned real property is
located, if any, and the Councilmember representing the district in which the
County-owned real property is located, and shall include a statement that
objections may be submitted to the Chief Administrative Officer, including an
email address and mailing address, by a specified date;
         (ii)   the Real Estate Division shall advertise the proposed
disposition on the County’s website and shall include a statement that
objections may be submitted to the Chief Administrative Officer, including an
email address and mailing address, by a specified date;
         (iii)   after the date specified, the Chief Administrative Officer
shall review any objections and determine if the proposed disposition may
proceed; and
         (iv)   if the Chief Administrative Officer determines that the
proposed disposition may proceed, the County Executive shall seek approval of
the County Council by resolution of the determination of the real property as
surplus and of the terms of the disposition of the real property.
(Bill No. 79-23)
§ 8-3-202. Disposition of County-owned non-buildable real property.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “non-buildable real property” means real
property owned by the County that has an area of .1 acres or less and is
determined by the Planning and Zoning Officer in writing to be non-buildable.
   (b)   Applicability. This section applies to the disposition of non-
buildable real property.
   (c)   Procedure. If the County Executive seeks to dispose of non-buildable
real property, the procedure shall be as follows.
      (1)   The Central Services Officer shall make a preliminary determination
as to whether the real property may be surplus.
      (2)   (i)   The Real Estate Division shall poll the Department of
Recreation and Parks and the Department of Public Works as to a need for the
real property;
         (ii)   An agency head or the agency head’s designee may respond on
behalf of the agency; and
         (iii)   Based on the polling results, the Chief Administrative Officer
shall make a final decision as to whether the real property is surplus
contingent on approval of the County Council as required in this section.
      (3)   If the real property is determined to be surplus, the Real Estate
Division shall give notice to the owners of real property within 300 feet of
the lot lines of the County-owned real property, the community association or
homeowners association for the community in which the County-owned real
property is located, if any, and the Councilmember representing the district in
which the County-owned real property is located:
         (i)   that the County is planning to surplus and dispose of the real
property;
         (ii)   that the County will accept offers from adjacent property
owners for the real property;
         (iii)   specifying how and when adjacent property owners may make
offers for the real property; and
         (iv)   stating that the sale is contingent on the approvals required
under this section.
      (4)   The Real Estate Division shall determine the highest offer and
obtain the approval of the Chief Administrative Officer for the proposed
disposition of the real property.
      (5)   If there are no offers for the real property or if the Chief
Administrative Officer does not approve the proposed disposition of the real
property, the County Executive may seek approval of the County Council by
resolution of the determination of the real property as surplus.
      (6)   If the Chief Administrative Officer approves the proposed
disposition of the real property:
         (i)   the Real Estate Division shall give notice of the proposed
disposition to the owners of real property within 300 feet of the lot lines of
the County-owned real property, the community association or homeowners
association for the community in which the County-owned real property is
located, if any, and the Councilmember representing the district in which the
County-owned real property is located, and shall include a statement that
comments may be submitted to the Chief Administrative Officer, including an
email address and mailing address, by a specified date;
         (ii)   after the date specified, the Chief Administrative Officer
shall review any objections and determine if the proposed disposition may
proceed; and
         (iii)   if the Chief Administrative Officer determines that the
proposed disposition may proceed, the County Executive shall seek approval of
the County Council by resolution of the determination of the real property as
surplus and of the terms of the disposition of the real property.
(Bill No. 79-23)
§ 8-3-203. Disposition of County-owned real property to a governmental entity.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “governmental entity” shall mean an
agency of the federal government, an agency or unit of the State government, a
quasi-governmental entity, or a political subdivision, but not the Maryland
Stadium Authority.
   (b)   Applicability. This section shall apply when the County receives a
request from a governmental entity to obtain fee simple title to real property
owned by the County except for non-buildable property as defined in §
8-3-202.
   (c)   Procedure. If the County Executive seeks to dispose of real property
owned by the County to a governmental entity, the procedure shall be as
follows.
      (1)   The Central Services Officer shall make a preliminary determination
as to whether the real property may be surplus.
      (2)   (i)   The Real Estate Division shall poll the Office of Central
Services, the Office of Planning and Zoning, the departments listed in §
2-1-103(b) of this Code, Arundel Community Development Services, Inc., and the
Housing Commission of Anne Arundel County as to a need for the real property;
         (ii)   An agency head or the agency head’s designee may respond on
behalf of the agency; and
         (iii)   Based on the polling results, the Chief Administrative Officer
shall make a final decision as to whether the real property is surplus
contingent on the approvals required in this section.
      (3)   (i)   If the real property is determined to be surplus, the Real
Estate Division shall establish the value of the property through one
independent appraisal if the estimated value is less than $100,000, or by the
average of two or more independent appraisals if the estimated value is
$100,000 or more.
         (ii)   Appraisals shall be valid for 18 months from the date of the
appraisal.
      (4)   (i)   The Real Estate Division shall give notice to the owners of
real property within 300 feet of the lot lines of the County-owned real
property, to the community association or homeowners association for the
community in which the County-owned real property is located, if any, to the
Councilmember representing the district in which the County-owned real property
is located, and on the County’s website that the County intends to surplus the
real property, that a governmental entity has requested that the real property
be transferred to the governmental entity by the County, of the use that the
governmental entity plans for the real property, that the County intends to
dispose of the real property to the governmental entity through a private
disposition, and that the disposition is contingent on the approvals required
in this section.
         (ii)   The notice shall include a statement that comments may be
submitted to the Chief Administrative Officer, including an email address and
mailing address, by a specified date.
      (5)   The Real Estate Division shall proceed to negotiate a proposed
private disposition of the real property with the governmental entity, the
terms of which shall be approved by the Chief Administrative Officer.
      (6)   If the Chief Administrative Officer approves the proposed
disposition of the real property, the County Executive shall seek approval of
the County Council by resolution of the determination of the real property as
surplus and of the terms of the disposition of the real property.
   (d)   Reversion. A deed transferring real property under this section shall
include a clause stating that the property shall revert to the County if the
governmental entity ceases to use the property for the purpose for which it was
transferred for more than 90 consecutive days.
(Bill No. 79-23)
§ 8-3-204. Duration of surplus declaration.
   If real property owned by the County is not disposed of within three years
of the approval of a surplus declaration by the County Council, then the
surplus declaration shall no longer be of any force and effect, and the real
property shall no longer be considered surplus.
(Bill No. 79-23)
§ 8-3-205. Disposition of capital improvement project property.
   In addition to other methods for disposing of real property provided in this
title, for a period of five years following the completion or abandonment of a
capital project for which fee simple title to property has been acquired, and
on a determination that all or part of the property acquired for the project is
no longer needed for public use, the County may offer to grant and convey the
surplus property to the owner from whom it was acquired, or to the owner’s
surviving spouse, personal representative, heirs, or assigns, for a price not
less than the cost of acquisition of the property by the County or, in the case
of property that is only a portion of a larger parcel acquired by the County, a
proportionate amount of the cost of acquisition of the entire parcel. If the
owner, the owner’s surviving spouse, personal representative, heirs, or assigns
do not execute a contract with the County within 60 days after the date of the
offer, the County may dispose of the property as provided in this subtitle.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 3-207) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 79-23)
§ 8-3-206. Report to County Auditor.
   Not later than September 30 of each year, the County Executive shall furnish
to the County Auditor a list of the property disposed of by the County in the
preceding fiscal year. For each property disposed of, the list shall contain a
description of the property, a statement of its acquisition cost, the date of
acquisition, its appraised value, and the consideration received for the
disposition.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 3-209) (Bill No. 59-85; Bill No. 79-16; Bill No. 51-18;
Bill No. 79-23)
SUBTITLE 3. LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
§ 8-3-301. Lease of real property; approval by County Council.
   The County Council shall approve by ordinance any contract for lease of
County-owned real property that specifies a term, including renewal options, of
three years or more, except that the following shall be exempt from this
provision:
      (1)   leases to County agencies, the State, or agencies of the State;
      (2)   leases for recreational facilities;
      (3)   leases to eleemosynary institutions;
      (4)   leases applicable to the Arundel Center or the Arundel Center
North; and
      (5)   leases for small cell systems, as defined in
Article 18 of this Code, on County- owned real property, including rights-of-
way, or existing County structures; and
      (6)   leases for commercial telecommunication facilities, as defined in
Article 18 of this Code, on existing County structures if the standard lease
includes the standard lease rate for commercial telecommunication facilities
approved by resolution of the County Council.
(1985 Code, Art. 10, § 3-301) (Bill No. 37-93; Bill No. 23-96; Bill No. 16-99;
Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 75-19)
ARTICLE 9. CRIMES, CIVIL OFFENSES, AND FINES
   Title
      
1.   CRIMES
      
2.   CIVIL OFFENSES AND FINES
Attorney's note –
Article 9 is not an exclusive listing of crimes under this Code.
TITLE 1. CRIMES
Section
Subtitle 1. Code Violations
   
9-1-101.   Criminal penalty for Code violations.
Subtitle 2. Alcoholic Beverages
   
9-1-201.   Sale or consumption on County property.
   
9-1-202.   Public possession or consumption.
   
9-1-203.   Consumption in area of licensed establishment.
Subtitle 3. Obscene Matter
   
9-1-301.   Sale or rental to minors.
   
9-1-302.   Warning sign required.
Subtitle 4. Stalking
   
9-1-401.   Stalking.
Subtitle 5. Trespass
   
9-1-501.   Public beaches and places of public resort.
   
9-1-502.   Vehicles.
Subtitle 6. Weapons
   
9-1-601.   Possession or discharge of firearms.
   
9-1-602.   Bows and arrows, BB guns, slingshots, and the like.
   
9-1-603.   (Reserved).
   
9-1-604.   Explosives.
Subtitle 7. Miscellaneous Prohibited Acts
   
9-1-701.   Fishing or swimming from County-owned bridge.
   
9-1-702.   Lie detector tests.
   
9-1-703.   Littering.
   
9-1-704.   Loitering.
   
9-1-705.   Loitering for the purpose of engaging in prostitution.
   
9-1-706.   Mooring vessel at County-owned pier.
   
9-1-707.   Noise disturbances.
   
9-1-708.   Possession or use of Jimson weed.
   
9-1-709.   Skateboards on roadways.
   
9-1-710.   Snow and ice on walkways.
   
9-1-711.   Poolrooms.
   
9-1-712.   Tampering with County-owned property.
   
9-1-713.   Recreational vehicle on County roads for living purposes.
SUBTITLE 1. CODE VIOLATIONS
§ 9-1-101. Criminal penalty for Code violations.
   A person who violates any provision of the laws of the County is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the person is subject to a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or imprisonment not exceeding six months or both, unless a different
criminal penalty is provided for elsewhere in this Code for a particular
violation. Each day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 6-101) (Bill No. 48-06)
State Code reference – Local Government Code, § 10-202.
SUBTITLE 2. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
State Code reference – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of State Code.
§ 9-1-201. Sale or consumption on County property.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Fire Department premises when used for social or fund-raising
events;
      (2)   the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages at a County park or
recreational facility as permitted by the Director of Recreation and Parks;
      (3)   the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages by community
associations or by nonprofit civic, service, religious, charitable, or
fraternal organizations for purposes of social or fund-raising activities; and
      (4)   the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on properties that
have existing alcoholic beverage licenses when acquired by the County in its
land acquisition process and that are leased by the County to the former
property owners or their heirs or estate.
   (b)   Prohibition. A person may not sell or consume an alcoholic beverage on
the premises of the County courthouse or on any other property owned or
utilized by the County, including County parks and recreational facilities and
including sidewalks, parking areas, and roadways within the property lines of
those premises used for recreational, social, or athletic activity.
   (c)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding six months or both. In addition, a
person employed by the County who violates any provision of this section is
subject to suspension or removal from employment with the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 1-101) (Bill No. 62-03)
§ 9-1-202. Public possession or consumption.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   “Alcoholic beverage” means an alcoholic beverage as defined in § 1-
101 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of State Code.
      (2)   "Container" means an object, regardless of shape or design or of
materials from which made, that is capable of holding and dispensing a
substance.
      (3)   "Open" means not in sealed manufactured package form.
      (4)   "Public road" includes a street, highway, shoulder, median, right-
of-way, alley, sidewalk, road, parking lot or area, lane, path, public way, or
any other land that is owned or leased by the County or the State and used or
intended or obtained for use for public conveyance of vehicles or persons.
      (5)   "Vehicle" means a vehicle as defined in the Transportation Article,
§ 11-176, of the State Code.
   (b)   Scope. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   the consumption of alcoholic beverages or the possession of one or
more alcoholic beverage containers by a non-driver passenger in a registered
Class B (for hire) vehicle, as defined in the Transportation Article, § 13-913,
of the State Code;
      (2)    the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on a premises
licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages under Alcoholic Beverages
and Cannabis Article of State Code;
      (3)   consumption of alcoholic beverages or possession of open containers
of alcoholic beverages on a public road if allowed under the terms of a permit
issued by an authorized State or local agency having jurisdiction over the
public road; or
      (4)   the carrying or transporting of open containers of alcoholic
beverages in a part of a vehicle not within the immediate control of the driver
of or a passenger in the vehicle.
   (c)   Prohibitions. A person may not consume an alcoholic beverage on a
public road in the County or in a vehicle while the vehicle is on a public road
in the County. A person may not possess an open container of alcoholic beverage
on a public road or in a vehicle while the vehicle is on a public road in the
County.
   (d)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding three months or both.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 1-102) (Bill No. 23-04)
§ 9-1-203. Consumption in area of licensed establishment.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply where a person has obtained a valid
license or permit from the Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel
County for consumption of alcoholic beverages in the location.
   (b)   Prohibitions. A person may not consume an alcoholic beverage:
      (1)   outside the structure but on the premises of an establishment that
has an alcoholic beverage license;
      (2)   on the parking lot of a shopping center that includes an
establishment that has an alcoholic beverage license; or
      (3)   on any parking lot for the use of the public that is adjacent to
the premises of an establishment that has an alcoholic beverage license.
   (c)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding six months or both.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 1-103)
SUBTITLE 3. OBSCENE MATTER

State Code reference – Criminal Law Article, § 11-204.
§ 9-1-301. Sale or rental to minors.
   (a)   Definitions. The definitions in the Criminal Law Article, § 11-101, of
the State Code, apply to this section.
   (b)   Prohibitions. A person may not knowingly sell, rent, or offer to sell
or rent to a minor:
      (1)   a video tape, motion picture, film, or other visual representation
or image of a person or portion of the human body that depicts sadomasochistic
abuse, sexual conduct, or sexual excitement; or
      (2)   a sound recording that contains any matter enumerated in subsection
(b)(1), obscenities, or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of
sadomasochistic abuse, sexual conduct, or sexual excitement.
   (c)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding three months or both.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 2-101) (Bill No. 23-04)
§ 9-1-302. Warning sign required.
   (a)   Requirement. The proprietor of any place that sells, rents, or offers
to sell or rent any item or material described in §
9-1-301 shall post a conspicuous sign on the premises warning minors that it is
unlawful to sell, rent, or offer to sell or rent those items or materials to
minors.
   (b)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $100.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 2-102)
SUBTITLE 4. STALKING
§ 9-1-401. Stalking.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated:
      (1)   "Course of conduct" means a persistent pattern of conduct composed
of two or more acts over a period of time, however short, that evidences a
continuity of purpose, but the term does not include constitutionally protected
activity.
      (2)   "Stalk" means to engage in a willful course of conduct that would
seriously alarm, annoy, intimidate, or harass that person and cause significant
mental or emotional distress that may, but does not necessarily, require
medical or other professional treatment or counseling, and the term includes
contact with a person without that person's consent or in disregard of the
person's expressed desire that the contact be avoided or discontinued,
including:
         (i)   following or appearing within the sight of the person;
         (ii)   approaching or confronting the person, whether in a public
place or on private property;
         (iii)   appearing at the workplace or residence of the person;
         (iv)   entering onto or remaining on property owned, leased, or
occupied by the person;
         (v)   placing an object on or delivering an object to property owned,
leased, or occupied by the person; and
         (vi)   contacting the person by telephone, mail, or electronic
communication.
   (b)   Prohibition. A person may not stalk another person, either directly or
indirectly through another person.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 2A-101)
SUBTITLE 5. TRESPASS
§ 9-1-501. Public beaches and places of public resort.
   (a)   Prohibition. A person may not enter a public beach or other place of
public resort without paying the required admission or entrance fee. A person
may not enter a public beach or other place of public resort in a way that is
contrary to the regulations governing admissions posted at the entrance to that
place.
   (b)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $25.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 3-101)
§ 9-1-502. Vehicles.
   (a)   Prohibition. Unless the person has the consent of the owner of the
property, a person may not drive or park a vehicle on:
      (1)   a private road, street, entranceway, driveway, or land that has
been conspicuously posted with signs containing the words "Private Property,
Keep Off", "Private Road, Keep Out", or "Private Road – No Parking";
      (2)   property that is fenced off from the road, street, or highway on
which it bounds; or
      (3)   residential property having a frontage of 250 feet or less on a
road, street, or highway.
   (b)   Prohibition. A person may not ride, be transported in, or be in a
vehicle while it is being driven or is parked in violation of subsection (a).
   (c)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $25.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 3-102)
State Code reference – Criminal Law Article, §§ 6-401 et seq.
SUBTITLE 6. WEAPONS
§ 9-1-601. Possession or discharge of firearms.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "firearm" includes a rifle, handgun, or
shotgun as those terms are defined in the Criminal Law Article, § 4-201, of the
State Code.
   (b)   Scope. This section does not apply to a police officer acting in the
line of duty.
   (c)   Prohibition. A person may not discharge a firearm within 100 yards of
a structure or camp occupied by human beings or commonly used by human beings
without the written permission of the owner, occupant, or lessee of the
structure or camp.
   (d)   Prohibition; exceptions.
      (1)   A person may not discharge a firearm on any property owned by the
County, except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection.
      (2)   This subsection does not apply to:
         (i)   an individual who sells property to the County and subsequently
occupies or has a right to use the property under a lease or license agreement
with the County that permits the discharge of firearms by that individual on
the property; or
         (ii)   a person acting with permission granted pursuant to a wildlife
management agreement, and in accordance with
Article 14 of this Code.
   (e)   Prohibition.
      (1)   A person may not possess or discharge a firearm on the property of
another or discharge a firearm onto or across the property of another unless,
at the time of the possession or discharge of the firearm, the person has the
express written permission of the owner, occupant, or lessee of the property on
which the firearm is possessed or is discharged on, onto, or across. The
written permission shall be signed by the owner, occupant, or lessee; shall
include the dates on which the possession or discharge is authorized; and shall
specify the parcel or property for which permission is granted. The written
permission shall identify the persons for whom permission is granted, and the
permission may not be transferred to another person or inferred or implied to
include companions of authorized persons. When properly executed, a writing
substantially in the following form is sufficient to constitute the written
permission required by this subsection:
   “I, ________ (owner, occupant, or lessee) hereby authorize ________ to
possess or discharge any weapon or firearm on, onto, or across my property
known as ________ and such permission is granted for the following time(s):
________________________________________________.
                                       ____________________________
                                          (owner, occupant, or lessee)”
      (2)   A police officer shall issue a warning before charging a violation
of this subsection.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 4-101) (Bill No. 60-03; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 77-08;
Bill No. 11-24)
§ 9-1-602. Bows and arrows, BB guns, slingshots, and the like.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "weapon" means a bow and arrow, BB gun,
slingshot, or other device designed to discharge a pellet or other object by
force of a spring, elastic band, gas cylinder, air cylinder, or gas or air
cartridge.
   (b)   Prohibitions. A person may not sell, give away, lend, or otherwise
transfer a weapon to a minor. A person may not discharge or use a weapon on
private property without the express permission of the owner or other person
entitled to possession of the property. A person may not discharge or use a
weapon except in a manner that will prevent the discharged pellet or object
from traversing grounds or space outside the limits of the property on which
the weapon is discharged or used. A person may not discharge a weapon within
100 yards of a structure or camp occupied by human beings or commonly used by
human beings unless the discharge is at a bona fide commercial indoor or
outdoor target range under the supervision of an adult or there is in use a
safe and reasonable backstop of sufficient size and composition to ensure that
the projectile or arrow cannot pass through the target or backstop.
   (c)   Construction of section. This section may not be construed to make
lawful anything otherwise prohibited by law.
   (d)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding 60 days or both.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 4-102)
§ 9-1-603. (Reserved).
§ 9-1-604. Explosives.
   (a)   Prohibition. Except in a place for blasting or in the course of
transportation, a person may not store or possess more than 100 pounds of
gunpowder or any quantity of dynamite, nitroglycerine, or other explosive in
the County.
   (b)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $300. If a corporation violates any provision of this section, the
president of the corporation or any officer or member of its board of directors
may be prosecuted for the violation.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 4-103)
SUBTITLE 7. MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITED ACTS
§ 9-1-701. Fishing or swimming from County-owned bridge.
   A person may not fish or swim from any County-owned bridge.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 5-101)
§ 9-1-702. Lie detector tests.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "employer" means any employer engaged in
any business or enterprise in the County except the State or federal
government.
   (b)   Scope. This section does not apply to an applicant for employment in
any position as a law enforcement officer with the County Police Department;
the Office of the Sheriff; a police department or police force in any
incorporated municipality in the County; or a special police force serving a
special taxing district in the County.
   (c)   Prohibition. An employer may not suggest, request, demand, or require
an employee or applicant for employment to submit to or take a polygraph, lie
detector, or similar test or examination as a condition of employment or
continued employment. An offer to allow an employee to voluntarily take such a
test instead of being subjected to any other form of personal investigation is
a violation of this section.
   (d)   Sanctions for violation. An employer who violates any provision of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine
not exceeding $500.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 5-102) (Bill No. 11-88; Bill No. 77-97)
§ 9-1-703. Littering.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “litter” has the meaning stated in § 10-
110 of the Criminal Law Article of the State Code.
   (b)   Prohibitions. A person may not:
      (1)   dispose of litter on a County road or violate State vehicle laws
regarding the disposal of litter, glass, or other prohibited substances on
roads; or
      (2)   dispose of or cause to allow the disposal of litter on public or
private property unless:
         (i)   the property is designated by the State, a unit of the State, or
a political subdivision of the State for the disposal of litter and the person
is authorized by the proper public authority to use the property; or
         (ii)   the litter is placed into a garbage or solid waste receptacle
or container on the property.
   (c)   Violations. A person who violates any provision of this section is
subject to:
      (1)   a civil fine in the amount of $250 for the first violation, $750
for the second violation, and $1,000 for the third or any subsequent violation,
and all applicable provisions of §
9-2-101 of this Code; or
      (2)   the penalties set forth in § 10-110 of the Criminal Law Article of
the State Code.
(Bill No. 19-21; Bill No. 62-22)
§ 9-1-704. Loitering.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "loiter" means for a person to:
      (1)   remain on a public street, sidewalk, or pathway, including one
privately owned but used by the public in general, so as to obstruct the free
passage of a pedestrian or vehicle after a regular or special police officer
has notified the person that the action is unlawful and has requested the
person to move;
      (2)   remain in or on a vehicle on a public street, sidewalk, or pathway,
including one privately owned but used by the public in general, so as to
obstruct the free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle after a regular or special
police officer has notified the person that the action is unlawful and has
requested the person to move;
      (3)   refuse or fail to leave, or refuse to remove a vehicle from, a
private business, commercial establishment, or parking lot that is posted with
conspicuous "No Loitering" signs if the business or establishment is not open
for business and the person has been requested to leave by the owner, the
owner's agent, or a regular or special police officer unless the person has
written permission from the owner, lessee, or operator to be present or is
window shopping under conditions and at a time of the day or night that a
reasonable person would consider conducive to that activity;
      (4)   refuse or fail to leave a private business or commercial
establishment that is open for business, or a parking lot of the business or
establishment, after having been requested to do so by the owner or the owner's
agent;
      (5)   refuse or fail to leave a public building, public grounds, or a
public recreational area, or a parking lot of a public building, public
grounds, or a public recreational area, after being requested to do so by a
regular or special police officer or by a regularly employed guard, watchman,
or other authorized employee of the agency or institution responsible for the
public building, public grounds, recreational area, or parking lot if the
circumstances indicate to a reasonable person that the person has no apparent
lawful business or purpose to pursue at that place;
      (6)   refuse or fail to leave a building of, grounds adjacent to a
building of, a recreational area of, or a parking lot of a public or private
learning institution after being requested to do so by a regular or special
police officer or by an authorized employee of the public or private learning
institution if the circumstances indicate to a reasonable person that the
person has no apparent lawful business or purpose to pursue at that place
unless the person:
         (i)   is present because the person has custody of or responsibility
for a pupil or student;
         (ii)   is present for a reason associated with the purpose of the
institution, including the use of recreational areas or facilities when
permitted; or
         (iii)   displays written permission from the principal or head of the
institution or a designee of the principal or head of the institution; or
      (7)   return, for no apparent lawful business or purpose, to the same
public or private property from which the person was asked to leave within the
preceding 24-hour period.
   (b)   Inapplicability. This section does not prohibit picketing or orderly
demonstrations by labor unions or members of the public.
   (c)   Prohibition and sanctions for violation. A person who loiters is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine not exceeding
$100 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or both for the first offense and a
fine not exceeding $200 or imprisonment not exceeding 60 days or both for a
subsequent offense.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 5-103) (Bill No. 119-93; Bill No. 19-21)
§ 9-1-705. Loitering for the purpose of engaging in prostitution.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated:
      (1)   "Assignation" means the making of an appointment or engagement for
prostitution or lewdness or any act in furtherance of the appointment or
engagement.
      (2)   "Lewdness" means any unnatural sexual practice.
      (3)   "Prostitution" means the offering or receiving of the body for
sexual intercourse for hire.
      (4)   "Public place" means any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley, plaza,
park, driveway, parking lot, or transportation facility, or a motor vehicle in
or on any such place.
   (b)   Prohibition. A person who, for the purpose of engaging in or promoting
prostitution, lewdness, or assignation, loiters, remains, stands, or wanders
about in a public place so as to beckon to, repeatedly stop, repeatedly attempt
to engage passersby in conversation, repeatedly stop or attempt to stop motor
vehicles, or repeatedly interfere with the free passage of other persons may
not disobey a request by a police officer to move on.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 5-103A) (Bill No. 119-93; Bill No. 19-21)
§ 9-1-706. Mooring vessel at County-owned pier.
   (a)   Prohibition. A person may not moor a boat at County owned or operated
wharves or piers for more than four hours out of any 24-hour period.
   (b)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $25.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 5-104; Bill No. 19-21)
§ 9-1-707. Noise disturbances.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “residential district” means those
districts identified as residential in §
18-2-105 of this Code.
   (b)   Scope. This section does not apply to the use or operation of a
device:
      (1)   in the performance of a governmental function by an agency or
instrumentality of federal, State, County, or municipal government;
      (2)   in the performance of a public service function by a public service
company as defined in § 1-101 of the Public Utilities Article of the State
Code;
      (3)   under a valid federal, State, County, or municipal license or
permit;
      (4)   in the activities of an educational institution or a bona fide
nonprofit charitable or philanthropic organization or civic association; or
      (5)   in farming activities.
   (c)   Prohibitions. A person may not:
      (1)   at any time use, operate, or permit the use or operation of a radio
or other music producing device, a television, an amplified musical instrument,
or any other audio producing device at an unreasonably loud volume that can be
heard in a residential district; or
      (2)   between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., use, operate, or
permit the use or operation of a musical instrument or a machine, tool, or
similar device at an unreasonably loud volume that can be heard in a
residential district.
   (d)   Rebuttable presumption. There is a rebuttable presumption that sound
generated by a device listed in subsection (c) that can be heard at a distance
of 50 feet from the device constitutes a violation under this section.
   (e)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates subsection (c) is
subject to a civil fine for a Class E civil offense as provided in §
9-2-101, and a police officer may issue a citation, as provided in §
9-2-101, for a violation of subsection (c). A police officer is not required to
issue a warning before charging a violation of subsection (c). Any person who
has been ordered by a police officer to cease using, operating, or permitting
the use or operation of a device in violation of subsection (c) and refuses or
fails to comply with the order is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is
subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or
both, and a violation may be tried on a citation prepared in accordance with
the rules of the District Court of Maryland.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 5-105) (Bill No. 87-93; Bill No. 60-97; Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 19-21; Bill No. 26-21)
§ 9-1-708. Possession or use of Jimson weed.
   (a)   Prohibition. Except for legitimate medical purposes, a person may not
possess or use in the County the plant known as datura stramonium, also known
as "Jimson weed".
   (b)   Rebuttable presumption. Unless it is consumed for legitimate medical
purposes, consumption of datura stramonium creates a rebuttable presumption of
intention to obtain an intoxicating, hallucinatory, or poisonous effect.
   (c)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $250 or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both for the first
offense and a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding two years
or both for a subsequent offense.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 5-106) (Bill No. 19-21)
State Code reference – 1968 Md. Laws, Ch. 695, § 1.
§ 9-1-709. Skateboards on roadways.
   (a)   Prohibition. A person may not ride a skateboard on a public roadway
unless the speed limit on the roadway is less than 30 miles an hour.
   (b)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $10.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 5-107) (Bill No. 19-21)
§ 9-1-710. Snow and ice on walkways.
   (a)   Prohibition. The owner, user, or occupant of property situated on a
street along which there is a paved sidewalk shall remove the snow and ice from
the sidewalk fronting the property within six hours after the fall of snow
except that, if it snows between 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the owner, user, or
occupant shall remove the snow and ice before 11:00 a.m.
   (b)   Removal by County; costs. Whenever a person fails to comply with
subsection (a), the Department of Public Works may cause the snow or ice to be
removed and shall certify the cost of removal to the Controller. The costs of
removal shall be paid to the County by the person who failed to remove snow or
ice and the costs may be recovered by the County in an action at law.
   (c)   Sanction for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine not
exceeding $10.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 5-108) (Bill No. 19-21)
§ 9-1-711. Poolrooms.
   (a)   Prohibitions. A person who has a license to keep a pool or billiard
table may not permit:
      (1)   a person under the age of 21 years to use the pool or billiard
table between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m.;
      (2)   an individual 16 or 17 years of age to use the pool or billiard
table unless the individual presents to the owner or operator of the
establishment an authorization and identification card provided by the owner or
operator and signed by the minor's parent or guardian in the presence of the
owner or operator;
      (3)   an individual under the age of 16 years to use the pool or billiard
table; or
      (4)   an individual under 16 years of age on the premises where the pool
or billiard tables are kept unless the minor is accompanied by the parent or
legal guardian of the minor or use of the tables is incidental to the major
commercial enterprise on the premises.
   (b)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $250 for the first offense and a fine not exceeding $500 for a
subsequent offense.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 5-109) (Bill No. 19-21)
§ 9-1-712. Tampering with County-owned property.
   A person may not willfully destroy, injure, deface, mar, or tamper with any
County-owned property or, except with the permission of the Department of
Public Works, use, handle, obstruct, or interfere with any County-owned
property.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 5-110) (Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 19-21)
§ 9-1-713. Recreational vehicle on County roads for living purposes.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section “recreational vehicle” means a camping
vehicle, motor home, park model recreational vehicle, or travel trailer, as
defined by the Transportation Article of the State Code.
   (b)   Prohibition. A person may not use or occupy a recreational vehicle
parked on a highway, as defined by the Transportation Article of the State
Code, as a dwelling, residence or accommodation between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
   (c)   Violations. It is a Class E civil offense to violate any provision of
this section.
(Bill No. 70-24)
TITLE 2. CIVIL OFFENSES AND FINES
Section
   
9-2-101.   Civil offenses and fines.
§ 9-2-101. Civil offenses and fines.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to the issuance of civil citations
for violations of
Article 18 of this Code. Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of this
section apply to all other violations that are made civil offenses or made
subject to civil fines by this Code.
   (b)   Civil fine enforced by citation or complaint; no preclusion of
criminal prosecution. A civil offense is punishable by a civil fine. A civil
fine in an amount up to $1,000 shall be enforced by the issuance of a civil
citation as provided in this section or as a form of relief requested in a
civil complaint filed in District or Circuit Court. A civil fine in an amount
over $1,000 shall be enforced as a form of relief requested in a civil
complaint filed in District or Circuit Court. Imposition of a civil fine does
not preclude criminal prosecution for the same violation.
   (c)   Signing of citation. A civil citation may be signed by an employee who
meets the training and other qualifications for the issuance of civil citations
as determined by the head of the office or department charged with enforcing
the provision of this Code for which the civil citation is issued.
   (d)   Service and enforcement. A civil citation shall be served and enforced
in the manner provided for a municipal infraction by Local Government Article,
§§ 6-103 through 6-115, of the State Code.
   (e)   Payment; notice of intent to stand trial; appearance in court;
doubling of fines. A civil fine imposed by a citation shall be paid within 20
days of service of the citation. If the civil fine imposed by a citation is not
paid or a written notice of intent to stand trial not delivered in the manner
required by Local Government Article, § 6-106, of the State Code, or if the
civil fine imposed by a citation served with a summons is not paid and the
defendant fails to appear in court as provided in Local Government Article, §§
6-104, 6-107, of the State Code, the fine shall be doubled to an amount not to
exceed $1,000.
   (f)   Schedule of fines. The general schedule of civil fines is as follows:
      (1)   for a Class A civil offense: a fine not exceeding $10,000 for the
first violation and any subsequent violation;
      (2)   for a Class B civil offense: $1,000 for the first violation; $5,000
for the second violation; and $10,000 for the third or any subsequent
violation;
      (3)   for a Class C civil offense: $500 for the first violation and
$1,000 for the second or any subsequent violation;
      (4)   for a Class D civil offense: $125 for the first violation; $500 for
the second violation; and $1,000 for the third or any subsequent violation; and
      (5)   for a Class E civil offense: $50 for the first violation; $100 for
the second violation; and $500 for the third or any subsequent violation.
   (g)   When deemed to be a Class E civil offense. A violation of this Code
shall be deemed a Class E civil offense if the violation is made a civil
offense but is not classified as described in subsection (f) or made subject to
a specific fine amount.
   (h)   Continuing violation. Each day that a violation continues constitutes
a separate civil offense. All civil fines for continuing violations shall
accrue without a requirement for an additional assessment, notice, or
opportunity for hearing for each separate offense.
   (i)   When violation constitutes a second, third, or subsequent violation. A
violation constitutes a second, third, or subsequent violation if the violator
previously paid a civil fine or was found guilty of or placed on probation
before judgment for a violation of the same provision of this Code at the same
or different location or a violation of another provision of the same article
of this Code at the same location.
   (j)   Persons liable. If a violation of a provision of this Code is made a
civil offense, then a civil offense is committed by any or all of the
following:
      (1)   the person who violates the provision, including a contractor or
subcontractor who performs work in violation of the provision;
      (2)   the owner of property on which work is performed in violation of
the provision;
      (3)   the person in whose name a permit is issued, who shall be strictly
liable for all violations of that permit; and
      (4)   a person acting on behalf of a property owner who approves work
that violates the provision, including an architect or engineer.
   (k)   When fines are remitted to the County. All fines, penalties, or
forfeitures collected by the District Court for violations enforced by the
issuance of civil citations under this section, and all civil fines imposed as
a result of a separate request for relief in a civil complaint, shall be
remitted to the County.
   (l)   Prosecution by the Office of Law. An attorney with the Office of Law
may prosecute a civil citation in the manner provided by Local Government Code,
§ 6-108(b), of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 11, § 6-102) (Bill No. 78-86; Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 75-93;
Bill No. 12-00; Bill No. 59-00; Bill No. 37-04; Bill No. 93-12)
ARTICLE 10. CABLE FRANCHISE ACT OF 2006
   Title
      
1.   DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   GRANT OF FRANCHISE
      
3.   FRANCHISE RENEWAL; FRANCHISE TRANSFER
      
4.   FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
      
5.   SYSTEM DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
      
6.   CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS
      
7.   SERVICE REQUIREMENTS
      
8.   CONSUMER PROTECTION
      
9.   LANDLORD AND TENANT RIGHTS
      
10.   REPORTS; RECORDS; INSPECTIONS
      
11.   FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS; TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE
      
12.   DISPUTE RESOLUTION; ARBITRATION
      
13.   TAMPERING WITH CABLE SYSTEM
      
14.   PRIVACY
   State Code reference – Local Government Article, §§ 1-702 through 1-706; 10-
312.
TITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10-1-101.   Definitions.
   
10-1-102.   Findings and purpose.
   
10-1-103.   Delegation of powers.
   
10-1-104.   Scope of article.
   
10-1-105.   Administration by County.
   
10-1-106.   Information Technology Officer's authority.
   
10-1-107.   Intervention.
§ 10-1-101. Definitions.
   (a)   Undefined words. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined
in this article have the meanings set forth in Title 47 of the United States
Code.
   (b)   Definitions. In this article, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Access channel" means a channel on a cable system set aside by a
franchisee for public, educational, or governmental use.
      (2)   "Affiliate" means a person who owns or controls, is owned or
controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with a franchisee.
      (3)   "Basic cable service" means a service tier that includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
      (4)   "Broadcast signal" means a television or radio signal that is
transmitted over the air to a wide geographic audience and is received by a
cable system off-air, by microwave or by any other technology.
      (5)   "Cable Act" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47
U.S.C. § 521.
      (6)   "Cable service" means the one-way transmission to subscribers of
video programming or other programming service and any subscriber interaction
that is required for the selection or use of the video programming or other
programming service.
      (7)   "Cable system" or "system" means a facility consisting of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, including video
programming, and is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but
the term does not include:
         (i)   a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals
of one or more television broadcast stations;
         (ii)   a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more
multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless
the facility uses, crosses, or occupies any public right-of-way;
         (iii)   a facility of a common carrier which is subject in whole or in
part to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except
that the facility is considered a "cable system" to the extent that the
facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to
subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-
demand services; or
         (iv)   any facilities of an electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
      (8)   "Channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
that is used in a cable system and that is capable of delivering a television
channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.
      (9)   "Commencement of construction" means the time and date when
construction of a cable system is considered to have begun which, unless
otherwise specified, is when the first connection is physically made to a
utility pole or the installation of cables underground is initiated, after
preliminary engineering (strand mapping) and after all necessary permits and
authorizations have been obtained.
      (10)   "Completion of construction" means that point in time when the
franchisee has installed all distribution facilities specified in a franchise
agreement so as to permit the offering of cable service to all of the potential
subscribers in the franchise area and has provided in an operational state any
facilities required by the franchise agreement.
      (11)   "Converter" means an electronic device that may serve as an
interface between a system and a subscriber's television receiver or other
terminal equipment and that may perform a variety of functions, including
signal security, de-scrambling, electronic polling, frequency conversion, and
channel selection.
      (12)   "County" means Anne Arundel County, any agency, department, board,
commission, or agent of Anne Arundel County, or any official or employee of any
of them.
      (13)   "County Council" means the Anne Arundel County Council.
      (14)   "Educational access channel" or "educational channel" means a
channel on a cable system set aside by a franchisee for educational use.
      (15)   "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission, its designee,
or any successor governmental entity.
      (16)   "Franchise" means an initial or renewal authorization issued by
the County, whether designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution,
contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, that authorizes the
construction or operation of a cable system and the rights and obligations
conferred by this article and the franchise agreement.
      (17)   "Franchise agreement" means a franchise award ordinance or a
contractual agreement that contains the specific provisions of the franchise
granted, including referenced specifications, franchise applications, franchise
requirements, ordinances, and other related materials.
      (18)   "Franchise fee" means a tax, fee, or assessment of any kind
imposed by the County on a franchisee or subscriber solely because of its
status as a franchisee or subscriber, but the term does not include:
         (i)   a tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability, including a
tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their
services;
         (ii)   capital costs that are required by the franchise agreement to
be incurred by the franchisee for public, educational, or governmental access
facilities;
         (iii)   requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or
enforcing of the franchise, including application fees, franchise processing
costs, payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance,
indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
         (iv)   a fee imposed under the authority of Title 17 of the United
States Code.
      (19)   "Franchisee" means a person who receives a franchise under a
franchise agreement and this article, and the person's lawful successor,
transferee, or assignee.
      (20)   "Governmental access channel" or "governmental channel" means a
channel on a cable system set aside by a franchisee for government use.
      (21)   "Gross revenues" means those revenues specified in a franchise
agreement.
      (22)   "Information Technology Officer" or "Officer" means the Anne
Arundel County Information Technology Officer.
      (23)   "Installation" means the connection of a cable system from feeder
cable to subscriber terminals and the provision of cable service.
      (24)   "Leased access channel" or "commercial access channel" means a
channel on a cable system designated or dedicated for use by a person
unaffiliated with the franchisee.
      (25)   "Normal business hours" means those hours during which most
similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers, including some
evening hours at least one night per week and some weekend hours.
      (26)   "Normal operating conditions" means those conditions that are
within the control of a franchisee, such as special promotions, pay-per-view
events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of a cable system, but the term does not include such
conditions as natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, or
telephone network outages.
      (27)   "PEG" means public, educational, or governmental.
      (28)   "PEG access facilities" means channel capacity designated for
public, educational, or governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the
use of that channel capacity.
      (29)   "Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint
stock company, organization, corporation, or a lawful successor to them or
transferee of them, but the term does not include the County.
      (30)   "Programmer" means a person who produces or otherwise provides
program material or information for transmission by video, audio, digital, or
other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other storage media, to
subscribers by means of the cable system.
      (31)   "Public access channel" or "public channel" means a channel on a
cable system set aside by a franchisee for public use.
      (32)   "Public right-of-way" means the surface, the air space above the
surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane,
path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, parkway, waterway, or similar property
within the County, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was
dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining a cable
system.
      (33)   "School" means a public or accredited private educational
institution, including primary and secondary schools, colleges, and
universities.
      (34)   "Service interruption" means the loss of picture or sound on one
or more channels or the degradation of picture or sound beyond practically
usable levels.
      (35)    "Service tier" means a category of cable service provided by a
franchisee and for which a separate rate is charged by the franchisee.
      (36)   "Subscriber" means a person who subscribes to a cable service
provided by a franchisee by means of or in connection with the cable system.
      (37)   "Tower" means an antenna supporting structure.
      (38)   "User" means a person or the County lawfully using a channel or
equipment and facilities for the purpose of producing or transmitting material,
as contrasted with receiving material in the capacity of a subscriber.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-1-102. Findings and purpose.
   (a)   Findings. Anne Arundel County finds that the further development of
cable communications results in great benefits for the people of the County.
Cable systems permanently occupy and extensively make use of scarce and
valuable public rights-of-way in a manner different from the way in which the
general public uses them. The County finds that public convenience, safety, and
general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers vested in
the County or such persons as the County designates to protect the public and
to ensure that any franchise granted is operated in the public interest.
   (b)   Additional findings. Cable systems have the capacity to provide not
only entertainment and information services to the County's residents but also
a variety of broadband, interactive communications services to institutions and
individuals. Certain of these services involve County agencies and other public
institutions.
   (c)   Goals. In light of the foregoing, the following goals, among others,
underlie the provisions set forth in this article:
      (1)   cable should be available to as many County residents as possible;
      (2)   a cable system should be capable of accommodating both present and
reasonably foreseeable future cable-related needs of the County;
      (3)   a cable system should be constructed and maintained during a
franchise term so that changes in technology may be integrated into existing
system facilities;
      (4)   a cable system should be responsive to the needs and interests of
the local community and provide the widest possible diversity of information
sources and cable service to the public; and
      (5)   a cable operator should pay fair compensation to the County for the
occupation and use of local public rights-of-way for cable service purposes.
   (d)   Provisions to serve public interest. The County intends that all
provisions set forth in this article be construed to serve the public interest
and the enumerated public purposes and that any franchise issued pursuant to
this article be construed to include these findings and public purposes as
integral parts of them.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-1-103. Delegation of powers.
   Unless prohibited by applicable law, the County may delegate the performance
of any act, duty, or obligation or the exercise of any power under this article
or any franchise agreement to any employee, officer, department, or agency of
the County.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-1-104. Scope of article.
   The provisions of this article apply to all cable franchises and cable
systems within the County.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-1-105. Administration by County.
   The County may:
      (1)   administer and enforce the provisions of this article and franchise
agreements;
      (2)   coordinate the operation of PEG access facilities;
      (3)   provide technical, programming, and operational support to public
agency users, such as government departments, schools, and health care
institutions;
      (4)   establish procedures and standards for the use of PEG channels or
for the sharing of public facilities, either in the franchise agreement or
otherwise by mutual agreement;
      (5)   plan expansion and growth of services;
      (6)   analyze the potential for integrating cable systems with other
local, State, or national telecommunications networks;
      (7)   formulate and recommend long-range telecommunications policy; and
      (8)   take other actions in furtherance of the purposes of this article.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-1-106. Information Technology Officer's authority.
   (a)   Regulatory authority. The Information Technology Officer shall
exercise regulatory authority under the provisions of this article and
applicable law.
   (b)   Exercise of authority. Unless otherwise expressly provided, the
Information Technology Officer shall exercise or discharge all rights, actions,
and obligations conferred on the County under this article.
   (c)   Adoption of regulations. After an opportunity for comment from the
public and franchisees, the Information Technology Officer may adopt
regulations to accomplish the purposes and effectuate the provisions of this
article.
   (d)   Judicial review of decisions. Unless this article or the franchise
agreement provides for a different method of review or resolution, a decision
by the Information Technology Officer is subject to judicial review in the
Circuit Court for the County or in the United States District Court for the
District of Maryland, and the purpose of the review shall be to determine
whether the Officer acted beyond the scope of the Officer's legal authority or
in an arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable manner.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-1-107. Intervention.
   The County may intervene in any suit or proceeding involving the franchise
to which the franchisee is a party that relates to a County franchise.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 2. GRANT OF FRANCHISE
Section
   
10-2-101.   Franchise required.
   
10-2-102.   Effect of grant.
   
10-2-103.   Franchise nonexclusive.
   
10-2-104.   Franchise area.
   
10-2-105.   Franchise agreement.
   
10-2-106.   Establishment of franchise requirements.
   
10-2-107.   Duration.
   
10-2-108.   Franchise applications.
   
10-2-109.   Grant procedure for new franchises.
   
10-2-110.   Police powers.
   
10-2-111.   Franchise fees.
   
10-2-112.   Franchise processing costs.
   
10-2-113.   Rates.
   
10-2-114.   Franchisee regulations.
   
10-2-115.   Compliance with State and federal law.
   
10-2-116.   Notices.
§ 10-2-101. Franchise required.
   (a)   Generally. Unless a franchise has been granted in accordance with the
provisions of this article, a person may not construct or operate a cable
system in the County; provided however, that a telecommunications or other
communications system operating in the County pursuant to other legal authority
may be upgraded or extended consistent with that legal authority so that the
system can be used to provide cable service without first obtaining a cable
franchise, but cable service cannot be offered or provided in the County and
plant that will be used only for cable service cannot be installed in the
County without first obtaining a franchise in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
   (b)   Sanctions for violation. In addition to any other remedy available to
the County, a person who violates this section is liable for a civil penalty of
$1,000 for each day the violation continues.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-102. Effect of grant.
   (a)   Award of franchise. The County may grant one or more cable franchises,
and each franchise shall be awarded in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of this article and applicable obligations of the County.
   (b)   Scope of franchise. A cable franchise:
      (1)   constitutes both a right and an obligation to provide cable service
as required by the provisions of this article and the franchise agreement; and
      (2)   is a privilege to be held for the general public.
   (c)   Article not a contract. This article is not a contract between the
County and a franchisee such that the County is prohibited from amending any of
the provisions of this article.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-103. Franchise nonexclusive.
   A franchise is nonexclusive, and the County may grant additional franchises
for a cable system pursuant to §
10-2-102, and an additional grant may not operate to materially modify, revoke,
or terminate rights previously granted to a franchisee.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-104. Franchise area.
   (a)   Generally. The County may grant a franchise for the entire County or
any defined portion of the County including, if requested by the appropriate
governmental entity and not preempted by applicable law, portions of the County
within a municipal corporation or federal reservation.
   (b)   Defined in agreement. The franchise area is the geographic area within
the County defined in the franchise agreement. The initial service area is any
portion of the franchise area scheduled to receive initial service as stated in
the franchise agreement.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-105. Franchise agreement.
   (a)   Negotiation. The Information Technology Officer may negotiate
franchise agreements with prospective franchisees for both new and renewed
franchises.
   (b)   Amendments. The Information Technology Officer may negotiate
amendments to franchise agreements.
   (c)   Nonbinding without approval by ordinance. A franchise agreement or any
amendment to a franchise agreement is not binding on the County until approved
by ordinance of the County Council.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-106. Establishment of franchise requirements.
   The County may establish appropriate requirements for new franchises or
franchise renewals and may modify these requirements from time to time to
reflect changing conditions and the state of the art in the cable industry.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-107. Duration.
   The term of a franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations, and
restrictions pertaining to the franchise shall be as established in the
franchise agreement, unless terminated sooner pursuant to this article.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-108. Franchise applications.
   (a)   Generally. An applicant for a franchise shall submit to the County
Council a written application utilizing the standardized format provided by the
County Council at the time and place designated by the County Council for
accepting applications.
   (b)   Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee of $10,000 payable by certified check to the order of Anne
Arundel County, Maryland.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-109. Grant procedure for new franchises.
   (a)   Public inspection. An application for a new franchise shall be
available for public inspection at places designated by the County Council.
   (b)   Public hearing. No later than 90 days after the filing of an
application, the County Council shall hold a public hearing on the application.
   (c)   Decision. No later than 90 days after the conclusion of the public
hearing, the County Council shall make a decision based on an evaluation of:
      (1)   the applicant's financial, technical, and legal qualifications to
operate the proposed system;
      (2)   the immediate and long-term effects on the public rights-of-way and
private property of the cable system, including the extent to which planned
installation or maintenance would involve disruption of property, public
services, or use of the public rights-of-way;
      (3)   any other effects of the system, its construction, or operation on
public safety;
      (4)   the applicant's ability and willingness to provide adequate PEG
access channel capacity, facilities, and financial support;
      (5)   the applicant's proposals to meet the future cable-related needs
and interests of the County; and
      (6)   other benefits to the County and its citizens to be provided by the
cable system.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-110. Police powers.
   (a)   Compliance with law. In accepting a franchise, a franchisee:
      (1)   acknowledges that its rights under the franchise are subject to the
police powers of the County to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the
safety and welfare of the public; and
      (2)   agrees to comply with all applicable ordinances enacted by the
County under its police power.
   (b)   Conflict of laws. Except as provided in subsection (c), a conflict
between the provisions of this article and any other lawful exercise of the
County's police power shall be resolved in favor of the County's police power.
   (c)   Exception. An exercise of the police power that is inconsistent with
this article and that applies exclusively to a particular person or is
otherwise not of general application in the County shall prevail only if the
County finds that an emergency exists that constitutes a danger to health,
safety, property, or general welfare or if the exercise of the police power is
mandated by law.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-111. Franchise fees.
   (a)   Generally. A franchisee shall pay franchise fees to the County in the
amounts designated in the franchise agreement. Franchise fees shall apply from
the effective date of the franchise agreement.
   (b)   Payment. Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the
schedule in the franchise agreement or, if the franchise agreement does not
specify a schedule, in quarterly installments within 30 days after the
expiration of a franchisee's fiscal quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied
by a financial statement listing the franchisee's gross revenues during that
quarter, broken down on a monthly basis.
   (c)   Late payments. If a payment is not made on or before the due date, the
franchisee shall pay as additional compensation:
      (1)   an interest charge, computed from the due date, at an annual rate
equal to the average rate of return on invested funds of the County during the
period for which the payment was due; and
      (2)   if the payment is late by 45 days or more, an amount equal to 5% of
the amount due as a charge incidental to enforcement of the franchise.
   (d)   Fee not a tax. Payment of a franchise fee may not be considered in the
nature of a tax or in lieu of other taxes or fees imposed by the County, except
to the extent that federal law includes those taxes or fees in the franchise
fee. A franchisee may not designate the franchise fee as a tax in any
communication to a subscriber.
   (e)   No release or accord and satisfaction. The acceptance of any payment
by the County is not a release or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the
County has for further and additional sums payable as a franchise fee under
this article or for the performance of any other obligation of the franchisee.
   (f)   Pass-through costs. Any franchisee "pass-through" or itemization of
franchise fee costs on subscribers' bills shall be in accordance with federal
law.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-112. Franchise processing costs.
   (a)   Assumption of costs. For a new franchise grant, a franchise renewal,
or a transfer of a franchise or its ownership or control, subject to any
limitations to specified amounts in a franchise agreement, the franchisee
requesting the grant, renewal, or transfer shall assume:
      (1)   costs of publication of notices before any required public hearing
or meeting;
      (2)   costs of the development, preparation, and publication of relevant
ordinances and franchise documents; and
      (3)   any other costs, including consultant and attorney fees incurred by
the County in its study, evaluation, and implementation of the applications and
proposals.
   (b)   Additional costs. These franchise processing costs are in addition to
the construction, inspection, and permit fees described in §
10-6-101(a), the franchise fee described in §
10-2-111, and the application fee described in §
10-2-108.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-113. Rates.
   (a)   Generally. The franchisee shall establish rates for its cable services
and apply those rates fairly and without discrimination to all subscribers in
the franchise area. The County may regulate rates to the extent permitted by
law.
   (b)   Promotional campaigns permitted. This section does not preclude the
franchisee from conducting promotional campaigns in which its rates are
discounted or waived or from offering bulk discounts for multiple-dwelling
units, hotels, motels, and similar institutions or for the community of
Heritage Harbour.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-114. Franchisee regulations.
   A franchisee may adopt regulations, terms, and conditions governing the
conduct of its business that enable the franchisee to exercise its rights and
perform its obligations under the franchise agreement and to ensure
uninterrupted cable service to its customers and that are not in conflict with
the provisions of this article, the franchise agreement, or applicable State
and federal laws and regulations.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-115. Compliance with State and federal law.
   (a)   Consistency and conflicts of law. A franchise granted under the
provisions of this article shall be consistent with federal and State laws and
regulations. In the event of a conflict, federal or State laws or regulations
prevail.
   (b)   Notification of conflict. If a State or federal law or regulation
requires or permits the franchisee to perform or omit any act in conflict with
the terms of the franchise or any County law or regulation, the franchisee
shall notify the Information Technology Officer immediately upon learning of
the conflict.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-2-116. Notices.
   Throughout the term of the franchise, a franchisee shall maintain and file
with the County an address for service of notices by mail. Unless otherwise
stated, notices to the County shall be sent to the Information Technology
Officer.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 3. FRANCHISE RENEWAL; FRANCHISE TRANSFER
Section
   
10-3-101.   Applicability of law.
   
10-3-102.   Proposal for renewal.
   
10-3-103.   Administrative hearing on nonrenewal.
   
10-3-104.   Negotiated renewal.
   
10-3-105.   Transfer of ownership or control.
§ 10-3-101. Applicability of law.
   The procedures for franchise renewal shall comply with applicable law.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-3-102. Proposal for renewal.
   (a)   Requirements. A proposal for renewal submitted by a franchisee shall
contain the requirements specified by the request for renewal proposal, and the
Information Technology Officer may reject any proposal for renewal that omits
any of these requirements.
   (b)   Public notice; referral to County Council. On receipt by the
Information Technology Officer of a proposal for renewal that meets the
requirements of the request for renewal proposal, the Officer shall furnish
prompt public notice of the proposal for renewal, review the proposal for
renewal, and refer the proposal for renewal to the County Council with the
Officer's recommendation for approval or rejection.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-3-103. Administrative hearing on nonrenewal.
   Any administrative proceeding on denial of renewal shall be conducted by a
Hearing Officer selected by the Information Technology Officer. The Hearing
Officer shall apply the applicable standards under governing law.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-3-104. Negotiated renewal.
   (a)   Informal renewal proceedings. The provisions of this section
constitute the informal renewal proceedings set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 546(h).
   (b)   Submission of negotiated renewal. Notwithstanding the formal renewal
procedures mandated by the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, a
franchisee may submit to the Information Technology Officer a proposal for a
negotiated renewal of the franchise at any time before the expiration of the
franchise.
   (c)   No obligation to act. The Information Technology Officer has no
obligation to act upon a proposal for a negotiated renewal submitted under this
section.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-3-105. Transfer of ownership or control.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Control" means the legal or practical ability to exert actual
working control over the affairs of a franchisee, either directly or
indirectly, and whether by contractual agreement, majority ownership interest,
a lesser ownership interest, or other means.
      (2)   (i) "Transfer" means a transaction in which:
            1.   control of a franchisee is transferred by transfer or grant of
an ownership or other interest in the franchisee, directly or indirectly, from
one person or group of persons to another person or group of persons; or
            2.   the rights held by a franchisee under the franchise are
transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons.
         (ii)   "Transfer" does not include transfer of an ownership or other
interest in a franchisee to the parent of the franchisee or to another
affiliate of the franchisee; transfer of an interest in a franchise agreement
or the rights held by the franchisee under the agreement to the parent of the
franchisee or to another affiliate of the franchisee; or any action that is the
result of a merger of the parent of the franchisee or another affiliate of the
franchisee unless and to the extent the merger would result in a combination of
wireline cable service competitors in the same service area.
   (b)   Franchise as privilege; obligations. A franchise is a privilege that
is in the public trust and personal to the franchisee. A franchisee's
obligations under its franchise involve personal services whose performance
involves personal credit, trust, and confidence in the franchisee.
   (c)   Assignment or conveyance restricted. Except for the installation of
facilities for the franchisee by a subcontractor who works under the
franchisee's direct control and supervision, a franchisee may not assign or
convey to any entity any right or authority granted by the franchise with
respect to the use or occupation of the County's public rights-of-way or
construction in them. In particular, the franchisee may not obtain permits or
construct facilities on behalf of any other affiliated or unaffiliated entity
under this franchise.
   (d)   Application for approval of transfer.
      (1)   Promptly, but at least 120 calendar days before the contemplated
effective date of a transfer, the franchisee shall submit to the County a
written application for approval of the transfer. The application shall provide
complete information on the proposed transaction, including details on the
legal, financial, technical, and other qualifications of the transferee and on
the potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and service. Except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, at a minimum, the application shall
include:
         (i)   a complete and un-redacted copy of the agreements to effectuate
the proposed transaction and all schedules, exhibits, and other documents
attached to them or referred to in them that are not otherwise publicly
available;
         (ii)   information sufficient to demonstrate the legal, financial, and
technical qualifications of the proposed transferee;
         (iii)   information sufficient to demonstrate whether the proposed
transaction will have any adverse financial impact on the franchisee or the
cable system, including capital investments and projected income statements and
cash flow statements covering the lesser of five years or the remainder of the
franchise term and clearly explaining all assumptions made in them;
         (iv)   a general description of the anticipated management structure
of the post-transfer cable system and of any financing to be used in connection
with the proposed transaction; and
         (v)   information sufficient to determine any potential adverse impact
of the proposed transaction on subscriber rates and service.
      (2)   If any of the information required by subsection (d)(1) is
confidential or proprietary, the franchisee shall:
         (i)   clearly mark those portions of the document as confidential or
proprietary; or
         (ii)   omit those portions of the documents, substitute a specific
description of the contents of the omitted material, and provide a written
certification that the material is confidential or proprietary and unrelated to
the County's review of the transfer and that the County may promptly review the
materials at a mutually convenient time and place.
      (3)   At the franchisee's option, the franchisee may notify the County of
the proposed transaction in general terms at least 150 days prior to the
contemplated effective date of a transfer and request that the County waive,
reduce, or modify some or all of the information requirements specified in
subsection (d). To the extent consistent with applicable law, the County may
grant in writing all or part of the request, without waiving any right the
County may have to request that the information be provided after the initial
application is filed.
      (4)   (i)   If a franchisee clearly identifies information as
confidential or proprietary, then, to the maximum extent permissible under
applicable federal, State, and local laws related to public records, the County
may not disclose that information to the public. If the County determines that
information is not clearly identified or that information identified as
confidential or proprietary is subject to public disclosure, the County shall
notify the franchisee that the County intends to disclose the requested
information unless ordered otherwise by a court. The County shall provide the
notice to franchisee to allow sufficient time for the franchisee to seek a
court order to protect such information from disclosure.
         (ii)   If a franchisee claims that any information submitted with
respect to a transfer is confidential or proprietary, the franchisee shall make
arrangements with the County for redaction, exclusion, or confidentiality,
including the execution of any confidentiality agreements, prior to the filing
of any FCC Form 394 or transfer application, such that all documents and
information required by this section can be included in the application when it
is initially filed.
      (5)   To determine whether to grant or deny a transfer, the County may
inquire into all qualifications of the prospective transferee and any other
matters the County deems necessary to determine whether the transfer should be
approved or denied. The franchisee and any prospective transferee shall
reasonably assist the County in any inquiry and, if they fail to do so, the
request for transfer may be denied.
      (6)   The County shall act on a transfer application in a timely fashion.
   (e)   County considerations. In determining whether to grant or deny an
application for a transfer, the County may consider:
      (1)   the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the
transferee to operate the cable system;
      (2)   any potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates or
services;
      (3)   whether the incumbent cable operator is in compliance with its
franchise agreement and applicable law and, if not, whether the proposed
transferee will cure any noncompliance;
      (4)   whether the proposed transferee owns or controls any other cable
system in the County and whether the transfer may eliminate or reduce
competition in the delivery of cable service in the County; and
      (5)   whether operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer
would have other adverse effects that may lawfully be considered by the County.
   (f)   Consent required. A transfer of a franchise, franchisee, or cable
system or of control over them, including by forced or voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation, receivership, or any other means, may not occur without the
prior consent of the County Council by ordinance, as required by this article.
If a transfer occurs without the County's prior written consent, the franchisee
shall notify the County promptly. A transfer without the County's prior written
consent:
      (1)   is ineffective;
      (2)   shall be considered to impair the County's assurance of due
performance; and
      (3)   shall be, in addition to any other remedies available under the
franchise agreement or applicable law, grounds for revocation pursuant to §
10-11-103.
   (g)   Additional liabilities. In addition to any other liability provided by
law, a franchisee is liable under its franchise for a transfer that violates
the terms of its franchise, whether the transfer is caused in whole or in part
by the franchisee or another person, parent, or affiliated entity, in which
event the franchisee is liable as if the transfer had been caused by the
franchisee itself.
   (h)   Closing documents. Unless the County expressly waives or modifies the
requirement, a franchisee shall provide the County with a complete copy of the
closing documents within 14 days after the closing of a transfer.
   (i)   Franchisee responsibilities. A franchisee is responsible for ensuring
that the intent of this section is carried out. If for any reason an event
occurs that would require the County's approval under this section, whether or
not the event is directly or indirectly within the franchisee's control, the
event constitutes a transfer for purposes of the franchise agreement and
applicable law.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 4. FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
10-4-101.   Construction bond.
   
10-4-102.   Performance bond.
   
10-4-103.   Form of bond or other security.
   
10-4-104.   Security fund.
   
10-4-105.   Indemnification.
   
10-4-106.   Insurance.
§ 10-4-101. Construction bond.
   (a)   Generally. Within 30 days after the granting of a new franchise or a
renewal that requires significant system construction as specified in the
franchise agreement and before the commencement of construction by the
franchisee, the franchisee shall file with the County a construction bond in
the amount specified in the franchise agreement in favor of the County and any
other person who may be entitled to damages as a result of the breach of any
duty by the franchisee, unless the franchisee has filed security with the
County to cover its physical plant pursuant to § 13-3-114 of this Code, in
which case the security shall serve as the construction bond required by this
article.
   (b)   Coverage. Among other matters, the construction bond shall cover the
cost of removal of any facilities or equipment installed by the franchisee if
the franchisee defaults in the performance of its franchise obligations.
   (c)   No limitation on liability. The amount of the bond is not a limitation
on the liability of the franchisee for damages.
   (d)   Waiver. The County may waive the construction bond or permit
consolidation of the construction bond with the performance bond and security
fund as specified in §§
10-4-102 and
10-4-104.
   (e)   Release. On completion of construction, any construction bonds then in
force and not consolidated pursuant to §
10-4-101(d) shall be released.
(Ord. 54-06)
§ 10-4-102. Performance bond.
   (a)   Generally. At least 30 days before beginning operation, the franchisee
shall file with the County a performance bond in the amount specified in the
franchise agreement in favor of the County and any other person who may be
entitled to damages as a result of any occurrence in the operation or
termination of the cable system operated under the franchise agreement.
   (b)   Coverage. Among other matters, the bond shall cover:
      (1)   the payments required to be made to the County under this article
and the franchise agreement;
      (2)   if applicable, the cost of removal of any facilities or equipment
installed by the franchisee; and
      (3)   the compensation to which the owner of a multiple-dwelling unit is
entitled pursuant to §
10-9-103.
   (c)   No limitation on liability. The amount of the bond is not a limitation
on the liability of the franchisee for damages.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-4-103. Form of bond or other security.
   (a)   Cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of bond. The
County may accept a cash deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of
a bond required under this title.
   (b)   Acceptable forms of security. Any security required by this title
shall be in a form acceptable to the County Attorney and the Controller and, if
provided in a form other than cash, from a bonding company or financial
institution acceptable to the Controller.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-4-104. Security fund.
   (a)   Generally. Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise,
the franchisee shall deposit into a bank account established by the County, and
maintain on deposit throughout the term of the franchise, the sum specified in
the franchise agreement as security for the franchisee's:
      (1)   faithful performance of all of the provisions of the franchise and
compliance with all orders, permits, and directions of any agency of the County
having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this article or any other
provision of this Code; and
      (2)   payment of any claims, liens, and taxes due to the County that
arise by reason of the construction, operation, or maintenance of the cable
system.
   (b)   Irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of cash deposit. The County may
permit a franchisee to provide some or all of the security fund in the form of
an irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of a cash deposit.
   (c)   Assessment from fund. Subject to the provisions of subsection (d), the
security fund may be assessed by the County for:
      (1)   failure of the franchisee to pay the County sums due under the
provisions of the franchise agreement and this article;
      (2)   reimbursement of costs borne by the County to correct franchise
violations not corrected by the franchisee after notice and the opportunity to
cure as provided under §
10-11-101; and
      (3)   monetary remedies, penalties, or damages assessed against the
franchisee due to franchise violations.
   (d)   Withdrawal of funds. The County may withdraw the amount due, with
interest and any penalties, from the security fund if after 30 days written
notice the franchisee fails to:
      (1)   pay to the County any franchise fee or taxes due;
      (2)   pay to the County any damages, costs, or expenses that the County
is compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the franchisee in
connection with the franchise; or
      (3)   comply with any material provision of the franchise that the County
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security fund.
   (e)   Notification of withdrawal. On any withdrawal from the security fund,
the County shall notify the franchisee of the amount and date of withdrawal.
   (f)   Restoration of withdrawn funds. Within 30 days after notice to the
franchisee that any amount has been withdrawn by the County from the security
fund under this section, the franchisee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient
to restore the security fund to the amount required by the franchise agreement,
or, if applicable, replace the letter of credit.
   (g)   Disposition upon franchise revocation. If the franchise is revoked for
cause by reason of the default of the franchisee under §
10-11-103, the security fund deposited under this section shall become the
property of the County.
   (h)   Return of funds. If there is no outstanding default by the franchisee
at the end of 90 days after the expiration of the term of the franchise, the
franchisee is entitled to the return of all or any part of the security fund
that remains on deposit and to any accrued interest.
   (i)   County rights reserved. The rights reserved to the County with respect
to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the County, whether
reserved by this article or authorized by law. Any action, proceeding, or
exercise of a right with respect to the security fund does not constitute an
election of remedies or a waiver of any other right the County may have.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-4-105. Indemnification.
   (a)   Generally. A franchisee shall indemnify, defend, and hold the County
harmless against all liability, loss, claims, suits, judgments, costs, attorney
fees, and damages of any kind in any way arising out of or through, or alleged
to arise out of or through:
      (1)   the acts or omissions of the franchisee and its employees,
officers, or agents, arising out of the construction, installation,
maintenance, operation, or removal of the cable system, including damage to
persons, real property, or personal property caused by the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance, or removal of any structure, equipment,
wire, or cable;
      (2)   the acts or omissions of the franchisee, and its employees,
officers, or agents, including any failure or refusal by the franchisee, and
its employees, officers, or agents, to comply with any obligation or duty
imposed on the franchisee by this article or the franchise agreement;
      (3)   copyright infringements;
      (4)   any failure by the franchisee to secure consents from the owners,
authorized distributors, or licensees of programs to be delivered by the cable
system, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized,
allowed, or prohibited by this article or the franchise agreement.
   (b)   Tender of defense of a claim. If a claim arises, the County shall
tender the defense of the claim to the franchisee. The County shall give the
franchisee written notice of its obligation to indemnify the County as promptly
as practicable after receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this subsection
and sufficiently in advance of the time for the franchisee's response to a
third-party claim that the franchisee will be able to timely respond and the
defense against the claim will not be prejudiced. The franchisee shall provide
the defense of any claims brought against the County by selecting counsel of
the franchisee's choice to defend the claim, subject to the consent of the
County, which shall not unreasonably be withheld. The franchisee shall keep the
County and its counsel advised of the progress and the substance of the defense
in a timely manner so that, if desired, the County can intervene to protect its
rights and benefits. The County may participate in the defense of a claim at
its expense. If a final judgment is obtained against the County or one or more
of its officers, employees, or agents in a suit or action for which the County
and its officers, employees, and agents are entitled to be indemnified and held
harmless, the franchisee shall pay the judgment, including all costs and
attorney fees. The franchisee shall be entitled to settle a claim brought in a
suit or action for which the County or its officers, employees, or agents are
entitled to be indemnified and held harmless hereunder, provided that, absent
the release of the County and any other indemnified parties, the franchisee
shall obtain the prior written approval of the County for any settlement of
such claims, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or unreasonably
delayed. In the event that the terms of any such settlement do not include the
release of the County and the County does not consent to the terms of the
settlement or compromise, the franchisee shall not settle the claim or action,
but its obligation to indemnify the County shall not exceed the amount of the
settlement.
   (c)   Limitations; County negligence or willful misconduct. A franchisee is
not required to indemnify the County for the negligence or willful misconduct
of the County.
   (d)   Limitations; programming for PEG access facilities and leased
channels. A franchisee is not required to indemnify the County for any activity
from which the franchisee is immune from liability pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 558,
pertaining to programming for PEG access facilities and leased channels.
   (e)   Effect of independent contractors. The fact that the franchisee
carries out activities under the franchise through independent contractors does
not constitute an avoidance of or defense to its duty of indemnification under
this section.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-4-106. Insurance.
   (a)   Coverage required. Throughout the term of a franchise, a franchisee
shall maintain:
      (1)   workers' compensation insurance in the amount and manner required
by State Workers' Compensation Law;
      (2)   commercial general liability insurance, including coverage for
bodily injury and property damage, at the limits specified in the franchise
agreement; and
      (3)   comprehensive automobile liability insurance, including owned, non-
owned, and hired car coverage with coverage for bodily injury and property
damage, at the limits specified in the franchise agreement.
   (b)   Copies; form; notice of cancellation. The franchisee shall furnish the
Information Technology Officer with certificates evidencing the insurance
required under this section. Insurance policies shall require 30 days written
notice of cancellation to the franchisee and to the County. If there is a
cancellation notice, the franchisee shall obtain, pay the premiums for, and
file with the County certificates evidencing replacement policies within 30
days after receipt by the County or the franchisee of a notice of cancellation.
   (c)   Named insureds; primary coverage. The insurance policies required
under this section shall name the County as an additional insured and be
primary in coverage to any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the
County.
   (d)   No limitation on liability. The minimum amounts set forth in the
franchise agreement for insurance do not limit the liability of the franchisee
to the amounts of that insurance.
   (e)   Insurance carriers to be licensed. All insurance carriers providing
the coverage described in this section shall be licensed to offer insurance in
this State.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 5. SYSTEM DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
10-5-101.   System design.
   
10-5-102.   Geographical coverage.
   
10-5-103.   System required.
   
10-5-104.   System construction schedule.
   
10-5-105.   Accessible facilities.
   
10-5-106.   Coordination of installation of cable underground – new
development.
   
10-5-107.   Authorization to traverse public rights-of-way without a franchise.
§ 10-5-101. System design.
   A franchisee shall construct its cable system in accordance with any design
requirements contained in the franchise agreement.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-5-102. Geographical coverage.
   Cable service shall be provided to subscribers in accordance with the
schedules and line extension policies specified in the franchise agreement.
Cable system construction and provision of cable service shall be
nondiscriminatory, and the franchisee may not delay or defer cable service to
any section of the franchise area on the grounds of economic preference.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-5-103. System required.
   A franchisee shall provide a cable system in accordance with the
requirements of the franchise agreement.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-5-104. System construction schedule.
   (a)   Compliance. A franchisee shall comply with the requirements of any
system construction schedule contained in the franchise agreement.
   (b)   Submission of plan. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise
agreement, a franchisee shall provide to the County a detailed construction
plan that contains a progress schedule, area construction maps, test plans, and
projected dates for offering cable service. The franchisee shall update this
information on a monthly basis by submitting a copy of its normal internal
progress reports, showing specifically whether schedules are met and the
reasons for any delay.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-5-105. Accessible facilities.
   A franchisee's cable system may not be designed or constructed in such a way
that it unreasonably impedes another franchised cable operator from gaining
access to a subscriber who chooses to be served by the other operator.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-5-106. Coordination of installation of cable underground – new
development.
   (a)   Notice of new development. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall
notify the Information Technology Officer and all franchisees when subdivision
plans are submitted to the Office of Planning and Zoning for review and
approval. A copy of the notification shall be sent to the telephone and
electric companies to indicate which franchisees received notice.
   (b)   Utility company notice of trenching to franchisee. If electric or
telephone utilities are to be placed underground in a new subdivision, the lead
utility company shall give written notice to known franchisees in the area
within which the property is located. The franchisees shall be notified at
least 48 hours before commencement of trenching construction.
   (c)   Compliance with utilities' operating and safety practices. The
franchisee's installation of its cables in a trench are subject to the
utilities' operating and safety practices.
   (d)   Closing of trenches without cable installation. When trenches are
closed without installation of cable by a franchisee, the franchisee may not
install its conduit and other facilities in a subdivision that is constructed
under a public works agreement or inspection agreement until the developer has
been fully released from responsibility to complete or maintain any facilities
that are required to be constructed or installed under the public works
agreement or inspection agreement. At the request of the developer and the
franchisee, the Information Technology Officer may permit the franchisee to
install those facilities after the trenches are closed.
   (e)   Subdivision law to include cable wiring. If the County's subdivision
statutes or regulations require pre-wiring of subdivisions for electrical and
telephone service, those statutes and regulations shall be construed to include
wiring for cable systems.
   (f)   Subdivision law to prevail. The provisions of any subdivision statute
or regulation prevail over the provisions of this section so long as
franchisees are not deprived of their right to participate in the pre-wiring of
a subdivision.
   (g)   Agreements with developer. With the approval of the Information
Technology Officer and the Director of Public Works, a developer may enter into
an agreement with a franchisee and a utility company for installation of the
franchisee's conduit and other facilities in the subdivision.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-5-107. Authorization to traverse public rights-of-way without a franchise.
   (a)   County authorization. The Information Technology Officer may issue a
license, easement, or other permit to a person to allow the person to traverse
a portion of the public right-of-way for which that person does not hold a
franchise in order to provide service outside the County or to provide service
to another franchise area within the County.
   (b)   Limitation on authorization. Unless a franchise is granted in
accordance with this article, a license, easement, or permit issued under
subsection (a) does not authorize that person to provide cable service in the
County or to render service or connect a subscriber in the area being
traversed.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 6. CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS
Section
   
10-6-101.   Technical standards.
   
10-6-102.   Test and compliance procedure.
   
10-6-103.   Cost.
   
10-6-104.   Area-wide interconnection.
§ 10-6-101. Technical standards.
   (a)   Standards. A cable system shall meet all applicable technical and
performance standards.
   (b)   Evaluation. If the Information Technology Officer has information that
gives the Information Technology Officer reason to believe that all or part of
the cable system does not meet the technical standards incorporated into the
franchise agreement, no more than once every three years and after consultation
with the franchisee, the Information Technology Officer may appoint a qualified
independent engineer to evaluate and verify the technical performance of the
system. The cost of the evaluation shall be borne equally by the County and the
franchisee.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-6-102. Test and compliance procedure.
   (a)   Standards. A franchisee shall perform all tests necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the franchise, and to ensure
that the cable system components are operating as required. All tests shall be
conducted in accordance with federal rules and any applicable United States
National Cable Television Association's recommended practices for measurement
and testing. In the event that the FCC's technical performance standards are
repealed or are no longer applicable to the cable system, such standards shall
remain in force and effect until the Information Technology Officer and the
franchisee agree to new standards.
   (b)   Tests required. A franchisee shall conduct tests as follows:
      (1)   proof of performance tests on the cable system at least once every
six months or as required by FCC rules, whichever is more often, except as
federal law otherwise limits the franchisee's obligation. In consultation with
the Information Technology Officer, the cable system monitor test points shall
be established in accordance with good engineering practices and consistent
with FCC guidelines; and
      (2)   special proof of performance tests, as requested by the County, of
a cable system or a segment thereof when subscriber or user complaints indicate
tests are warranted.
   (c)   Supervision. Tests shall be supervised by a franchisee's senior
engineer, who shall sign all records of tests provided to the County.
   (d)   County review. The County shall have the right to be present at and
review all required tests on newly constructed or rebuilt segments of a cable
system. A franchisee shall provide the County with at least two business days'
notice of, and opportunity to observe, any such tests performed on a cable
system.
   (e)   Reports. A franchisee shall retain written reports of the results of
any tests required by the FCC, and such reports shall be submitted to the
County upon the County's request. The County shall have the same rights the FCC
has to inspect a franchisee's performance test data.
   (f)   Correction of failure. If any test indicates that any part or
component of a cable system fails to meet applicable requirements, the
franchisee, without requirement of additional notice or request from the
County, shall take corrective action, retest the locations and advise the
County of the action taken and results achieved, and supply the County with a
copy of the results within 30 days from the date corrective action was
completed.
   (g)   Waiver. The Information Technology Officer may, for good cause shown,
waive or limit the system test and inspection provisions in this section.
   (h)   No limitation on technical reviews. This section may not be construed
to prevent the County from conducting technical reviews of cable systems at the
County's expense pursuant to the procedures specified in this article.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-6-103. Cost.
   The franchisee shall bear the cost of all tests required by this title.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-6-104. Area-wide interconnection.
   A franchise agreement shall require interconnection of access channels of
the cable system. Interconnection may be done by direct cable connection,
microwave link satellite, or other appropriate method.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 7. SERVICE REQUIREMENTS
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
10-7-101.    Local origination programming.
   
10-7-102.   Cable channels for commercial use.
Subtitle 2. PEG Access Facilities
   
10-7-201.   Public usage of system.
   
10-7-202.   PEG access facilities.
   
10-7-203.   PEG access facility management entity – creation.
   
10-7-204.   Duties of PEG access facility management entity.
   
10-7-205.   County review of PEG access facility management entity.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 10-7-101. Local origination programming.
   If provision is made in a franchise agreement for local origination
programming, the franchisee shall operate any cable-casting studios on a high-
quality professional basis for the purpose of providing cable-cast programming
responsive to local needs and interests.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-7-102. Cable channels for commercial use.
   The franchisee shall designate channel capacity for commercial use as
required by 47 U.S.C. § 532 or other applicable law.
(Bill No. 54-06)
SUBTITLE 2. PEG ACCESS FACILITIES
§ 10-7-201. Public usage of system.
   If specified in the franchise agreement, the County may utilize a portion of
the cable capacity and associated facilities and resources to develop and
provide noncommercial cable services that are in the public interest.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-7-202. PEG access facilities.
   A franchisee shall provide support for PEG access as specified in the
franchise agreement. All PEG access channels shall be included in the service
tier that contains basic cable service.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-7-203. PEG access facility management entity – creation.
   (a)   Intent. The County intends to ensure that PEG access facilities are
managed in the public interest and that programming using public access
channels is open to all residents and available for all forms of public
expression, community information, and debate of public issues.
   (b)   Delegation of responsibilities. The County may delegate the
responsibility for PEG access channels or facility management to a nonprofit
entity that it designates or establishes, including a nonprofit public
corporation, a PEG access facility management commission or committee that is
appointed by the County Executive and represents a broad spectrum of the
community, or an established nonprofit entity with special cable-casting
capability, such as a local or regional college or university.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-7-204. Duties of PEG access facility management entity.
   (a)   Generally. A PEG access facility management entity shall have the
power to:
      (1)   produce programs for and manage public access facilities;
      (2)   ensure that public access facilities are made available to all
residents of the franchise area on a nondiscriminatory first-come, first-served
basis;
      (3)   ensure no censorship or control over program content of the public
access facilities except as necessary to comply with prohibition of material
that is illegal;
      (4)   devise, establish, and administer all regulations and procedures
pertaining to the use and scheduling of the PEG access facilities;
      (5)   prepare reports on public access operations;
      (6)   hire and supervise staff;
      (7)   make all required purchases of materials and equipment;
      (8)   develop sources of funding, such as foundation or federal or State
grants;
      (9)   further community programming;
      (10)   establish budgets on an annual basis to utilize funds and
resources for the purpose of PEG access programming; and
      (11)   perform any other appropriate functions relevant to PEG access
channels.
   (b)   Delegation of County duties. The County may delegate to the PEG access
facility management entity the duty to:
      (1)   receive and utilize or reallocate for utilization channel capacity,
facilities, support funding, and other resources provided by the County, by the
franchisees pursuant to their franchises, and by others for public use of the
cable system;
      (2)   report to the County annually on the utilization of resources, the
new public services developed, and the benefits achieved for the County and its
residents.
   (c)   Regulations for use of PEG access facilities. A PEG access facility
management entity shall prepare regulations for the use of its access
facilities, and the entity shall promptly forward them to the County. At a
minimum, the regulations shall provide for:
      (1)   access on a first-come, first-served nondiscriminatory basis for
all residents of the franchise area;
      (2)   prohibition of commercial use by public access programming
producers;
      (3)   prohibition of the presentation of obscene material;
      (4)   public inspection of the log of producers, which shall be retained
by the PEG access facility management entity for a period of four years;
      (5)   procedures by which individuals or groups who violate any rule may
be prevented from further access to the facilities; and
      (6)   use of reasonable amounts of channel time, system facilities, and
technical support as are provided for in the agreement between the PEG access
facility management entity and the franchisees.
   (d)   Annual report. A PEG access facility management entity shall provide a
report to the County at least annually that indicates achievements in
community-based programming and services.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-7-205. County review of PEG access facility management entity.
   (a)   Generally. The County may review the activities of a PEG access
facility management entity to determine if it is performing its purposes in a
manner satisfactory to the County.
   (b)   Unsatisfactory performance. If a PEG access facility management entity
is not performing satisfactorily, the County may reallocate all or a portion of
the channel capacity, operations appropriation, and capital appropriation,
including any facilities and equipment purchased previously with an
appropriation, to another PEG access facility management entity.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 8. CONSUMER PROTECTION
Section
   
10-8-101.   General provisions.
   
10-8-102.   Consumer service standards.
   
10-8-103.   Installations, connections, and related matters.
   
10-8-104.   Cable service and repair standards.
   
10-8-105.   Verification of compliance.
   
10-8-106.   Overall quality of customer service.
   
10-8-107.   Complaints.
   
10-8-108.   Information Technology Officer's review of complaints.
   
10-8-109.   Escrow account during pendency of complaint.
   
10-8-110.   Notices by franchisee.
   
10-8-111.   Rights of individuals.
   
10-8-112.   Continuity of cable service mandatory.
   
10-8-113.   Identification of employees.
   
10-8-114.   Billing.
   
10-8-115.   Disconnection and downgrades.
   
10-8-116.   Changes in cable service.
   
10-8-117.   Parental control option.
   
10-8-118.   Anti-competitive acts prohibited.
   
10-8-119.   Local office.
§ 10-8-101. General provisions.
   (a)   Franchisee duties. A franchisee shall satisfy the customer service
standards set forth in this section and any additional or stricter requirements
established by regulations of the FCC or other applicable federal, State, or
local law or regulation.
   (b)   Scope of article. This article does not prevent or prohibit:
      (1)   the County and a franchisee from agreeing to customer service
requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this article;
      (2)   the County from enforcing, through the end of a franchise term,
pre-existing customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth
in this article and are contained in current franchise agreements;
      (3)   the County from enacting or enforcing any lawful customer service
or consumer protection laws or regulations; or
      (4)   the establishment or enforcement of any County law or regulation
concerning customer service that imposes customer service requirements that
exceed or address matters not addressed by the standards set forth in this
article, a franchise agreement, or federal or State law or regulations.
   (c)   Compliance with agreement and consumer protection laws. This article
does not relieve a franchisee of its obligation to comply with other applicable
consumer protection laws and its franchise agreement.
   (d)   Meeting standards specified percentages of time. Where standards must
be met a certain percentage of the time, a cable system operator must adopt
policies designed to meet those standards in all cases, and in no event shall
intentionally violate the standards; however, the cable operator shall not be
subject to penalties or liquidated damages if it unintentionally fails to meet
the standards in particular cases, so long as the cable system operator meets
the standards the specified percentage of the time.
   (e)   Violations during first six months of service. Other than for
violations of §
10-8-111, a cable operator shall not be subject to penalties, liquidated
damages, or other monetary sanctions for violations of the customer service
standards set forth in this title that occur during the first six months after
the operator first begins to provide cable service in the County, unless such
violations involve fraud or willful misconduct.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-102. Consumer service standards.
   In addition to standards or conditions specified in the franchise agreement,
a franchisee shall comply with the following consumer standards under normal
conditions of operation as well as any additional standards.
   (a)   Telephone line capacity. A franchisee shall provide sufficient toll-
free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to ensure that a
minimum of 90% of all calls received by the franchisee (measured on a quarterly
basis) are answered within 30 seconds. Measurement of this standard shall
include all calls received by the franchisee at all call centers receiving
calls from subscribers, whether they are answered by live representatives,
answered by an automated attendant, or abandoned. If a call is answered by an
automated attendant, the standard established by this subsection shall be
satisfied for a given call if the automated attendant system includes an option
to speak to a service representative, that option is presented to the caller
within the first 90 seconds from the time the call is answered by the automated
attendant, and the caller is not required to wait more than 30 seconds to be
connected to a service representative after exercising the option to speak to a
service representative.
   (b)   Emergency telephone line capacity. A franchisee shall provide
emergency local or toll-free line capacity on a 24-hour basis, including
weekends and holidays.
   (c)   Maintenance and repair staff. A franchisee shall provide an emergency
system maintenance and repair staff on a 24-hour basis that is capable of
responding to and repairing major system malfunctions.
   (d)   Installation. A franchisee shall provide installation of cable service
to a subscriber within seven days after receipt of a request, excluding time
required to obtain necessary permits, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable
has been activated for cable service; provided, however, that if installation
requires that fiber be terminated on the subscriber's premises and such
termination has not yet been installed, a franchisee shall have seven days to
install such termination, and the seven-day period for installation of cable
service shall commence only after such termination is installed.
   (e)   Advance scheduling for installation. A franchisee shall schedule
appointments with subscribers for installation of service in advance within a
specified four-hour time period.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-103. Installations, connections, and related matters.
   (a)   Charges limited. Except as federal rate regulations may otherwise
require, a franchisee may not assess a subscriber any cost other than a
standard installation charge for cable service drops of 200 feet or less for a
standard installation of a single outlet, unless the franchisee demonstrates to
the County's satisfaction in advance that extraordinary circumstances justify a
higher charge.
   (b)   Cable drops. Except as applicable law otherwise may require, if a drop
exceeds 200 feet in length due to engineering requirements, a franchisee may
charge a subscriber for the franchisee's costs of labor and materials for
installation of the portion of the drop that is beyond 200 feet, plus a 10%
service fee. The subscriber's preference for the point of entry into the
residence shall be observed whenever feasible. Runs in building interiors shall
be as unobtrusive as possible. The franchisee shall use due care in the process
of installation and shall repair any damage to the subscriber's property caused
by the installation. The restoration shall be undertaken as soon as possible
after the damage was incurred and shall be completed within no more than 30
days after the damage is incurred, subject to reasonable landscaping
limitations.
   (c)   Underground and above ground installations. In locations where a
franchisee's system is underground, drops shall be placed underground. Except
as federal law otherwise requires, in an area where a franchisee would be
entitled to install a drop above ground, the franchisee, if requested by the
property owner, shall install the drop underground but may charge the property
owner the difference between the cost of labor and materials for an above
ground installation and the cost of labor and materials for the underground
installation, plus a 10% service fee.
   (d)   Deposit permitted. In addition to any allowable monthly rental fees, a
franchisee may require a reasonable, non-discriminatory deposit on equipment
provided to subscribers. A subscriber deposit shall bear interest in accordance
with applicable law or a rate that is not less than the prime rate of the bank
used by the County for the conduct of its ordinary business. All deposits, with
interest, shall be returned to the subscriber within 30 days after return of
the equipment.
   (e)   Antenna switches. A franchisee shall adhere to FCC regulations
regarding antenna switches. A franchisee may not require a subscriber or
potential subscriber to remove any existing antenna structures for the receipt
of over-the-air television signals as a condition to providing cable service.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-104. Cable service and repair standards.
   (a)   General standard. 
      (1)    A franchisee shall render efficient cable service and make prompt
repairs. A franchisee shall intentionally interrupt cable service on the cable
system only for good cause and for the shortest time possible, and, except in
emergency situations, as set forth in paragraph (2) of this subsection, or to
the extent necessary to correct the affected subscriber's service problems,
only after a minimum of 48 hours' prior notice to subscribers and the County of
the anticipated cable service interruption.
      (2)   A franchisee need not give notice to subscribers for planned
maintenance that does not require more than two hours' interruption of cable
service and that occurs between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., but
shall give notice to the County no less than 24 hours prior to the cable
service interruption.
      (3)   The franchisee shall maintain a written log or the equivalent
stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction on hard copy
of all cable service interruptions and requests for cable service.
   (b)   Requirements. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following
standards shall be met by a franchisee no less than 95% of the time, measured
on a quarterly basis.
      (1)   An installation located up to 200 feet from a franchisee's existing
distribution system shall be completed within the times specified in §
10-8-102(d).
      (2)   Excluding time required to obtain necessary permits, an
installation located more than 200 feet from a franchisee's existing
distribution system shall be completed within 60 days if extension of the
distribution system less than one-half mile is required, or within one year if
extension of the distribution system one-half mile or more is required.
      (3)   Work on other requests for service shall be commenced by the next
business day after notification of a problem, and the work shall be completed
within three days from the date of the notification. If, for reasons beyond the
franchisee's control, the work cannot be completed in the required time despite
the exercise of all due diligence, the franchisee shall complete the work in
the shortest time possible. A franchisee's failure to hire sufficient staff or
to train its staff properly does not justify a franchisee's failure to comply
with these requirements. Except as federal law otherwise provides, a charge may
not be made to the subscriber for work to correct a problem, except for the
cost of repairs to the franchisee's equipment or facilities if it can be
documented that the subscriber damaged the equipment or facilities.
   (c)   Normal business hours. At a minimum, a franchisee shall perform
installations and disconnects during normal business hours.
   (d)   Technicians. A franchisee shall maintain a force of technicians
capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following
time frames, including weekends:
      (1)   for a system outage, within two hours of receiving a subscriber
call that identifies a system outage of sound or picture of one or more
channels affecting at least 10% of the subscribers of the system;
      (2)   for an isolated outage, within 24 hours of receiving a request for
service that identifies an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more
channels; and
      (3)   for inferior reception quality, within 48 hours of receiving a
request for service that identifies a problem concerning picture or sound
quality.
   (e)   Response to service request. A franchisee has responded to a request
for service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at
the service location and begins work on the problem, or, if a technician's
presence at the service location is not necessary to diagnose and cure the
problem, when the franchisee has begun work on the problem elsewhere. If a
subscriber is not home when the technician arrives, response is considered to
have taken place if the technician leaves written notification of the
technician's arrival. The franchisee may not charge the subscriber for a
service call unless the service request can be demonstrated:
      (1)   both to have been repeated and not to have been based on a problem
originating with the cable system; or
      (2)   to involve subscriber negligence or misuse of equipment.
   (f)   Appointment window. The appointment window for installations and
service calls shall be a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block
during normal business hours. A franchisee may also offer longer appointment
windows so long as it also offers the customer the specified four-hour time
block.
   (g)   Cancellation of appointment. A franchisee may not cancel an
appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day
preceding the appointment. If a franchisee's representative is not able to keep
the appointment as scheduled, the subscriber shall be contacted and the
appointment rescheduled for a time convenient to the subscriber. Such
rescheduling shall not relieve the franchisee of responsibility for an improper
cancellation where the cancellation and rescheduling occurs after the close of
business on the business day preceding the original appointment.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-105. Verification of compliance.
   If the Information Technology Officer has information sufficient to give the
Officer reason to believe that the franchisee may not be in compliance with the
standards established in this title, the Information Technology Officer, on
reasonable notice, may require a franchisee to reasonably demonstrate
compliance with the standards required in this title. The franchisee shall
provide reasonably sufficient detail to permit the Information Technology
Officer to verify the extent of compliance.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-106. Overall quality of customer service.
   (a)   County evaluation. At any time, the Information Technology Officer may
evaluate the overall quality of customer service provided by a franchisee to
subscribers.
   (b)   Inadequate customer service. If the Information Technology Officer
determines that customer service quality fails to meet applicable standards,
the Officer may order a franchisee to cure the inadequacies within a reasonable
period of time.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-107. Complaints.
   (a)   Limitation on "subscriber complaint". For purposes of this section, a
subscriber complaint does not include a routine request for service that is
handled in the ordinary course of the franchisee's business.
   (b)   Written procedures. A franchisee shall establish and file with the
Information Technology Officer written procedures for receiving, acting on, and
resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the County. The written
procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit an oral
or written complaint that the franchisee has violated any provision of this
article or the terms and conditions of any subscriber contract with the
franchisee.
   (c)   Notice of results and proposed action or resolution. At the conclusion
of a franchisee's investigation of a subscriber complaint, but in no event more
than ten days after receiving the complaint, the franchisee shall notify the
subscriber of the results of the investigation and any proposed action or
resolution. At the subscriber's request, the notice shall be given in the same
manner as the complaint was made. The franchisee shall also notify the
subscriber of the subscriber's right to file a complaint with the Information
Technology Officer. A subscriber may not undertake other proceedings to resolve
a complaint until the procedure established by this subsection has been
exhausted.
   (d)   County review of complaint. A subscriber who is dissatisfied with the
franchisee's proposed action or resolution or who has not received a
notification within the ten-day period in the manner specified pursuant to
subsection (c) of this section may have the complaint reviewed by the County by
filing with the Information Technology Officer a written complaint and any
written notification from the franchisee within 20 days after receipt of the
franchisee's notification or, if no notification was provided, within 30 days
after filing the original complaint with the franchisee. The Information
Technology Officer shall notify the franchisee promptly after receipt of the
complaint. The Information Technology Officer may extend the time limits in
this subsection for reasonable cause.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-108. Information Technology Officer's review of complaints.
   (a)   Determination of further action. The Information Technology Officer
shall determine, based on a review of a subscriber complaint and any
notification by the franchisee and any prior discussions or correspondence,
whether further action on a complaint filed pursuant to §
10-8-107 is warranted. If the Information Technology Officer does not initiate
further action within 30 days of the filing of the complaint, the franchisee's
proposed action or resolution is final.
   (b)   Additional action. If the Information Technology Officer decides to
initiate further action, the Officer shall require the franchisee and the
subscriber to submit within ten days of notice to them a written statement of
the facts and arguments in support of their respective positions. The
franchisee or the subscriber may request in the statement that the Information
Technology Officer conduct a meeting with the franchisee and the subscriber.
   (c)   Discussion. If requested, the Information Technology Officer may
conduct a discussion, in person or by teleconference, following notice in
writing specifying the time and place for the discussion. The discussion shall
be conducted informally, and the parties may offer any evidence pertinent to
the dispute. The Information Technology Officer may require and the parties
shall produce any additional evidence, including test reports from the
franchisee, that the officer considers necessary to an understanding and
determination of the dispute.
   (d)   Written decision. The Information Technology Officer shall issue a
written decision that sets forth the basis for the decision within 15 days
after receipt of the written statements or, if a discussion is requested,
within 15 days after the conclusion of the discussion.
   (e)   Actions permitted. The Information Technology Officer may order any
action deemed appropriate, including adjustments to monthly service charges,
actual damages, specific performance, or liquidated damages that are specified
in a franchise agreement.
   (f)   Review of discussion. The Information Technology Officer's decision is
final, subject only to judicial review that is limited to a determination as to
whether the Officer acted arbitrarily, illegally, capriciously, or
unreasonably.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-109. Escrow account during pendency of complaint.
   The Information Technology Officer may establish an escrow account into
which a subscriber may deposit a disputed portion of the subscriber's monthly
service charge, unless the franchisee's own rules allow the subscriber to
withhold payment of any disputed amounts. If a subscriber continues to make
full and timely payment of all monthly service charges to the franchisee, the
subscriber deposits any disputed portions of the monthly service charges into
an escrow account, or the franchisee's own rules allow the subscriber to
withhold payment of any disputed amounts, then the franchisee may not
discontinue service during the pendency of a complaint submitted under the
provisions of this title. Any amount deposited in the escrow account shall be
paid to the franchisee or the subscriber in accordance with the Information
Technology Officer's final decision on a complaint.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-110. Notices by franchisee.
   (a)   Contents of notice to subscribers. Promptly after a subscriber is
connected or reconnected to a cable system and at least once annually
afterwards, a franchisee shall provide each subscriber with written information
concerning:
      (1)   the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the
name, address, local telephone number, and e-mail address of the franchisee's
employee or agent to whom inquiries or complaints are to be addressed;
      (2)   the County official responsible for regulating the franchise,
including the name, telephone number, and e-mail address of the official; and
      (3)   the franchisee's business hours, legal holidays, and procedures for
responding to inquiries after normal business hours.
   (b)   Notification of changes. A franchisee shall provide to all subscribers
at least 30 days' written notice before the implementation of any change in
rates, programming services, business hours, legal holidays, or procedures for
responding to inquiries after normal business hours, unless such change is
beyond the control of the franchisee, in which case the franchisee shall
provide the maximum possible notice up to the 30 days specified herein. Unless
waived by the Information Technology Officer, the franchisee shall provide to
the Information Technology Officer at least five business days before issuing
the subscriber notice the matters to be contained in the subscriber notice and
the text of the subscriber notice. If the text of the subscriber notice is not
available at least five business days before issuance of the subscriber notice,
it shall be provided to the Information Technology Officer as soon as it is
available.
   (c)   Copies submitted to County. A franchisee shall file copies of all
notices provided to subscribers with the Information Technology Officer.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-111. Rights of individuals.
   (a)   Discrimination prohibited. A franchisee may not deny service or access
or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, PEG access facility users, or
any individual on the basis of income, race, color, religion, national origin,
age, sexual orientation, or sex.
   (b)   Compliance with equal employment opportunity. A franchisee shall
adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of federal and State
laws and regulations.
   (c)   Privacy. A franchisee's policy with regard to personally identifiable
information shall be consistent with the applicable provisions of federal,
State, and local laws and regulations.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-112. Continuity of cable service mandatory.
   (a)   Continuity at transfer. If a franchisee transfers a cable system, the
franchisee shall cooperate with the County and the transferee in maintaining
continuity of cable service to all subscribers, such that, to the extent
reasonably possible, subscribers receive continuous uninterrupted cable
service.
   (b)   Continuity at termination. If a cable franchise terminates, the
franchisee shall cooperate with the County and any other providers of cable
service in maintaining continuity of cable service to all subscribers, such
that, to the extent reasonably possible, subscribers receive continuous
uninterrupted service. This provision shall not be construed to require a
franchisee to continue providing cable service after the termination date.
   (c)   Failure to operate system. If a franchisee whose franchise has not
been terminated fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days without
prior approval of the Information Technology Officer or without just cause, the
County may seek any legal or equitable remedies to ensure that operation of the
system is restored, including injunctive relief, and may seek damages on its
own behalf and on behalf of its citizens to remedy losses or harms resulting
from such failure.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-113. Identification of employees.
   Every employee of a franchisee or its contractors or subcontractors shall be
clearly identifiable on sight through identification badges or other indicia as
a representative of the franchisee. Every vehicle of the franchisee or its
contractors or subcontractors shall be similarly identifiable. The franchisee's
telephone number shall also be clearly marked on all of the franchisee's
vehicles, unless the franchisee maintains a publicly listed number that may be
used by any member of the public to contact an employee of the franchisee with
respect to actions of the franchisee's vehicles or employees. The telephone
number of a franchisee's contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly marked
on all of the contractors' or subcontractors' vehicles.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-114. Billing.
   (a)   General standards. Bills shall be clear, concise, and understandable.
Bills shall fully itemize cable services, equipment, and any other items for
which a franchisee charges a subscriber, including basic and premium service
charges and equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate all activity
during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits.
   (b)   Refunds. Refund checks to subscribers shall be issued promptly, but no
later than:
      (1)   the earlier of the subscriber's next available billing cycle or 30
days following resolution of the refund request; or
      (2)   the return of all equipment supplied by the franchisee if cable
service is terminated.
   (c)   Credits. Credits for cable service shall be issued no later than the
subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is
warranted.
   (d)   Prorated cable service. A franchisee's first billing statement after a
new installation or cable service change shall be prorated as appropriate and
shall reflect any security deposit.
   (e)   Payment information; late fees. A franchisee's billing statement shall
show a specific payment due date not earlier than the midpoint of the period
for which the cable service being billed is rendered. If a balance due is not
received by seven days after the end of the period for which the cable service
being billed is rendered, the franchisee may assess a late fee in accordance
with State and local law and judicial decisions. Any late fee shall appear on
the following month's billing statement.
   (f)   Right to remit payment in person. A franchisee shall inform the
subscriber of the right to remit payment in person at the franchisee's local
office or other bill payment locations, of the address of such locations, and
of the hours when such locations are open for business.
   (g)   Limitation on late fees or penalties. Subscribers may not be charged a
late fee or otherwise penalized for any billing error of a franchisee,
including a failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber or a failure to
properly credit the subscriber for a payment timely made.
   (h)   Credit for cable service outages.
      (1)   The provisions of this subsection do not apply if it can be
documented that a subscriber seeks a refund for an outage or impairment that
the subscriber caused or for a planned outage that occurred between the hours
of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of which the subscriber had proper prior notice.
      (2)   Upon the reasonably prompt request of a subscriber or without a
subscriber's request if the franchisee can identify the affected subscribers,
the account of a subscriber shall be credited a prorated share of the monthly
charge for cable service if the subscriber is without cable service for a
period that exceeds 12 hours during any 24-hour period, or cable service is
substantially impaired for any reason for a period that exceeds 12 hours during
any 24-hour period.
   (i)   Written response to billing complaints. A franchisee shall respond in
writing to a written billing complaint from a subscriber within 30 days of
receipt if the subscriber requests a written response.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-115. Disconnection and downgrades.
   (a)   Termination of cable service. A subscriber may terminate cable service
at any time.
   (b)   Franchisee duties. A franchisee shall promptly disconnect or downgrade
cable service to any subscriber upon the subscriber's request and may not
require a notice period before the disconnect or downgrade of service to a
subscriber. If the subscriber returns or permits the franchisee to retrieve any
equipment necessary to receive a service within five business days of the
disconnection, the franchisee may not impose a charge for any cable service
delivered after the date of the disconnect request.
   (c)   Return of equipment. A subscriber may be asked, but not required, to
disconnect a franchisee's equipment and return it to the business office. If a
franchisee fails to remove its property from a subscriber's premises within 60
days of the termination of cable service, the property shall be deemed
abandoned unless the subscriber is responsible for the franchisee's failure to
remove the property.
   (d)   Return of security deposit or other funds. Any security deposit or
other funds due the subscriber shall be refunded on disconnected accounts after
any customer premises equipment provided by the franchisee has been recovered
by the franchisee. The refund shall be made within the earlier of 30 days or by
the end of the next available billing cycle measured from the date
disconnection was requested. If later than these two dates, the refund shall be
made on the date on which any customer premises equipment provided by the
franchisee is returned.
   (e)   Disconnection of cable service. If a subscriber fails to pay a monthly
subscriber fee or other fee or charge, a franchisee may disconnect the
subscriber's cable service after 35 days from the beginning of the period for
which the cable service being billed is rendered as set forth in this
subsection. After 35 days from the beginning of the period for which the cable
service being billed is rendered, at least ten days' advance written notice of
the intent to disconnect must be given to the subscriber. If the subscriber
pays all amounts due, including any late charges, before the date scheduled for
disconnection, the franchisee may not disconnect cable service. After
disconnection, upon payment by the subscriber in full of all proper fees or
charges, including the payment of any reconnection charge, the franchisee shall
promptly reinstate cable service.
   (f)   Immediate disconnection permitted. A franchisee may immediately
disconnect a subscriber if the subscriber is damaging or destroying the
franchisee's cable system or equipment. After disconnection, the franchisee
shall restore cable service if the subscriber provides adequate assurance that
the subscriber has ceased the practices that led to disconnection and paid all
proper fees and charges, including any reconnect fees and amounts owed the
franchisee for damage to its cable system or equipment.
   (g)   Disconnection for signal leakage. A franchisee may disconnect a
subscriber who causes signal leakage in excess of federal limits. Disconnection
may occur either:
      (1)   after five days' written notice to the subscriber, if the
subscriber fails to take steps to correct the problem; or
      (2)   without notice if signal leakage is detected originating from the
subscriber's premises in excess of federal limits, provided that the franchisee
shall immediately notify the subscriber of the problem and, once the problem is
corrected, reconnect the subscriber.
   (h)   Reconnection. A franchisee shall reconnect cable service to a
subscriber who wishes to have the subscriber's cable service restored if the
subscriber first satisfies any previously owed obligations.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-116. Changes in cable service.
   (a)   Notice of change to cable service. When a franchisee substantially
alters the cable service it provides to a class of subscribers, the franchisee
shall provide each subscriber notice as required in §
10-8-110(b), explain the substance and full effect of the alteration, and
provide the subscriber with the right to choose to receive any combination of
cable services offered by the franchisee.
   (b)   Charges for authorized cable services only. A franchisee may not
charge for any cable service or product that the subscriber has not
affirmatively indicated the subscriber wishes to receive. Payment of the
regular monthly bill does not constitute such an affirmative indication.
   (c)   Requirement to purchase cable service other than basic service.
Subject to federal law, a franchisee who does not have effective competition
may not require a subscriber to purchase a cable service other than basic
service as a condition of purchasing premium or pay-per-view programming.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-117. Parental control option.
   Upon the request of a subscriber, a franchisee shall make available to each
subscriber, either for rent or for purchase or both, the option of blocking the
video and audio portion of any channel or channels of programming entering the
subscriber's home. The control option shall be made available to all
subscribers requesting it at the time that cable service is provided or within
a reasonable time thereafter.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-118. Anti-competitive acts prohibited.
   A franchisee may not engage in unlawful acts that have the purpose or effect
of limiting competition for the provision of cable service or services similar
to cable service in the County.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-8-119. Local office.
   A franchisee having 45,000 or more subscribers in the County shall have at
least one local office located within the County or, with the Information
Technology Officer's consent, which shall not be unreasonably withheld, in
another convenient location that is open during normal business hours to accept
subscriber bill payments, service requests, and complaints, and for
distribution and acceptance of equipment. At all times, a franchisee shall
provide for the delivery, exchange, or retrieval of equipment by dispatching a
representative of the franchisee to the subscriber's premises, using a pre-paid
mailer, or establishing locations.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 9. LANDLORD AND TENANT RIGHTS
Section
   
10-9-101.   Definitions.
   
10-9-102.   Installation to be permitted.
   
10-9-103.   Compensation.
   
10-9-104.   Enforcement.
§ 10-9-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Landlord" means a person who owns, leases, controls, or manages a
multiple-dwelling unit.
      (2)   "Multiple-dwelling unit" means a dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units or a non-owner-occupied dwelling containing two units, but does
not include a structure or group of structures having living or sleeping
accommodations used primarily for transient occupancy.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-9-102. Installation to be permitted.
   (a)   Findings. Access to PEG programming and other cable services is an
important benefit for all residents of the County and arbitrary denial of
access to tenants by a landlord is contrary to the public interest.
   (b)   Landlord to permit installation. A landlord may not prohibit or
otherwise prevent a franchisee from entering a multiple-dwelling unit for the
purpose of constructing, installing, or servicing cable system equipment if a
tenant or occupant of the unit has requested cable service. A franchisee may
not make an installation in an individual dwelling unit unless permission has
been given by the tenant occupying the unit.
   (c)   Nondiscrimination in rent. A landlord may not discriminate in rental
or other charges based on cable service subscription. The owner of the real
property may require compensation in exchange for permitting the installation
of cable system equipment within and on the real property only in accordance
with the provisions of §
10-9-103.
   (d)   Franchisee obligations to landlord. A landlord may require a
franchisee to install cable system equipment in the multiple-dwelling unit at
no cost to the landlord and indemnify the landlord for any damage that results
from the installation or removal of cable system equipment.
   (e)   Sanctions for violation. A landlord's violation of this section
constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of an owner's multiple-
dwelling operating license issued under §§
11-10-101 et seq. of this Code.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-9-103. Compensation.
   (a)   Compensation in excess of $1. If a landlord intends to require the
payment of more than $1 per individual dwelling unit to allow the installation
of cable system facilities or equipment, the landlord shall serve written
notice on the franchisee within 20 days of the date the landlord is notified
that a franchisee intends to construct or install facilities or equipment in
the landlord's multiple dwelling. Unless timely notice is given by the landlord
to the franchisee, it is conclusively presumed that the landlord does not claim
or intend to require the payment of a sum in excess of a one-time payment of
$1in exchange and as compensation for permitting the installation of cable
system facilities or equipment.
   (b)   Reasonable compensation. A landlord who has given timely notice to a
franchisee may assert a claim for reasonable compensation in excess of $1 for
permitting the installation of cable system facilities or equipment. Within 30
days after the landlord gives notice of intent to demand additional
compensation, the landlord shall advise the franchisee in writing of the amount
claimed as reasonable compensation.
   (c)   Action to enforce claim of compensation. If within 60 days after the
receipt of the landlord's claim a franchisee has not agreed to pay the amount
claimed or some other amount acceptable to the landlord, the landlord may file
an action in court to enforce the claim for compensation. In any such action,
it shall be presumed that reasonable compensation is $1, but the presumption
may be rebutted and overcome by evidence that:
      (1)   the landlord has a specific alternative use for the space occupied
by the cable system facilities or equipment, the loss of which results in a
monetary loss to the landlord; or
      (2)   installation of cable system facilities or equipment in the
multiple-dwelling unit will otherwise substantially interfere with the use and
occupancy of the unit to an extent that causes a decrease in the resale or
rental value of the real property.
   (d)   Determination of damages. In determining damages when no part of the
real property is being taken, consideration shall be given only to an injury
that is special and peculiar to the real property. The amount of any benefit to
the real property by reason of the installation of cable system facilities or
equipment shall be deducted from the damages awarded.
   (e)   Limitations on compensation. The landlord is not entitled to
compensation based on a claim of lost profits or business opportunity from an
existing or proposed satellite, microwave, or master antenna television system
servicing the multiple-dwelling unit.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-9-104. Enforcement.
   (a)   Franchisee rights. The right of a franchisee to construct, install, or
maintain its cable facilities or equipment in a multiple-dwelling unit may not
be delayed or impaired by:
      (1)   the giving of the notice described in §
10-9-103;
      (2)   the assertion of a specific claim by a landlord; or
      (3)   the initiation by a landlord of legal action to enforce a claim.
   (b)   Unauthorized interference by landlord. If a landlord interferes with a
franchisee's installation of cable facilities or equipment in a manner not
authorized by this title, a tenant or occupant or the franchisee may seek a
court order to enjoin the landlord from further interference.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 10. REPORTS; RECORDS; INSPECTIONS
Section
   
10-10-101.   Annual reports.
   
10-10-102.   Annual statement of gross revenues.
   
10-10-103.   Copies of State and federal reports.
   
10-10-104.   Public reports.
   
10-10-105.   Complaint file and reports.
   
10-10-106.   Inspection of facilities.
   
10-10-107.   Open books and records.
   
10-10-108.   Records required.
   
10-10-109.   Quarterly report.
   
10-10-110.   Telephone statistics report.
§ 10-10-101. Annual reports.
   Within 120 days after the close of a franchisee's fiscal year, the
franchisee shall submit a written annual report in the format provided by the
County, including:
      (1)   a summary of the previous year's activities in development of the
cable system, including cable services begun or discontinued during the
reporting year and the number of subscribers for each class and service tier;
      (2)   a statement generally describing any projected construction for the
next two years;
      (3)   a list of the franchisee's principals, including officers and
directors;
      (4)   a list of stockholders or other equity investors holding at least
5% of the voting interest in the franchisee and any parent, unless the parent
is a public corporation whose annual reports are publicly available; and
      (5)   a map of the County showing the areas in which the franchisee
offers cable service as of the end of the fiscal year.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-10-102. Annual statement of gross revenues.
   (a)   Generally. On an annual basis within 90 days after the close of a
franchisee's fiscal year, a franchisee shall furnish to the County a financial
statement based on the definition of gross revenues set forth in the franchise
agreement showing the sources and amounts of gross revenues for that fiscal
year, including all contra-expenses, offsets, deductions, exclusions, and other
amounts applied during that year that have the effect of reducing gross
revenues. The statement shall be audited by an independent certified public
accountant.
   (b)   Independent review. After providing ten days' prior written notice,
the County may conduct an independent audit of the franchisee's records. If the
audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of 5% or more, the franchisee
shall assume all reasonable costs of the audit.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-10-103. Copies of State and federal reports.
   (a)   Required report. A franchisee shall submit to the County copies of all
pleadings, applications, notifications, and documents of any kind with respect
to its provision of cable service within the franchise area that are submitted
by the franchisee to any federal or State court or to any federal, State, or
local regulatory agency or governmental body, together with copies of all
decisions, correspondence, and documents evidencing actions by those courts,
regulatory agencies, or governmental bodies.
   (b)   Confidentiality. If a franchisee clearly identifies information as
confidential or proprietary, then, to the maximum extent permissible under
applicable federal, State, and local laws related to public records, the County
may not disclose that information to the public. If the County determines that
information is not clearly identified or that information identified as
confidential or proprietary is subject to public disclosure, the County shall
notify the franchisee that the County intends to disclose the requested
information unless ordered otherwise by a court. The County shall provide the
notice to franchisee to allow sufficient time for the franchisee to seek a
court order to protect such information from disclosure.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-10-104. Public reports.
   Within 30 days after receipt of a request, a franchisee shall submit to the
Information Technology Officer a copy of each of the franchisee's annual and
other periodic public financial reports and those of its parents, subsidiaries,
and affiliated corporations and entities.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-10-105. Complaint file and reports.
   (a)   Maintenance of file. A franchisee shall keep an accurate and
comprehensive file of all complaints regarding the cable system and the
franchisee's actions in response to those complaints. These files and reports
shall be available to the County and for public inspection during normal
business hours.
   (b)   Summary of service interruptions. A franchisee shall maintain a log
and summary of all cable service interruptions during the term of the
franchise. The log and summary shall be available to the County and for public
inspection during normal business hours.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-10-106. Inspection of facilities.
   (a)   County inspection authorized. The County may inspect all cable system
facilities and conduct any tests that the County deems necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of this article, the franchise agreement, and other
pertinent provisions of law. If a test is to be conducted at a location other
than a subscriber's premises, the County shall first provide the franchisee
with an opportunity to approve the test or type of test, which approval shall
not unreasonably be withheld, conditioned, or delayed.
   (b)   Franchisee to permit County inspection and tests. A franchisee shall
allow the County to make inspections and conduct tests at any time on at least
ten days' notice or, in case of an emergency, on demand without prior notice,
to allow the County to verify the accuracy of any submitted report.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-10-107. Open books and records.
   (a)   Policy of open books and records. A franchisee shall manage all of its
cable system operations in accordance with a policy of open books and records.
   (b)   Inspection of books and records.  Upon at least 30 days' prior written
notice to the franchisee, or at ten business days' prior written notice to the
franchisee if there are compelling circumstances, the County shall have the
right to inspect the franchisee's books and records pertaining to the operation
under the franchise at any time during normal business hours as reasonably
necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the franchise agreement, this
article, and applicable law. The inspections shall be conducted in a manner
that will not unreasonably disrupt the franchisee's normal operations. The
notice shall specifically reference the records that the County desires to
review, so that the franchisee may organize the necessary books and records for
appropriate access by the County. The franchisee shall not be required to
maintain any books and records for franchise compliance purposes longer than
three years.
   (c)   Costs of examination. If any books or records that relate to the cable
system are not kept in any local office or are not made available to the County
at a location requested by the County, and if the County determines that
inspection of the records is necessary to the performance of any of the
County's responsibilities under this article, the franchisee shall pay all
reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the County in making the
inspection.
   (d)   Confidentiality to be maintained. The County shall maintain the
confidentiality of any trade secrets or other proprietary information in the
possession of the franchisee, and the records shall be exempt from inspection
under this section to the extent required by applicable law regarding
subscriber privacy. If a franchisee clearly and appropriately identifies
information as confidential or proprietary, then to the maximum extent
permissible under applicable federal, State, and local laws related to public
records, the County may not disclose that information to the public. If the
County determines that information is not clearly or appropriately identified,
the County shall notify the franchisee that the County intends to disclose the
requested information unless ordered otherwise by a court. The County shall
provide the notice to franchisee to allow sufficient time for the franchisee to
seek a court order to protect such information from disclosure.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-10-108. Records required.
   (a)   Records retained at local office. A franchisee shall maintain at all
times within its local office a complaint file required by §
10-10-105 and a copy of its franchise agreement.
   (b)   Records to be filed with County and posted. The franchisee shall file
copies of the following items with the Information Technology Officer and post
them conspicuously for public inspection in the franchisee's local office:
      (1)   franchisee's schedule of charges;
      (2)   franchisee's contract or application forms for basic service;
      (3)   franchisee's policy for the processing of subscriber complaints;
and
      (4)   franchisee's delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect
procedures.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-10-109. Quarterly report.
   Beginning six months after a franchisee first begins to provide cable
service in the County, a franchisee shall complete for each quarter within 30
days after the end of the quarter a report containing the following
information:
      (1)   a summary of customer service requests identifying the number and
nature of the requests and their disposition;
      (2)   a summary showing the number, address, and nature of service calls
during the quarter;
      (3)   the total number of subscribers at the end of the quarter;
      (4)   details of any special offers made to subscribers that concluded
during the quarter or lasted for more than 90 days as of the end of the
quarter;
      (5)   results of any proof of performance tests conducted on the cable
system during the quarter; and
      (6)   the status of any rebuild, any deployment of facilities affecting
the cable system, or any major new construction in progress during the quarter.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-10-110. Telephone statistics report.
   (a)   Required. The franchisee shall maintain and organize statistics on a
quarterly basis for all telephone calls received in each month, whether the
calls are received directly by the franchisee or by an answering service. The
statistics shall address telephone answer time, including wait time; telephone
transfer time; percentage of customers receiving a busy signal; and response
time by trained customer service representatives to telephone inquiries
received after normal business hours. The statistics shall be in a form
sufficient to enable the County to determine whether the standards specified in
this article are being met.
   (b)   Submission to County. Unless the franchise agreement or applicable law
requires that the telephone statistics be provided more often, a franchisee
shall submit the statistics in a report to the Information Technology Officer
by the tenth day of the month after each calendar quarter, beginning six months
after the franchisee first begins to provide cable service in the County. The
report shall show the statistics for each month in the three-month period, plus
quarterly totals. If a franchise agreement or applicable law requires that
these statistics be provided more often than once in each quarter, they shall
be provided as specified in the franchise agreement or other applicable law.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 11. FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS;
TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE
Section
   
10-11-101.   Procedure for remedying franchise violations.
   
10-11-102.   Monetary remedies.
   
10-11-103.   Revocation.
   
10-11-104.   Procedures in event of termination.
   
10-11-105.   Termination on account of certain assignments or appointments.
   
10-11-106.   Force majeure.
   
10-11-107.   No recourse against County.
   
10-11-108.   Nonenforcement by County.
§ 10-11-101. Procedure for remedying franchise violations.
   (a)   Written demand to remedy. If the Information Technology Officer
determines that a franchisee has failed to perform any obligation under the
franchise or has failed to perform in a timely manner, the Officer may make a
written demand on the franchisee that it remedy the violation. If the violation
is not remedied or in the process of being remedied to the satisfaction of the
Information Technology Officer within a reasonable time following the demand,
the Officer may:
      (1)   assess against the franchisee monetary damages as provided in §
10-11-102;
      (2)   request revocation of the franchise as provided in §
10-11-103; or
      (3)   pursue any legal or equitable remedy available under the franchise
agreement or any applicable law.
   (b)   Remedies cumulative. Remedies available to the County for franchise
violations under this article and under a franchise agreement shall be
construed, except as otherwise provided in this article, as cumulative and not
alternative.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-11-102. Monetary remedies.
   (a)   Liquidated damages authorized. For a franchisee's violation of this
article or its franchise agreement, the Information Technology Officer may
assess against the franchisee liquidated damages up to the limits established
in the franchise agreement and assess and withdraw the liquidated damages from
the franchisee's security fund as provided in its franchise agreement.
   (b)   Civil penalties. For a franchisee's violation of this article or its
franchise agreement, the Information Technology Officer may assess against the
franchisee civil penalties up to the limits specified in the chart contained in
this subsection and assess and withdraw the civil penalties from the
franchisee's security fund as provided in its franchise agreement.
Violation                               Civil Penalty
Construction delays or upgrade-related
delays where a franchise requires a     $500 per day.
construction or upgrade schedule
Violation of customer service standards $100 per day or per occurrence, as
                                        applicable.
Failure to comply with PEG access       $135 per day, in addition to any
requirements                            monetary payment due.
Failure to supply information, reports, $200 per day.
or filings lawfully required
Failure to render payments due to the   $100 per day, in addition to any
County, such as franchise fees or       monetary payment due.
liquidated damages
Failure to file, obtain, or maintain a  $50 per day.
bond in a timely fashion
Failure to restore damaged property     $50 per day, in addition to the cost of
                                        the restoration.
Violation of technical standards of the $100 per day.
FCC
Any other violations of this article, a $200 per day for each violation for
franchise agreement, or other law       each day the violation continues.
applicable to a cable system operator
 
   (c)   Payment of civil penalty. A franchisee shall pay a civil penalty
assessed in accordance with this article within 30 days after receipt of notice
from the County.
   (d)   Offset of penalties. If civil penalties are assessed against a
franchisee under this section, the franchisee is not subject to liquidated
damages payable to the County for the same violation. If liquidated damages
payable to the County are assessed against a franchisee, the franchisee is not
subject to civil penalties under this section for the same violation. If the
County seeks actual damages for any violation, any penalties or liquidated
damages recovered by the County for the same violation, including penalties or
liquidated damages for partial time periods included in a longer time period
for which actual damages are sought, shall be offset against any actual damages
recovered by the County.
   (e)   Filing of appeal does not stay or release obligations. The filing of
an appeal to any regulatory body or court does not stay or release the
obligations of a franchisee under the franchise agreement and applicable law.
This provision reflects in part the obligations of a franchisee under
applicable law and may not be construed to waive any right or obligation of the
County or a franchisee.
   (f)   No waiver of rights or remedies. An assessment of liquidated damages
or civil penalties does not constitute a waiver by the County of any other
right or remedy it may have under the franchise or applicable law, including
its right to recover from the franchisee any additional damages, losses, costs,
attorney fees, and expenses that were incurred by the County by reason of or
arising out of the violation. The County's election of liquidated damages under
the franchise agreement shall take the place of any right to obtain actual
damages over and above the payment of any amounts otherwise due. This provision
may not be construed to prevent the County from electing to seek actual damages
for a continuing violation if it has imposed civil penalties or liquidated
damages for an earlier partial time period for the same violation, subject to
the offset specified in subsection (d).
   (g)   Civil penalties. The following amounts shall apply in place of those
specified in §
10-11-102(b) when assessing civil penalties for violations of customer service
standards that are measured on a quarterly basis:
      (1)   for the first calendar quarter in which a franchisee does not meet
the prescribed standard (a "noncompliant quarter"), the franchisee will be
subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500;
      (2)   for a second consecutive noncompliant quarter, a franchisee shall
be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $2,000; and
      (3)   for each consecutive noncompliant quarter beyond the second, a
franchisee shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $4,000.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-11-103. Revocation.
   (a)   Standards for revocation. The County may revoke a franchise and
rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the following
circumstances, each of which represents a default and a material breach of the
franchise:
      (1)   a franchisee's failure to perform any of its material obligations
under this article or under any franchise agreements or other agreements or
understandings entered into in connection with such a franchise agreement
between the County and the franchisee;
      (2)   a second consecutive failure of more than 10% of locations tested
under §
10-6-102;
      (3)   a repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the
consumer standards set forth in §§
10-8-101 et seq.;
      (4)   a franchisee's failure to provide continuous and uninterrupted
cable service; or
      (5)   a franchisee engaging in any fraud or deceit upon the County under
this article or the franchise agreement.
   (b)   Revocation procedure. 
      (1)   After complying with §
10-11-101, as applicable, the Information Technology Officer shall hold an
informal meeting with the franchisee to review the alleged violation. If the
meeting does not result in resolution satisfactory to the Information
Technology Officer, the Information Technology Officer may issue a notice of
intent to revoke the franchise that describes the reasons for the intended
revocation.
      (2)   The franchisee shall have the right to demand a public
administrative hearing before a Hearing Officer selected by the Information
Technology Officer. The demand shall be filed with the Information Technology
Officer no later than 30 days after the date of the notice of intent to revoke
the franchise, and shall include a response to each of the reasons given for
the intended revocation. The Hearing Officer shall be a person with experience
in evidentiary proceedings.
      (3)   At least 30 days prior to the administrative hearing, the County
shall serve upon the franchisee a written notice specifying the time and place
of such hearing and stating that its subject is the revocation of the franchise
and the reasons the revocation is being sought.
      (4)   The Hearing Officer shall have the authority to issue subpoenas in
the manner set forth in §
1-1-101, and to administer oaths as described in §
1-1-102. The Hearing Officer shall admit probative evidence that reasonable and
prudent individuals commonly accept in the conduct of their affairs, and shall
exclude evidence regarded as privileged under Maryland law.
      (5)   At the administrative hearing, both the franchisee and the
Information Technology Officer shall be provided a fair opportunity for full
participation, including the rights to be represented by legal counsel and to
introduce probative evidence. The hearing shall be recorded or a verbatim
transcript shall be made by the County. Following the conclusion of the
hearing, the franchisee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to submit
written proposed findings and conclusions.
      (6)   The Hearing Officer shall prepare a written recommendation on
whether the franchise should be revoked. A recommendation for revocation shall
include findings of fact and conclusions on each of the reasons for the
revocation. The recommendation of the Hearing Officer is not a final
administrative decision appealable to the Board of Appeals.
      (7)   A recommendation for revocation shall be brought before the County
Council in the form of an ordinance approving the recommendation of the Hearing
Officer. The records of the administrative hearing shall be placed in the
record before the County Council. No additional evidentiary hearing is required
before the County Council, but the franchisee shall have a reasonable and fair
opportunity to be heard.
      (8)   The County Council may either approve or decline to approve the
ordinance revoking the franchise. If the ordinance is passed and becomes law,
the franchise shall be deemed revoked as of the effective date of the
ordinance, the security fund and bonds shall be deemed forfeited, and the
franchisee shall be required to pay the costs of the administrative hearing
described in this section. If the County Council does not approve the
ordinance, the franchise shall continue in full force and effect, and the
franchisee shall not be required to pay the costs of the administrative
hearing.
§ 10-11-104. Procedures in event of termination.
   (a)   Generally. If a franchise is revoked, expires, or is otherwise
terminated, and the franchisee does not have other authority to maintain and
operate its franchise in the County's public rights-of-way, then, to the extent
not inconsistent with 47 U.S.C. § 541(b)(3), the County may order the
franchisee to:
      (1)   remove above-ground system facilities from the franchise area
within a reasonable period of time as determined by the County; or
      (2)   maintain and operate its cable system as trustee for its successor
in interest for a period not to exceed 24 months from the date of termination
and provide cable services of the types provided before termination in
accordance with the provisions of this article and the terms of the franchise
agreement.
   (b)   Removal of plants, structures, and equipment. In removing its plant,
structures, and equipment pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the
franchisee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that is made by it
and shall leave all roads and public places in as good a condition as that
prevailing before removal and without affecting electrical or telephone cable
wires or attachments. All applicable indemnification and insurance
requirements, the security fund, and the construction and performance bonds
shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until
full compliance by the franchisee with the provisions of this section.
   (c)   Failure to complete work. If a franchisee fails to complete any work
required by subsection (a) or (b) or any other work required by law within 90
days after receipt of written notice and to the satisfaction of the County, the
County may cause the work to be done and:
      (1)   the franchisee shall reimburse the County for the costs incurred
within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of the costs; or
      (2)   the County may recover the costs through the security fund or bonds
provided by the franchisee.
   (d)   Enforcement. The County may seek legal and equitable relief to enforce
the provisions of this section.
   (e)   No limitation on County rights. The termination of a franchise does
not affect any of the rights of the County under any provision of law.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-11-105. Termination on account of certain assignments or appointments.
   (a)   Generally. A franchise shall be deemed revoked 120 days after an
assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or
trustee to take over the business of a franchisee, whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other
action or proceeding. The franchise may be reinstated at the County's sole
discretion if within that 120-day period:
      (1)   the assignment, receivership, or trusteeship is vacated; or
      (2)   the assignee, receiver, or trustee fully complies with the terms
and conditions of this article and the applicable franchise agreement and
executes an agreement, approved by a court, under which it assumes and agrees
to be bound by the terms and conditions of this article, the terms and
conditions of the franchise agreement, and any other conditions established or
required by applicable law.
   (b)   Service of notice of revocation. In the event of foreclosure or other
judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment, or property of a franchisee,
the County may revoke the franchise following a public hearing before the
County Council by serving notice on the franchisee and the successful bidder,
in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise
will be revoked and will terminate 30 days after serving the notice unless the
County has approved the transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder and
the successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the County to assume and
be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and this
article.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-11-106. Force majeure.
   (a)   Generally. If a franchisee's performance of any of the terms,
conditions, obligations, or requirements of the franchise is prevented or
impaired due to any cause beyond the franchisee's reasonable control, the
inability to perform shall be excused and penalties or sanctions may not be
imposed. The franchisee shall notify the Information Technology Officer in
writing within 30 days of its discovery of the occurrence of an event beyond
its reasonable control.
   (b)   Scope of "force majeure". Causes beyond a franchisee's reasonable
control include acts of god and civil emergencies. The County and the
franchisee may further define "causes beyond a franchisee's reasonable control"
or "force majeure" in the franchise agreement.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-11-107. No recourse against County.
   A franchisee has no recourse against the County for any loss, costs,
expenses, or damages arising out of any provision or requirement of the
franchise or because of the enforcement of the franchise. This section does not
preclude recourse by a franchisee if the loss, costs, expenses, or damages
arise from willful misconduct by the County.
(Bill No. 54-06)
§ 10-11-108. Nonenforcement by County.
   A franchisee is not relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of this article or the franchise agreement by reason of any failure
of the County to enforce prompt compliance.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 12. DISPUTE RESOLUTION; ARBITRATION
Section
   
10-12-101.   Arbitration.
§ 10-12-101. Arbitration.
   (a)   Arbitration panel. Matters expressly made arbitrable under this
article or a franchise agreement are subject to the Maryland Uniform
Arbitration Act and shall be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the
Information Technology Officer and the franchisee. If the Information
Technology Officer and the franchisee cannot agree on an arbitrator, then the
Information Technology Officer shall choose one arbitrator, and the franchisee
shall choose a second arbitrator within ten days after notice of the officer's
selection. The first two arbitrators shall choose a third arbitrator. If the
first two arbitrators fail to agree on a third arbitrator, either or both shall
apply to the American Arbitration Association or its successor organization to
name the third arbitrator. These three arbitrators shall act by majority vote.
Unless the majority of the panel agrees otherwise, the third arbitrator shall
be the presiding officer.
   (b)   Costs. Each party shall bear the expenses of its own representation
before the arbitration panel. Unless otherwise provided in this article, the
expenses of the arbitration shall be borne as determined by the arbitration
panel in its award or finding.
   (c)   Decision binding. In the absence of fraud or collusion, the
determination of a majority of the arbitration panel is binding on the parties
without recourse to the courts, except as provided by the rules of the American
Arbitration Association or State law. The arbitration shall be conducted in
accordance with the commercial arbitration rules of the American Arbitration
Association.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 13. TAMPERING WITH CABLE SYSTEM
Section
   
10-13-101.    Theft of cable service.
§ 10-13-101. Theft of cable service.
   (a)   Theft of cable service prohibited. A person may not make an
unauthorized connection, physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively,
or otherwise, to a franchisee's system for the purpose of receiving television
signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds, or other information or
intelligence transmitted over a franchisee's cable system.
   (b)   Tampering prohibited. Without the consent of the franchisee or
agreement with utility companies, a person may not willfully tamper with,
alter, remove, or injure cable, wires, or other equipment used for the
distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sounds,
or other information or intelligence transmitted over the franchisee's cable
system.
   (c)   Sanctions for violation. A person who violates a provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
exceeding $500, imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.
(Bill No. 54-06)
TITLE 14. PRIVACY
Section
   
10-14-101.    Protection of privacy.
§ 10-14-101. Protection of privacy.
   (a)   Privacy rights. Without prior written permission from a subscriber, a
franchisee may not, except in accordance with practices permitted by 47 U.S.C.
§ 551, sell, distribute, or make available personally identifiable information
relating to a subscriber, including the subscriber's name, address, telephone
number, viewing habits, and, except in accordance with normal credit practices,
account billing and payment history.
   (b)   Subscriber permission. A subscriber's prior written permission shall
be on a form provided by the franchisee. The form shall state a duration not to
exceed one year and the purpose for which and by whom the collected data will
be utilized. A subscriber may revoke the authorization without cost or penalty
by delivering to the franchisee in writing an indication of intent to revoke.
   (c)   Request of personally identifiable subscriber information. A
franchisee shall refuse a request to make personally identifiable subscriber
information available to a government agency in the absence of legal compulsion
or authorization by the subscriber. If a request for subscriber information is
made by a government agency, the franchisee shall notify the subscriber
promptly and, in any event, before responding, unless prohibited by law.
   (d)   Subscriber rights to examine and correct information. A franchisee
shall permit a subscriber to examine and copy at the office of the franchisee
in the County during normal business hours all information developed by the
franchisee about that subscriber. Copying costs shall be borne by the
subscriber. The franchisee shall correct the records on a reasonable showing by
the subscriber that the information is inaccurate.
(Bill No. 54-06)
ARTICLE 11. LICENSES AND REGISTRATIONS
   Title
      
1.   DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   AMUSEMENTS
      
3.   AUCTIONEERS
      
4.   CONSTRUCTION TRADE LICENSES
      
5.   FIRES
      
6.   FOOD SERVICE FACILITIES
      
6A.   HOTELS
      
7.   HUCKSTERS
      
8.   LIQUID WASTE HAULERS
      
9.   MANUFACTURED MOBILE HOMES
      
9A.   MASSAGE THERAPY
      
10.   MULTIPLE DWELLINGS AND ROOMING HOUSES
      
11.   SPECIAL EVENTS
      
12.   PAWNBROKERS
      
12A.   SECOND-HAND DEALER LICENSE
      
13.   ROADSIDE VENDORS
      
13A.   SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTALS
      
14.   SWIMMING POOLS
      
15.   TAXICABS
      
16.   TOWING COMPANIES
      
17.   UNATTENDED DONATION BOXES
TITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
11-1-101.   Definitions.
   
11-1-102.   Administration.
   
11-1-103.   General requirements.
   
11-1-104.   Right of entry.
   
11-1-105.   Civil enforcement.
   
11-1-106.   Stop-work orders.
§ 11-1-101. Definitions.
   In this article, "Department" means the Department of Inspections and
Permits and "Director" means the Director of Inspections and Permits or the
Director's designee.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 1-101)
§ 11-1-102. Administration.
   The Director and the Department shall administer and enforce the provisions
of this article, except that:
      (1)   provisions relating to massage therapy establishments shall be
administered and enforced as provided in
Title 9A;
      (2)   provisions relating to multiple dwellings and rooming houses shall
be administered and enforced as provided in
Title 10;
      (3)   provisions relating to nonconsensual towing companies and parking
lot owners shall be administered and enforced as provided in
Title 16; and
      (4)   provisions relating to fires, food service facilities, and swimming
pools shall be administered and enforced by the Health Officer and the Health
Department.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 1-102) (Bill. No. 52-13; Bill No. 76-22)
§ 11-1-103. General requirements.
   (a)   Applications. To apply for a license required under this article, an
applicant shall file an application on the form required by the Department or
the Health Department, as applicable.
   (b)   Fees. No license may be issued or renewed until the applicant pays the
required fee. Fees may not be refunded or prorated.
   (c)   Falsification of information. Any person who falsifies information
required or provided under this article shall be disqualified from becoming or
continuing as a licensee.
   (d)   Insurance. A licensee shall maintain workers' compensation insurance
in the amount and manner required by the Maryland Workers' Compensation Law. A
licensee required to maintain other insurance by this article shall provide
insurance with a carrier licensed to offer insurance in this State or, for
qualified Maryland taxicab companies, a valid certificate of self-insurance
issued by the State of Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration pursuant to the
Transportation Article of the State Code and COMAR 11.18.02.01, et seq. and
11.18.02.04 as a Class B self-insurer, provide the Director with a copy of a
certificate of the required insurance or self-insurance, and, except for a
State-certified self-insured Maryland taxicab company, make the policy
available for inspection upon request. The policy shall require 30 days'
written notice of cancellation to the licensee and the County, except that
construction trade licensees, liquid waste haulers, and pawnbrokers shall
provide notice of cancellation to the Department within 10 days of the
cancellation date. A license shall be suspended on a provisional basis without
a hearing if the licensee fails to maintain all insurance required by this
article.
   (e)   Compliance with other law. In addition to compliance with this
article, a licensee shall comply with all applicable federal, State, and County
law and regulations.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 1-103, 2-311, 2-320, 2-629) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No.
21-12)
§ 11-1-104. Right of entry.
   The County may enter on property or into a structure without advance notice
during reasonable hours to make inspections to ensure compliance with this
article.
§ 11-1-105. Civil enforcement.
   (a)   Generally. The County may enforce the provisions of this article
through injunctive proceedings, an action for specific performance, or any
other appropriate proceedings.
   (b)   Civil fines. It is a Class D civil offense for a person to violate any
provision of this article.
   (c)   Remedies are cumulative. The remedies available under this section are
cumulative and not exclusive. Initiation of criminal proceedings under §
9-1-101 of this Code or civil proceedings under this section does not preclude
administrative action to suspend or revoke a license based on the same
violation.
State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-202.
§ 11-1-106. Stop-work orders.
   (a)   Issuance. The County may issue a stop-work order to a licensee who is
engaging in any activity in violation of this article or who is doing work on a
structure in violation of this Code or otherwise in an unsafe and dangerous
manner. The stop-work order shall state the conditions under which the work or
activity may be resumed. It shall be served by posting on the site and by
delivery to the owner of the property, the owner's agent, or the person doing
the work. Upon service of the order, the work or activity shall be stopped
immediately, except for work or activity directed to be performed to remove a
violation or unsafe condition.
   (b)   Civil fine. It is a Class D civil offense for a person to continue any
activity or work in violation of a stop-work order.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 6-401.1, 14-401.1) (Bill No. 11-86; Bill No. 12-86)
TITLE 2. AMUSEMENTS
Section
Subtitle 1. General Provisions
   
11-2-101.   Inspections by Police Department.
   
11-2-102.   Denial; refusal to renew; revocation.
   
11-2-103.   Payment of taxes.
   
11-2-104.   Amusement License Commission.
Subtitle 2. Bingo Games
   
11-2-201.   Definitions.
   
11-2-202.   Regulatory authority.
   
11-2-203.   Rules and regulations.
   
11-2-204.   Hearing by Office of Administrative Hearings.
   
11-2-205.   Findings and recommendations of the Amusement License Commission.
   
11-2-206.   General prohibitions – Commercial bingo.
   
11-2-207.   Commercial bingo licenses.
   
11-2-208.   Location of commercial bingo games; notices and signs.
   
11-2-209.   Instant bingo and progressive bingo by commercial bingo licensees.
   
11-2-210.   Insurance to be maintained by commercial bingo licensees.
   
11-2-211.   Ownership and control by commercial bingo licensees.
   
11-2-212.   Standards to be met by commercial bingo owners and managerial
employees.
   
11-2-213.   Disclosure of stock ownership by corporate commercial bingo
licensees.
   
11-2-214.   Internal management controls required for commercial bingo
licensees.
   
11-2-215.   Annual report by commercial bingo licensee.
   
11-2-216.   Transfer of ownership or control by commercial bingo licensee.
   
11-2-217.   Manufacturer's and distributor's licenses.
   
11-2-218.   Linked bingo game provider license.
   
11-2-219.   Prizes and awards – Commercial bingo and linked bingo.
   
11-2-220.   Audits – Commercial bingo and linked bingo.
   
11-2-221.   Financial reports and audits – All license holders.
   
11-2-222.   Service of notices and orders – All license holders.
   
11-2-223.   Renewal of licenses – All license holders.
   
11-2-224.   Suspension or revocation of licenses – All license holders.
   
11-2-225.   Confidentiality of information.
   
11-2-226.   Retention of records.
   
11-2-227.   Reportable events.
   
11-2-228.   Arbitration.
Subtitle 3. Carnivals (Class D)
   
11-2-301.   License required.
   
11-2-302.   Fee.
   
11-2-303.   Insurance.
   
11-2-304.   Investigation.
   
11-2-305.   Contents of license.
   
11-2-306.   Operation under license.
   
11-2-307.   Display of license.
Subtitle 4. Circuses (Class A)
   
11-2-401.   License.
Subtitle 5. Coin-Operated Amusement Devices (Classes E, I, and FA)
   
11-2-501.   "Coin-operated amusement device" defined.
   
11-2-502.   Licenses classified.
   
11-2-503.   General prohibitions.
   
11-2-504.   Class E license.
   
11-2-505.   Class I license.
   
11-2-506.   Class FA license.
Subtitle 6. Drag Races (Class X)
   
11-2-601.   Class X license.
Subtitle 7. Fund-Raising Events (Classes S and T)
   
11-2-701.   Definitions.
   
11-2-702.   Licenses classified.
   
11-2-703.   Display.
   
11-2-704.   Limitations on issuance.
   
11-2-705.   Term; renewal.
   
11-2-706.   Class S license.
   
11-2-707.   Class T license.
   
11-2-708.   Prizes for Class S and T licenses.
   
11-2-709.   Fees.
   
11-2-710.   Reporting.
Subtitle 8. Wheels of Fortune (Class U)
   
11-2-801.   Class U license.
SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11-2-101. Inspections by Police Department.
   The Police Department shall make frequent inspections of premises for which
licenses are issued under this title to ascertain that the premises and the
devices in the premises are licensed.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-103)
§ 11-2-102. Denial; refusal to renew; revocation.
   The Department is not required to make an investigation before the issuance
of a license and may refuse to issue or renew a license on the basis of the
facts disclosed on the application. The Department may deny, refuse to renew,
or revoke a license if it finds that the activity authorized by the license at
the proposed premises will create a nuisance or be detrimental to the peace and
welfare of the community.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-104, 2-628, 2-629, 2-705, 2-708)
§ 11-2-103. Payment of taxes.
   A person may not become or continue as a licensee under this article unless
the person is current on the payment of all taxes owing to the County and the
State.
§ 11-2-104. Amusement License Commission.
   (a)   Establishment. There is an Amusement License Commission consisting of
seven members. Six members, who shall be residents of the County, are appointed
by the County Executive. The seventh member shall be a police officer appointed
by the Chief of Police.
   (b)   Term. The term of a member runs concurrently with the term of the
County Executive. At the end of a term, a member shall continue to serve until
a successor is appointed. The County Executive may remove a member for cause
prior to the expiration of the term of the member. If a vacancy occurs during
the term of a member appointed by the County Executive, the County Executive
shall appoint a qualified successor to complete the term. The member appointed
by the Chief of Police shall serve at the pleasure of the Chief of Police.
   (c)   Chair and Vice Chair. The Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice
Chair from its membership.
   (d)   Meetings; quorum. The Commission shall meet at the request of the
Director, and the Chair shall schedule the meetings and preside over them. The
Commission shall advise the Director on proposed ordinances and the adoption of
regulations to implement the provisions of this title and shall perform other
duties as assigned by the Director. The Commission shall issue findings and
recommendations in the regulation of commercial bingo games under §
11-2-202 and §
11-2-205. A quorum of four members is required to make a recommendation under
that subsection. The vote of each member on a recommendation shall be a matter
of public record.
   (e)   Rules of procedure. The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure for
the orderly conduct of its business and for the issuance of findings and
recommendations under this title.
   (f)   Reimbursement for expenses. Members of the Commission are not entitled
to compensation for their services, but are entitled to reimbursement for
reasonable and necessary expenses as provided in the budget of the Department.
   (g)   Conflicts of interest. Members of the Commission are subject to the
same conflict-of-interest provisions applicable to County officials or
employees under §
7-3-101 of this Code, and a member shall be disqualified from considering or
advising the Director on any matter in which the member has a personal or
financial interest, but this provision does not prevent a member engaged in an
activity regulated by this title from participating in general regulatory
matters or from participating in recommendations affecting a license other than
that in which the member has a personal or financial interest. The Director may
adopt regulations to implement the conflict-of-interest provisions, including
requirements for disclosure by members of interests in activities regulated by
this title.
   (h)   Staff. The Director shall furnish clerical and other staff support to
the Commission.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-111, 2-112) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 11-95)
SUBTITLE 2. BINGO GAMES
§ 11-2-201. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Beneficial ownership" means record ownership and:
         (i)   stock or other ownership in one or more entities in a chain of
parent and subsidiary or affiliated entities, any one of which participates in
the capital or profits of a licensee, regardless of the percentage of ownership
involved;
         (ii)   any interest that entitles a person to benefits substantially
equivalent to ownership by reason of any contract, lease, understanding,
relationship, agreement, or other arrangement, even though the person is not
the record owner; and
         (iii)   unless there are special circumstances, securities held by an
individual's spouse or relatives, including children, living in the home.
      (2)   "Bingo" means that specific game of chance played with cards having
randomly-numbered squares ranging from 1 to 75 in which prizes are awarded on
the basis of designated numbers on the cards conforming to a predetermined
pattern of numbers. The cards shall have five vertical rows headed respectively
by the letters B.I.N.G.O., with each row having five randomly numbered squares,
except that one or more squares may be labeled "free". The term "bingo"
includes instant bingo.
      (3)   "Bingo equipment and supplies" means all equipment and devices
commonly used in the direct operation of bingo or instant bingo, including the
receptacle, object, rack, verification board, and cards.
      (4)   "Commercial bingo" means bingo for which any type of consideration
is paid or collected in order to play the game, but the term does not include
bingo conducted by charitable and nonprofit organizations permitted to conduct
bingo under State or County law.
      (5)   "Commission" means the Amusement License Commission established by
§
11-2-104.
      (6)   "Gross receipts" means the total revenue received from bingo games
and admission charges, excluding the cost of prizes or winnings distributed,
but without regard to other expenses.
      (7)   "Instant bingo" means a specific game of chance played by the
random selection of one or more individually prepackaged cards, with winners
determined by preprinted letters, numbers, or symbols.
      (8)   "Licensee" means the holder of a commercial bingo license, but the
term does not include the holder of a manufacturer's or distributor's license
or a linked bingo game provider.
      (9)   "License holder" means a licensee, a holder of a manufacturer's and
distributor's license, or a linked bingo game provider.
      (10)   "Linked bingo game" means a bingo game simultaneously played at
two or more locations at which licensees are authorized to conduct commercial
bingo games.
      (11)   "Linked bingo game provider" means a person who provides equipment
or management services to be used in the conduct of a linked bingo game.
      (12)   "Managerial employee" means a director, officer, and any other
employee having managerial control over a licensee's commercial bingo business,
the general manager, the chief financial officer, the chief bookkeeper, and any
individual placed in direct control of commercial bingo games during a session.
      (13)   "Manufacturer and distributor" means any person who manufactures,
sells, leases, or otherwise provides or distributes bingo equipment or supplies
to licensees.
      (14)   "Objects" means a set of 75 balls or other precision shapes
identical in size and shape on which are printed numbers and letters, with
numbers 1 through 15 marked with the letter "B", numbers 16 through 30 marked
with the letter "I", numbers 31 through 45 marked with the letter "N", numbers
46 through 60 marked with the letter "G", and numbers 61 through 75 marked with
the letter "O".
      (15)   "Owner" means an individual proprietor or a general or limited
partner, and the term includes a person with a beneficial ownership interest in
a licensee and a shareholder of a corporate licensee having 10% or more
interest, including beneficial ownership, in the licensee.
      (16)   "Progressive game" means a bingo game in which a prize amount is
carried over to a subsequent game if no winner is declared after a specified
number of draws or calls are completed.
      (17)   "Proposed transferee" means a proposed purchaser, lessee,
assignee, or person acquiring ownership or control of a license or of a
licensee.
      (18)   "Rack" means the container in which the objects are placed after
being drawn and announced.
      (19)   "Receptacle" means the container from which the objects are drawn
or ejected.
      (20)   "Session" means a series of bingo games conducted by a licensee
during a single 24-hour period.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-301, 2-307, 2-310) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 4-00;
Bill No. 9-05)
§ 11-2-202. Regulatory authority.
   In addition to the other powers specified by this subtitle, the Director
shall have the power to conduct investigations and monitor the conduct of
commercial bingo games and the manufacture and distribution of bingo equipment
and supplies. The Director also may permit variations of the game
configuration, after referral to and recommendation from the Amusement License
Commission.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-302) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 4-00; Bill No. 10-02;
Bill No. 9-05)
§ 11-2-203. Rules and regulations.
   After public notice and an opportunity for comment from the public, license
holders, and the Commission, the Director shall adopt rules and regulations to
implement this subtitle. The scope of the rules and regulations may include all
subjects necessary to implement the intent of this subtitle and to ensure the
integrity of bingo games and the proper disposition of all funds derived from
the commercial bingo games. The scope of the rules and regulations may include:
      (1)   the issuance, denial, revocation, or suspension of licenses and the
manufacturing and distribution of bingo equipment and supplies;
      (2)   uniform procedures for requiring and reviewing personal and
financial background information of owners and managerial employees, including
requirements for an appropriate amount of time for completion of required
background checks, a review by a certified public accountant of certified
financial statements, a review of any contingent or pledged liabilities, an
income statement for the most recent fiscal year, a statement of financial and
related records of any business entity in which the owner or managerial
employee has a majority interest, a submission of copies of federal and state
income tax returns, a disclosure of all financial interests in commercial or
nonprofit gaming, a criminal background review, and a character review;
      (3)   the use of computer and electronic devices for conducting bingo;
      (4)   the conduct of bingo games and activities involved in manufacturing
and distributing bingo equipment and supplies;
      (5)   recordkeeping, reporting requirements, and acceptable admission and
sales receipting systems;
      (6)   requirements that commercial bingo licensees maintain adequate
records documenting the purchase of bingo equipment and supplies from licensed
manufacturers and distributors and that manufacturer's and distributor's
licensees maintain adequate records documenting the sale of bingo equipment and
supplies to commercial bingo licensees; and
      (7)   standards for the manufacture, distribution, and control of bingo
equipment and supplies that may include the uniform standards promulgated by
the North American Gaming Regulators Association or its successor organization.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-311) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 9-05)
§ 11-2-204. Hearing by Office of Administrative Hearings.
   A hearing that this subtitle specifies to be held by the Director may be
held by the Office of Administrative Hearings at the request of the Director
and with the approval of the Chief Administrative Officer.
§ 11-2-205. Findings and recommendations of the Amusement License Commission.
   The Director shall obtain the findings and recommendations of the Amusement
License Commission before approval of a change in ownership or control of a
license, approval of an owner or managerial employee of a licensee, approval of
a license renewal, and, with the exception of an emergency suspension,
suspension or revocation of a license.
§ 11-2-206. General prohibitions – Commercial bingo.
   (a)   Loans. A commercial bingo licensee or its owners or managerial
employees may not lend any person money for the purpose of allowing that person
to play commercial bingo.
   (b)   Competition. A commercial bingo licensee shall not act in concert with
another licensee to limit or restrict competition.
   (c)   Persons under 18. Except for an employee of the licensee, a person
under 18 years old may not enter a commercial bingo establishment.
   (d)   Computer and electronic devices. A computer or electronic device may
not be used for determining or generating the numbers and letters to be
announced for the game in lieu of randomly selecting objects from the
receptacle. A computer or electronic device may not be used in the direct
operation of the bingo games without the prior approval of the Director.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-321) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 87-21)
§ 11-2-207. Commercial bingo licenses.
   (a)   Classes of licenses required. A Class NA license is required to
operate a bingo game for up to 750 persons. A Class NB license is required to
operate a bingo game for up to 1,000 persons. A Class NC license is required to
operate a bingo game for up to 2,000 persons.
   (b)   Number of licenses. The maximum number of commercial bingo licenses
that may be issued each year is three. Licenses renewed under §
11-2-223 shall be counted against the total number of licenses that may be
issued. If any of the three commercial bingo licenses are abandoned,
surrendered, revoked, or not renewed, no new licenses may be issued to replace
those licenses and the total number of licenses that thereafter may be issued
shall be reduced to the number of the remaining licenses. Nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the transfer of ownership or control
of a commercial bingo license under §
11-2-216.
   (c)   Term. Commercial bingo licenses shall be issued for a calendar year.
   (d)   Fees. The annual license fees are $3,000 for a Class NA license to
operate a bingo game for up to 300 persons; $7,500 for a Class NA license to
operate a bingo game for up to 750 persons; $10,000 for a Class NB license; and
$12,500 for a Class NC license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-303, 2-304, 2-305) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 4-00)
§ 11-2-208. Location of commercial bingo games; notices and signs.
   (a)   Location. Each license authorizes the operation of commercial bingo
games in a structure at the single, specific location described on the license.
The location of commercial bingo games may not be moved without the written
approval of the Director.
   (b)   Notice. A commercial bingo licensee shall post conspicuously on the
premises where the commercial bingo games are conducted a notice that contains
a copy of the bingo license, a description of all prizes to be awarded and how
the prizes may be won, the rules under which bingo is to be played, and all
costs to play.
   (c)   Sign for reporting complaints. The names, titles, and business
telephone numbers of the following individuals shall be displayed prominently
on a sign at the premises where the commercial bingo games are conducted, with
an accompanying explanation that the following individuals may be contacted in
the event of a complaint: the employee of the licensee with general managerial
control over the commercial bingo games; the managerial employee designated
under §
11-2-212; and the Chief of Licensing of the Department or other individual
designated by the Director.
   (d)   Sign regarding compulsive gambling. There shall be a sign at the
premises where the commercial bingo games are conducted stating that compulsive
gambling is a treatable disorder, with the toll-free telephone number of the
compulsive gambling hotline or other telephone number designated by the
Director. The licensee shall pay to the nonprofit organization operating the
hotline an annual charge, not to exceed $500, requested by the organization to
defray the costs of maintaining the service.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-306, 2-318) (Bill No. 96-91)
§ 11-2-209. Instant bingo and progressive bingo by commercial bingo licensees.
   (a)   Instant bingo. A commercial bingo licensee may offer instant bingo as
part of its commercial bingo games, but only during a session at which regular
games are offered.
   (b)   Progressive bingo. A commercial bingo licensee may offer a progressive
bingo game. A progressive bingo game shall be played to a conclusion and a
consolation prize shall be awarded if the advertised prize is not awarded.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-316) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 9-05)
§ 11-2-210. Insurance to be maintained by commercial bingo licensees.
   Throughout the term of a license, a commercial bingo licensee shall maintain
commercial general liability insurance, including coverage for bodily injury
and property damage, with a minimum coverage for any one occurrence of
$500,000.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-320) (Bill No. 96-91)
§ 11-2-211. Ownership and control by commercial bingo licensees.
   (a)   Generally. A commercial bingo licensee shall be the actual owner and
operator of the business conducting the commercial bingo games. This provision
does not preclude a licensee from renting the premises where the bingo games
are located.
   (b)   Individual proprietorship. A commercial bingo license for an
individual proprietorship shall be issued to the individual proprietor, who
shall be at least 18 years old and a resident and taxpayer of the State for at
least two years before issuance of the license. The individual proprietor shall
reside in and be a taxpayer of the State during the term of the license.
   (c)   Partnership. A commercial bingo license for a partnership shall be
issued in the name of the partnership, and each of the general partners shall
be at least 18 years old and a resident and taxpayer of the State for at least
two years before issuance of the license. Each general partner shall reside in
and be a taxpayer of the State during the term of the license.
   (d)   Corporation or other business entity. A commercial bingo license for a
corporation or other business entity shall be issued in the name of the
business entity. The entity shall remain in good standing during the term of
the license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-308) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 64-15)
§ 11-2-212. Standards to be met by commercial bingo owners and managerial
employees.
   (a)   Requirements. A person may not become or continue as an owner or
managerial employee of a commercial bingo licensee without the approval of the
Director under the standards set forth in this section. At all times there
shall be at least one owner or managerial employee on the premises and
supervising the commercial bingo games being conducted.
   (b)   Standards. No owner or managerial employee of a commercial bingo
licensee may have:
      (1)   ever been convicted, held liable, or found to have committed acts
involving moral turpitude, including any violation of federal, state, or local
law or regulation;
      (2)   ever had a judgment entered in an action for fraud, deceit, or
misrepresentation by any court of competent jurisdiction;
      (3)   associations with individuals known to have engaged in organized
crime or racketeering;
      (4)   a financial relationship with any person known to have engaged in
organized crime or racketeering;
      (5)   had direct managerial or supervisory control over a gaming
enterprise in which there was a pattern of cheating, fraud, or employee
dishonesty;
      (6)   violated the provisions of this article; or
      (7)   engaged in any other conduct that the Director determines to be a
threat to the integrity of commercial bingo or public confidence in the
integrity of commercial bingo.
   (c)   Access to records; fingerprinting and photographs. The Director and
the Commission shall have access to both conviction and non-conviction criminal
history record information in performing duties under this section. Each owner
and managerial employee shall be fingerprinted and photographed at a facility
of the Police Department, but the Director may make exceptions to the location
of the fingerprinting and photographing if there are adequate safeguards for
reliability of the information. Fingerprints and photographs may be submitted
to the Maryland State Police and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for
further processing and identification. Any costs of processing charged by
County, state, or federal agencies shall be borne by the licensee.
   (d)   List maintained by licensee. The licensee shall maintain a current
list of its employees who are involved in the commercial bingo operation,
including cashiers and bookkeepers, but excluding employees whose duties
include only custodial, maintenance, parking, or food service functions. The
licensee shall indicate which of these employees the licensee considers to be
managerial employees. On request by the Director, the licensee shall furnish
this list, together with a description of each employee's duties, to the
Director so that the Director may determine if the employee is a managerial
employee as provided by this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-311) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 9-05)
§ 11-2-213. Disclosure of stock ownership by corporate commercial bingo
licensees.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, "owner of stock" means anyone who
participates or has a vested right to participate in the capital payments,
profits, or percentage of income from stock, or has a right under any set of
circumstances to convert debt into an ownership interest in stock.
   (b)   Stock ownership. A commercial bingo licensee shall maintain records of
owners of stock of the licensee so that the names of all persons, including
corporations, trusts, estates, and partnerships that are the beneficial owners
of the stock, are disclosed regardless of the manner in which, or whether or
not, the ownership interest is stated or registered on the stock of the
licensee. A licensee shall include in its charter a prohibition against any
person owning stock in the licensee unless the name of that person is listed as
an owner in the corporate stock book and the person provides the affidavits
required by this section.
   (c)   Affidavits. A commercial bingo licensee shall obtain, at least once
every calendar year, pursuant to written notice to the record owners of all
stock of the licensee, an affidavit from each record owner of the stock of the
licensee sworn to under the penalty of perjury, stating to the best of the
affiant's knowledge, information, and belief:
      (1)   if any person other than the affiant has any right of beneficial
ownership of any kind in the stock held in the name of the affiant, or if the
stock held in the name of the affiant is pledged, promised, or guaranteed as
security to another person;
      (2)   the name and address of the other person; and
      (3)   the amount and nature of the ownership.
The Director may limit the ownership that must be reported in an affidavit to
10% or more of the beneficial ownership of the licensee. The Director shall
consider the number of stockholders and the burden to the licensee and if the
licensee is a public corporation whose annual reports are publicly available.
   (d)   Beneficial ownership in stock. If the commercial bingo licensee
receives information indicating that a person other than the record owner has a
beneficial ownership interest in stock of the licensee, the licensee shall
request promptly by written notice to the other person that this person submit
to the licensee within 60 days from the date of the notice an affidavit
stating, to the best of the affiant's knowledge, information, and belief:
      (1)   if the affiant has any right of ownership in stock of the licensee
attributed to the affiant in the notice and the amount and nature of the
ownership;
      (2)   if any person other than the affiant and the record owner has any
right of ownership of any kind in stock of the licensee attributed to the
affiant by the notice of the affiant; and
      (3)   the amount and nature of the ownership of any other person.
   (e)   Change in stock ownership. Any change in the record ownership or
beneficial ownership of stock of any commercial bingo licensee shall be
reported promptly to the Director. On a failure of a licensee to maintain and
report records of ownership of stock as required by this section or the failure
of a licensee to make a reasonable effort to obtain the affidavits required by
this section, the Director may suspend or revoke the license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-310) (Bill No. 96-91)
§ 11-2-214. Internal management controls required for commercial bingo
licensees.
   (a)   Inspection and review. The Director, on reasonable notice to a
commercial bingo licensee, may inspect and review the internal management
controls employed by the licensee to ensure that all gross receipts are
properly documented, and the licensee shall provide to the Director all
information necessary for this inspection and review.
   (b)   Admission and sales receipting systems. A commercial bingo licensee
shall employ a progressively numbered admission and sales receipting system
that has been approved by the Director.
   (c)   Requirement to employ additional or alternative internal management
controls; sanction for failure to do so. If the Director determines that the
internal management controls employed by a commercial bingo licensee are
insufficient to ensure that all gross receipts are properly documented, the
Director shall have the authority to require the licensee to employ additional
or alternative internal management controls. If the licensee fails to adopt the
additional or alternative internal management controls, the Director may
suspend the license until the additional or alternative internal management
controls are adopted.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-317) (Bill No. 96-91)
§ 11-2-215. Annual report by commercial bingo licensee.
   (a)   Designation of fiscal year. A commercial bingo licensee shall specify
its fiscal year in its initial license application and thereafter may change
its fiscal year only with the approval of the Director, which shall not be
withheld unreasonably.
   (b)   Annual report. Within the time established by the Director through
regulation, each commercial bingo licensee shall submit an annual report under
oath in the format required by the Director, including:
      (1)   a list of its officers, members of its board of directors, and
other principals of the licensee, including the managerial employees;
      (2)   the ownership records and affidavits required by §
11-2-213;
      (3)   an annual financial statement prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles reflecting the total amount of gross receipts
and all payments, deductions, and computations for the period covered by the
statement. The annual financial statement shall:
         (i)   be audited and certified by an independent certified public
accountant;
         (ii)   include the method of calculation and a statement of the gross
receipts subject to the admissions and amusement tax;
         (iii)   give the identity of the lender or borrower and loan amount or
amounts where the amount of any single loan to or from the licensee exceeded
$10,000 or where the aggregate amount of loans from a single lender or to a
single borrower exceeded $10,000 for the year; and
         (iv)   include a certification by the independent certified public
accountant that the internal controls employed by the licensee are adequate to
ensure the accuracy of the licensee's tax returns, including the returns for
the admissions and amusement tax.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-319) (Bill No. 96-91)
§ 11-2-216. Transfer of ownership or control by commercial bingo licensee.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "control" means actual working control in
whatever manner exercised, including majority stock ownership.
   (b)   Consent of Director required. A license may not be sold, transferred,
leased, assigned, or disposed of by forced or voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation, receivership, or any other means without the prior written
consent of the Director, and then only under such conditions as the Director
may establish. Every transfer of control by the licensee shall subject the
license to revocation unless the Director consents in writing.
   (c)   Notification; presumptions. A licensee shall promptly notify the
Director in writing of any proposed transfer of control of the licensee. A
presumption that a transfer of control has occurred arises on the transfer by
any person of 10% or more of the beneficial interest of the licensee, whether
the transfer takes place through single or multiple transactions. A presumption
that a transfer of control has occurred also arises on the acquisition by any
person of 10% or more of the beneficial ownership interest of the licensee,
whether through single or multiple transactions.
   (d)   Qualifications of proposed transferee. For the purpose of determining
whether the Director should consent to transfer of control, the Director may
inquire into the qualifications of the proposed transferee, and the licensee
shall assist the Director in the inquiry. In seeking the Director's consent to
any change in ownership or control, the proposed transferee shall demonstrate
to the Director that the proposed transferee has the financial and technical
capability to enable it to operate the commercial bingo games and will employ
internal management and financial controls sufficient to discourage employee
dishonesty and maintain the integrity of the bingo games. The proposed
transferee shall provide to the Director the personal and financial information
for owners and managerial employees of the proposed transferee required under §
11-2-212; disclosure of stock ownership by a corporate proposed transferee as
required under §
11-2-213; a financial statement for the proposed transferee audited by an
independent certified public accountant; a detailed description of the proposed
sources and methods of financing the commercial bingo operation; the
organizational structure of the proposed transferee and the internal management
and financial controls proposed by the proposed transferee to discourage
employee dishonesty and to maintain the integrity of the bingo games; and the
information required by subsection (e).The Director may not consent to a change
in ownership or control unless the owners and managerial employees of the
proposed transferee meet the standards set forth in §
11-2-212 and have paid all taxes as required by §
11-2-103.
   (e)   Information. In addition to other information required by this
section, a proposed transferee shall disclose whether the proposed transferee,
any owner, director, or officer of the proposed transferee, any employee or
agent of the proposed transferee, or any person controlling the proposed
transferee, any owner, director, or officer of the proposed transferee, or any
employee or agent of the proposed transferee has:
      (1)   ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral
turpitude including any violation of federal, state, or local law or
regulation, or is currently under an indictment, investigation, or complaint
charging such acts;
      (2)   ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit, or
misrepresentation entered against the proposed transferee by any court of
competent jurisdiction;
      (3)   any pending legal claim, lawsuit, or administrative proceeding
arising out of or involving the operation of a gaming enterprise; or
      (4)   ever had a license or permit to operate a gaming enterprise denied,
suspended, or revoked.
   (f)   Costs and appeal to arbitration. On approval or disapproval of a
change in ownership or control, the new licensee and any successor licensee
shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs reasonably incurred by the
County in reviewing the proposed change in ownership or control, including
County personnel costs calculated in accordance with rates established by the
County Controller. The licensee may appeal the calculation of these costs to
arbitration under §
11-2-228.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-307, 2-309) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 4-00; Bill No.
9-05)
§ 11-2-217. Manufacturer's and distributor's licenses.
   (a)   Requirement. A commercial bingo licensee may not purchase or obtain
bingo equipment or supplies except from a manufacturer or distributor licensed
under this section.
   (b)   Personal and financial background check. The Director shall conduct a
personal and financial background check of the owners, officers, and directors
of an applicant for a manufacturer's and distributor's license or renewal of a
manufacturer's and distributor's license in the same manner as performed for
the owners and managerial employees of a commercial bingo licensee under §
11-2-212, except that the financial and stock ownership information shall be
required only if determined necessary by the Director. In lieu of the personal
and financial background check, the Director may extend reciprocity to a
similar license issued to an applicant by another state or political
subdivision if the Director is satisfied that the licensing criteria of that
state or political subdivision are comparable to those contained in this
subtitle.
   (c)   Term. The term of a manufacturer's and distributor's license is a
calendar year.
   (d)   Fee. The annual fee for a manufacturer's and distributor's license is
$2,000.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-314) (Bill No. 96-91)
§ 11-2-218. Linked bingo game provider license.
   (a)   Requirements. A linked bingo game may be conducted only by a licensed
linked bingo game provider, and the provider may conduct linked bingo games
only at locations in the County at which commercial bingo is authorized. A
linked bingo game provider may offer not more than one linked bingo game per
session and shall provide documentary evidence to ensure that each prize winner
is paid within 48 hours.
   (b)   Standards. No linked bingo game provider may have:
      (1)   ever been convicted, held liable, or found to have committed acts
involving moral turpitude, including any violation of federal, state, or local
law or regulation;
      (2)   ever had a judgment entered in an action for fraud, deceit, or
misrepresentation by any court of competent jurisdiction;
      (3)   associations with individuals known to have engaged in organized
crime or racketeering;
      (4)   a financial relationship with any person known to have engaged in
organized crime or racketeering;
      (5)   had direct managerial or supervisory control over a gaming
enterprise in which there was a pattern of cheating, fraud, or employee
dishonesty;
      (6)   violated the provisions of this article; or
      (7)   engaged in any other conduct that the Director determines to have
threatened the integrity of bingo or public confidence in the integrity of
bingo.
   (c)   Term. The term of a provider's license is a calendar year.
   (d)   Fee. The annual fee is for the license is $3,000.
   (e)   Bond or other security. A linked bingo game provider shall provide a
bond or other security acceptable to the Director in the amount of $250,000 to
guarantee prize payment.
(Bill No. 9-05)
§ 11-2-219. Prizes and awards – Commercial bingo and linked bingo.
   (a)   Generally. A commercial bingo licensee may issue merchandise, coins,
currency, tokens, or tickets redeemable in cash or merchandise, or other things
of value as a prize or award to the players. The value of a prize or award
other than cash shall be determined by its fair market value.
   (b)   Value. A prize or award having an aggregate value in excess of $1,200
may not be awarded to the winner or winners of a single game, except that:
      (1)   each session a licensee may offer one or more games with an
aggregate prize limit of $300,000;
      (2)   a licensee may offer a progressive game or games with an aggregate
prize limit of $100,000 and may exceed that limit only with prior written
approval by the Director; and
      (3)   a linked bingo game provider may offer a linked bingo game with a
prize equal to the sum of the maximum aggregate prize permitted for each
participating licensee.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §2-315) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 10-02; Bill No. 9-05;
Bill No. 12-07)
§ 11-2-220. Audits – Commercial bingo and linked bingo.
   (a)   Generally. On 10 days' written notice, the Director may conduct an
audit of the licensee's records for the year for which the annual financial
statement has been provided. The audit shall be performed in accordance with
generally accepted auditing standards. If the audit discloses that the licensee
underpaid the admissions and amusement tax by 5% or more, the licensee shall
assume all reasonable costs of the audit. The Director may perform no more than
one audit on each licensee during a fiscal year, unless the most recent audit
disclosed that the licensee underpaid the admissions and amusement tax by 5% or
more. The records subject to audit shall include the returns and records filed
and maintained by the licensee under the Tax-General Article, Title 4, Subtitle
2, of the State Code.
   (b)   Appeal to arbitration. A licensee has the right to appeal the results
of an audit performed by the Director to arbitration under §
11-2-228.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-319) (Bill No. 96-91)
§ 11-2-221. Financial reports and audits – All license holders.
   (a)   Quarterly financial statements. Each license holder shall file with
the Director quarterly financial statements in the same form and including the
same information as the annual financial statement, except that the quarterly
financial statements need not be audited and certified by an independent
certified public accountant.
   (b)   Records. A license holder shall keep complete and accurate financial
records in the form and with the information that the Director and the
Comptroller of the State require. These records shall be made available for
inspection and examination by the Director at any time during normal County
business hours. The records available for examination and inspection by the
Director shall include copies of the admissions and amusement tax returns filed
by the licensee.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-319) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 9-05)
§ 11-2-222. Service of notices and orders – All license holders.
   (a)   To Director or designee. All reports, notices, correspondence, and
other documents to be filed with the County or the Director under this subtitle
shall be sent to the Director. On written notice by the Director to each
license holder, these reports, notices, correspondence, and other documents
shall be sent to the Chief of Licensing or other designee of the Director.
   (b)   Duty of license holder to keep name and address of person to receive
notices current. Each license holder shall specify in its application for the
issuance or renewal of a license the name and mailing address of an individual
residing in the County who shall receive all formal notices and correspondence
from the County or the Director under this subtitle. Before any change in the
name or address of this individual becomes effective, the license holder shall
notify the Director in writing of the change.
   (c)   Service of suspension or revocation. A written order suspending or
revoking a license shall be sent by certified mail to the individual designated
in subsection (b) and shall be considered served as of the date of delivery to
the address given.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-324) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 9-05)
§ 11-2-223. Renewal of licenses – All license holders.
   (a)   Generally. A license holder may apply for a license renewal within the
time period and under the regulations adopted by the Director. A change
requested by a commercial bingo licensee in the classification of the license
does not affect the right to apply for a license renewal.
   (b)   Denial. The Director may deny an application for a license renewal on
the grounds set forth in this subtitle for the approval of a change in
ownership or working control of a license or licensee, or on any of the
following grounds:
      (1)   a pattern of customer complaints, including complaints concerning
the manner in which the commercial bingo games were conducted during the
license period;
      (2)   a violation of this subtitle, violation of the rules and
regulations enacted under this subtitle, or violation of any other applicable
federal, state or local law or regulation during the license period;
      (3)   failure of a commercial bingo licensee to maintain an active
commercial bingo operation during the license period, including a failure to
offer bingo games on a regularly scheduled basis;
      (4)   an adverse impact of a commercial bingo licensee's operation on the
neighborhood, including traffic, noise, and public safety;
      (5)   a failure to employ required internal management and financial
controls sufficient to discourage employee dishonesty and maintain the
integrity of the bingo games; or
      (6)   a failure to have paid all taxes as required by §
11-2-103.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-312) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 4-00)
§ 11-2-224. Suspension or revocation of licenses – All license holders.
   (a)   Grounds for and length of suspension or revocation. The Director may
suspend or revoke all licenses issued under this subtitle on the basis of a
violation by a license holder or an owner or managerial employee of a license
holder of any provision of this title or of a regulation adopted under the
authority of this subtitle, or of any provision of other federal, state, or
County law where the violation arises from the activities licensed under this
subtitle. Except for an emergency suspension or a suspension under §
11-1-103(d), the suspension of a license may not exceed 30 days.
   (b)   Notice and hearing. Except for an emergency suspension or a suspension
under §
11-1-103(d), the Director may not suspend or revoke a license without notice
and an opportunity for a public hearing. The notice of the proposed suspension
or revocation shall specify the reasons for the proposed suspension or
revocation, and the public hearing may not be scheduled earlier than 15 days
after service of the notice.
   (c)   Order. Within 15 days after the conclusion or waiver of the hearing,
the Commission shall submit its written findings and recommendations to the
Director. If suspension or revocation is warranted, the Director shall issue a
written order to suspend or revoke the license specifying the reasons for the
action. The order shall become effective on service.
   (d)   Stay. A license holder whose license has been suspended or revoked may
request the Director to stay the suspension or revocation pending an appeal to
the Board of Appeals. In determining whether to grant a stay of a suspension or
revocation, the Director shall consider the nature of the violation, the
likelihood of a successful appeal, and the hardship on the license holder.
   (e)   Emergency suspensions. The Director may order an emergency suspension
of a license prior to a hearing if the Director determines that emergency
suspension is necessary to protect the integrity of the commercial bingo games.
An emergency suspension may not exceed 15 days. The written order implementing
an emergency suspension shall become effective on service, shall specify the
reasons for the emergency suspension, and shall notify the license holder of
the date and time of the hearing at which permanent action will be considered.
   (f)   Admissions and amusement tax disputes. If suspension or revocation is
based on a failure to file an admissions and amusement tax return or to make an
admissions and amusement tax payment when due as required by the Tax-General
Article, Title 4, of the State Code, and a dispute exists between the licensee
or linked bingo game provider and the Comptroller of the State over the amount
of tax to be paid, the Director may require that the licensee or linked bingo
game provider pay into an escrow account maintained by the Director an amount
equal to the tax estimated by the Comptroller to be due pending final
adjudication of the dispute.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-325) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 9-05)
§ 11-2-225. Confidentiality of information.
   (a)   Generally. The information gathered as a result of the personal and
financial background check on an owner and managerial employee, annual and
quarterly financial statements, and the financial statements of applicants
shall be maintained in confidence by both the Department and the Commission and
shall not be available for public inspection. Confidential information shall
not be included in the minutes of the Commission. Before their appointment,
members of the Commission shall acknowledge in writing that they are bound to
preserve the confidentiality of confidential information.
   (b)   Use. The provisions of this section may not be construed to prohibit
the Director or the Commission from using the information for the purposes
intended in this subtitle or to prosecute or defend an administrative or
judicial proceeding. The information shall be available to the Police
Department or other law enforcement agency, which shall preserve its
confidentiality in accordance with federal and state laws governing access to
public records and criminal history record information.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-326) (Bill No. 96-91)
§ 11-2-226. Retention of records.
   All reports, documents, and other records required by this subtitle shall be
retained for a period of five years after their preparation.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-327) (Bill No. 96-91)
§ 11-2-227. Reportable events.
   A license holder shall report immediately to the Director the arrest,
indictment, or conviction of an owner or managerial employee for an act
involving moral turpitude, including any violation of federal, state, or local
law or regulation; the initiation of any legal claim, lawsuit, criminal
investigation, or administrative proceeding arising out of or involving the
operation of a gaming enterprise by a license holder or an owner or managerial
employee of a license holder; and the appointment of a receiver or the
initiation of proceedings in bankruptcy against a license holder or an owner of
a license holder.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-328) (Bill No. 96-91; Bill No. 9-05)
§ 11-2-228. Arbitration.
   (a)   Generally. Matters that are arbitrable under this subtitle shall be
arbitrated in accordance with the following provisions.
   (b)   Arbitration panel. The arbitration panel shall consist of three
members. The first arbitrator shall be selected by the Director, and the second
arbitrator shall be selected by the licensee within 10 days of notice of the
Director's selection. The third arbitrator shall be a certified public
accountant and shall be chosen by the first two arbitrators. If the first two
arbitrators fail to agree as to the third arbitrator, either or both shall
apply to the American Arbitration Association or its successor organization to
name the third arbitrator. Except when the majority of the panel agrees to the
contrary, the third arbitrator shall be the presiding officer.
   (c)   Expenses. Each party shall bear the expenses of its own representation
before the arbitration panel. The expenses of the arbitration shall be borne as
determined by the arbitration panel in its decision or finding.
   (d)   Decision. In the absence of fraud or collusion, the determination of
the majority of the arbitration panel shall be binding on the parties without
recourse to the Board of Appeals or the courts.
   (e)   Regulations. The Director may adopt regulations implementing the
provisions of this subsection that include rules of procedure governing the
arbitration.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-329) (Bill No. 96-91)
SUBTITLE 3. CARNIVALS (CLASS D)
§ 11-2-301. License required.
   A Class D license is required for a carnival or similar event.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-401)
§ 11-2-302. Fee.
   In this section, "concession" means a ride, game, show, or event. The fee
for a Class D license is:
 
Number of Concessions Fee per Week
1 – 10              $100
11 – 20             $200
21 – 40             $300
more than 40          $400
 
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-403)
§ 11-2-303. Insurance.
   A licensee shall maintain commercial general liability insurance that
provides coverage for bodily injury and property damage, with a minimum
coverage for any one occurrence of $100,000 for one person and $300,000 for two
or more persons.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-404)
§ 11-2-304. Investigation.
   A copy of the application of a Class D license shall be forwarded to the
Chief of Police or the designee of the Chief of Police. Within 30 days after
the date of the application, the Chief of Police or the designee of the Chief
of Police shall inform the Director of the date and nature of any criminal
conviction of any of the individuals named in the application. The Director
shall consider the information in making a determination as to the advisability
of issuing the license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-405)
§ 11-2-305. Contents of license.
   Each Class D license shall show the number of days and the beginning and
ending dates during which the licensee may operate.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-406)
§ 11-2-306. Operation under license.
   (a)   Number; days and hours of operation. A licensee may not obtain more
than two Class D licenses in one calendar year or operate the activities
permitted by a Class D license for a total of more than 12 days in one calendar
year. A person may not operate a carnival or similar event after 12:00
midnight; after 2:00 a.m. on the last night of operation, except if the last
night of operation is a Sunday; or before 1:00 p.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on
Sunday.
   (b)   Felony conviction. A person who has been convicted of a felony may not
operate a game, device, or concession authorized by a Class D license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-408, 2-410) (Bill No. 30-92; Bill No. 23-04)
§ 11-2-307. Display of license.
   The licensee shall prominently display a copy of the Class D license and the
name of the operator in the main office at the location of the event.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-409)
SUBTITLE 4. CIRCUSES (CLASS A)
§ 11-2-401. License.
   (a)   Requirement. A Class A license is required for a circus.
   (b)   Fee. The fee for a Class A license is $250 a day, up to a maximum of
$1,000 per engagement.
   (c)   Scope of license. A Class A license authorizes the licensee to present
performances of or by persons and animals. A Class A license does not authorize
the operation of gaming or amusement devices.
   (d)   Insurance. Throughout the term of a license, a licensee shall maintain
commercial general liability insurance, including coverage for bodily injury
and property damage, with a minimum coverage for any one occurrence of
$500,000.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-501, 2-502, 2-503, 2-504) (Bill No. 46-92; Bill No.
24-96)
SUBTITLE 5. COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES (CLASSES E, I, AND FA)
§ 11-2-501. "Coin-operated amusement device" defined.
   In this title “coin-operated amusement device” means a pinball machine with
or without flippers, a claw or digger machine, an electronic game, a video
game, a console device or any similar device that is activated for play by the
insertion of a coin, by remote control, or by other manual, mechanical, or
electrical means, but the term does not include kiddie rides, such as devices
with figures mounted on a coin-operated mechanism that when in operation move
in a rocking or rolling motion simulating a ride, or “electronic gaming
devices” as defined in COMAR 36.06.01.02.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-601) (Bill No. 5-22)
§ 11-2-502. Licenses classified.
   (a)   Three classes. There are three classes of licenses for coin-operated
amusement devices.
   (b)   Class E. A Class E license is required for a single location or single
room of a building in which are located less than twenty coin-operated
amusement devices. A Class E license may be issued only to the owner or
operator of the location or room of a building in which coin-operated amusement
devices are located or to a Class I licensee.
   (c)   Class I. A Class I license is required for the distribution, placing
in operation, rental, or lease of a coin-operated amusement device at a
location not owned or operated by the Class I licensee.
   (d)   Class FA. A Class FA license is required for a single location or
single room of a building in which are located twenty or more coin-operated
amusement devices. A Class FA license may be issued only to the owner or
operator of the location or room of a building in which coin- operated
amusement devices are located.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-602) (Bill No. 5-22; Bill No. 75-22)
§ 11-2-503. General prohibitions.
   For each play, a coin-operated amusement device may award only merchandise
or prizes having a wholesale value of not more than $30; the right to receive
merchandise or prizes having a wholesale value of not more than $30; or a
ticket, token, or other object that represents or can be converted into
merchandise or prizes having a wholesale value of not more than $30.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-603) (Bill No. 5-22)
§ 11-2-504. Class E license.
   (a)   Term. A Class E license shall be issued for the year beginning July 1
of each year and ending June 30 of the next succeeding year.
   (b)   Fees. The annual fee for a Class E license is $100 per coin-operated
amusement device. The licensee shall pay a late fee of $25 per day for a
failure to renew the license prior to its expiration.
   (c)   Issuance or denial. A Class E license shall be issued if the applicant
has paid all taxes as required by §
11-2-103 and is otherwise in compliance with all provisions of this title and
Title 1 of this article. An applicant for a Class E license shall identify each
device to be operated at the location in the manner required by the Department.
   (d)   Display. Each Class E license shall be securely fastened and
prominently displayed on a wall of the location for which it was issued.
   (e)   Transfer. A Class E license may not be transferred to another owner,
location, or place of business.
   (f)   Failure to display license. Upon request by authorized agents of the
County, the proprietor of the premises where the amusement device is found, or
the person exercising management responsibility for the premises if the
proprietor is not present, shall produce the license for the location.
   (g)   Failure to provide satisfactory proof of licensing. If satisfactory
proof of licensing has not been provided to the Director within 24 hours, the
proprietor or the person exercising management responsibility for the premises
shall be notified to immediately render the amusement devices at the location
inoperable until a license is obtained for the location and obtain the license
within five working days of the date of notice.
   (h)   Confiscation of devices. The County may confiscate amusement devices
from an unlicensed location if:
      (1)   the device is not rendered inoperable when required by this
section;
      (2)   the device is placed back in operation after having been rendered
inoperable but before the issuance of a license for the location; or
      (3)   a license is not obtained for the location of the device within
five working days after notification and the device has not been removed from
the location.
   (i)   Redemption of devices after confiscation. Whenever a coin-operated
amusement device is confiscated in accordance with subsection (h), the device
may be redeemed by its owner on payment of a recovery charge of $250. If a
device is not redeemed within 180 days after the date of confiscation, it shall
be considered abandoned. A device that has been redeemed in accordance with
this section may not be placed into operation until a Class E or FA license has
been obtained for the location of the device.
   (j)   Suspension; revocation. The Department may suspend or revoke a Class E
license for any violation of this title or Title 1 of this article by a Class E
licensee or any agent or employee of a Class E licensee. The Department shall
provide notice and the opportunity for a hearing before suspending or revoking
a license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-609, 2-610, 2-611, 2-612, 2-613, 2-614) (Bill No. 46-
92; Bill No. 5-22)
§ 11-2-505. Class I license.
   (a)   Term. A Class I license shall be issued for the year beginning July 1
of each year and ending June 30 of the next succeeding year.
   (b)   Fees. The annual fee for a Class I license is $2,000. The licensee
shall pay a late fee of $50 per day for a failure to renew the license prior to
its expiration.
   (c)   Issuance or denial. A Class I license shall be issued if the applicant
has paid all taxes as required by §
11-2-103 and is otherwise in compliance with all provisions of this title and
Title 1 of this Article.
   (d)   Records. Each holder of a Class I distributor’s license or the
resident agent of the license holder shall keep and maintain in the County
complete and accurate records of the kind of amusement devices licensed for
operation and the locations at which the amusement devices are located. The
records shall be available for inspection by the Director at reasonable times
and on request.
   (e)   Suspension; revocation. The Department may suspend or revoke a Class I
license for any violation of this title or Title 1 of this article by a Class I
licensee or any agent or employee of a Class I licensee. The Department shall
provide notice and the opportunity for a hearing before suspending or revoking
a license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-618, 2-619, 2-620, 2-621, 2-622) (Bill No. 23-04;
Bill No. 5-22)
§ 11-2-506. Class FA license.
   (a)   Term. A Class FA license shall be issued for the year beginning July 1
of each year and ending June 30 of the next succeeding year.
   (b)   Fees. The fee for a Class FA license is $5,000. The licensee shall pay
a late fee of $100 per day for a failure to renew the license prior to its
expiration.
   (c)   Public hearing. A public hearing conducted by the Director or the
Director's designee shall be held on an initial application for an FA license
no sooner than 30 days after the application is received by the Department. The
applicant shall attend the hearing.
   (d)   Advertisement of public hearing. The hearing shall be advertised for
two successive weeks. The advertisement shall contain the date, time, and place
of the public hearing, the names and addresses of the persons having a
financial interest in the ownership of the business, and a description of the
premises where the license is to be located.
   (e)   Issuance or denial. A Class FA license shall be issued if the
applicant has paid all taxes as required by §
11-2-103 and is otherwise in compliance with all provisions of this title and
Title 1 of this Article.
   (f)   Suspension; revocation. The Department may suspend or revoke a Class
FA license for any violation of this title or Title 1 of this article by a
Class FA licensee or any agent or employee of a Class FA licensee. The
Department shall provide notice and the opportunity for a hearing before
suspending or revoking a license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-626, 2-627) (Bill No. 5-22)
SUBTITLE 6. DRAG RACES (CLASS X)
§ 11-2-601. Class X license.
   (a)   License required. A Class X license is required to hold a drag race.
   (b)   Fee. The annual fee for a Class X license is $4,500.
   (c)   Insurance. A licensee shall maintain commercial general liability
insurance that provides coverage for bodily injury and property damage, with a
minimum coverage of $300,000 for one person and $500,000 for two or more
persons.
   (d)   Issuance or denial and revocation. A Class X license shall be issued
if the applicant has paid all taxes as required by § 11-2-103 and is otherwise
in compliance with all provisions of this title and Title 1 of this Article.
Three or more violations of the provisions of this Code may be cause for
revocation of the license.
   (e)   Scope of activity authorized by license. A Class X license authorizes
the licensee to hold drag races at the place designated in the license for
three days in each week for a calendar year. A Class X license does not
authorize gambling or betting on a race. Racing under a Class X license is
prohibited from 10:00 p.m. Sunday to noon on Friday and after 11:00 p.m. on
Friday and Saturday, with racing permitted Monday through Thursday only on
federal holidays from 12:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m., and top fuel drag racing,
including jet-powered or nitromethane-fueled drag racing, is prohibited after
9:00 p.m. on all racing days.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-701, 2-703, 2-704, 2-706) (Bill No. 46-92; Bill No.
70-13)
SUBTITLE 7. FUND-RAISING EVENTS (CLASSES S AND T)
§ 11-2-701. Definitions.
   In this subtitle the following terms have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Eligible organization" means a volunteer fire company or bona fide
fraternal, civic, war veterans', religious, amateur athletic, or charitable
organization or corporation.
      (2)   "Regular place of meeting" means premises owned, rented, or leased
for the eligible organization's regular use or occupancy.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-801) (Bill No. 67-95)
§ 11-2-702. Licenses classified.
   (a)   Two classes. There are two classes of license for fund-raising events.
   (b)   Class S license. A Class S license is required for an eligible
organization to operate bingo games, paddle wheels, big-six wheels, and wheels
of fortune in its regular place of meeting.
   (c)   Class T license. A Class T license is required for an eligible
organization to operate bingo games, paddle wheels, big-six wheels, and wheels
of fortune at a carnival, benefit, or similar event.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-802) (Bill No. 67-95)
§ 11-2-703. Display.
   The licensee shall prominently display Class S and T licenses at the place
of and during the time of the operation of the licensed devices.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-804) (Bill No. 67-95)
§ 11-2-704. Limitations on issuance.
   (a)   Funds to benefit eligible organization. The Director may not authorize
the issuance of a Class S or T license unless it is established that all of the
funds to be derived from the licensed event or devices benefit the eligible
organization or its charitable purposes, and no individual may derive personal
financial benefit or use from the proceeds of the event.
   (b)   In accordance with application and only by member of eligible
organization. A Class S or T license may not be issued for the operation of
devices at a carnival, benefit, or event not operated for the purposes stated
in the application, or for the operation of devices or games by any person
other than a member of the eligible organization who meets the requirements of
this subtitle as set forth in §
11-2-710.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-805) (Bill No. 67-95)
§ 11-2-705. Term; renewal.
   (a)   Term. A Class S license may not be issued for a period of more than
one year. All licenses shall expire on April 30 following the date of issue.
   (b)   Renewal. A Class S or T license may not be renewed. A new application
shall be submitted for each new license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-806) (Bill No. 67-95)
§ 11-2-706. Class S license.
   A Class S license authorizes the licensee to operate bingo games in its
regular place of meeting and not more than five paddle wheels, wheels of
fortune, or big-six wheels. Devices or games operated under a Class S license
shall be owned by the licensee and the proceeds from the operation of the
devices or games shall be applied to the purposes for which the license was
granted.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-807) (Bill No. 67-95)
§ 11-2-707. Class T license.
   A Class T license authorizes the licensee to operate any device or
combination of devices authorized by a Class S license at a carnival, benefit,
or other event operated by the licensee for the number of days authorized by
the Department. Each Class T license shall show the number of days and the
beginning date and ending date during which it is lawful to operate under the
license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-808) (Bill No. 67-95)
§ 11-2-708. Prizes for Class S and T licenses.
   The holder of a Class S or Class T license may not award a prize of greater
than $50 for any spin of a wheel device.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-809) (Bill No. 67-95)
§ 11-2-709. Fees.
   The fee for a Class S license is $50. The fee for a Class T license is $20
for each day of operation, up to a maximum of $50 per event.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-811) (Bill No. 67-95)
§ 11-2-710. Reporting.
   Within 60 days after the expiration of a Class S or Class T license, each
licensee shall submit a report under oath to the Director that includes an
accounting of all funds received and a listing of the names, addresses, ages,
and date of membership of all individuals who managed or operated any gaming
device or game at the event. The report shall include a statement that each
individual operating a gaming device during the event obtained membership in
the eligible organization in accordance with the organization's charter and
bylaws and has been a member of the eligible organization for 12 months prior
to the event.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 2-812) (Bill No. 46-92; Bill No. 67-95)
SUBTITLE 8. WHEELS OF FORTUNE (CLASS U)
§ 11-2-801. Class U license.
   (a)   License required. A Class U license is required to operate wheels of
fortune or similar devices at a bull roast or similar type of outing by a
nonprofit organization.
   (b)   Fee. The fee for a Class U license is $50 a day.
   (c)   Investigation; issuance. The Director may not authorize the issuance
of a Class U license if it is found on investigation that the proposed
operation of the devices at the premises would create a nuisance or be
detrimental to the peace and welfare of the community or the applicant is not a
nonprofit organization.
   (d)   Limitations on issuance. A license may not be issued to the same
organization for more than one day in each month.
   (e)   Scope. A Class U license authorizes the licensee to operate not more
than five paddle wheels, wheels of fortune, or big six wheels for one day at a
bull roast or similar type of outing.
   (f)   Contents. Each license shall show the day on which the licensed
devices are authorized.
   (g)   Prizes. A Class U licensee may issue an award or prize or a thing of
value not exceeding $50 in value for a score achieved on any wheel devices for
which the license was issued.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 2-1001, 2-1002, 2-1003, 2-1004, 2-1005, 2-1006, 2-1007)
TITLE 3. AUCTIONEERS
Section
   
11-3-101.   Generally.
§ 11-3-101. Auctioneers.
   (a)   Definition. In this title "auctioneer" means a person who receives
compensation for conducting an auction sale.
   (b)   License required. An auctioneer may not conduct an auction sale in the
County without an auctioneer's license.
   (c)   Display. An auctioneer shall display the license during any auction
sale conducted in the County. The auctioneer also shall display the license
number in a prominent place in all advertisements.
   (d)   Fees. The fee for an auctioneer's license is $250. The licensee shall
pay a late fee of $50 for a failure to renew the license prior to its
expiration.
   (e)   Expiration. Each auctioneer's license expires on June 1 of each year.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 3-101, 3-102, 3-103, 3-104) (Bill No. 46-92; Bill No.
10-94)
State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-202.
TITLE 4. CONSTRUCTION TRADE LICENSES
Section
Subtitle 1. General Provisions
   
11-4-101.   Scope.
   
11-4-102.   Licenses required.
   
11-4-103.   Term; renewal.
   
11-4-104.   Display of license; sign.
   
11-4-105.   Change of business location.
   
11-4-106.   Compliance with all laws and regulations.
   
11-4-107.   Suspension; revocation.
Subtitle 2. Boards and Commissions
   
11-4-201.   General provisions.
   
11-4-202.   Board of Electrical Examiners.
   
11-4-203.   Gas Commission.
   
11-4-204.   Board of Environmental Systems Examiners.
   
11-4-205.   Plumbing Commission.
Subtitle 3. Electrical Licenses
   
11-4-301.   Scope.
   
11-4-302.   License classes.
   
11-4-303.   Qualifications.
   
11-4-304.   Application; fees.
   
11-4-305.   Examination.
   
11-4-306.   Insurance.
   
11-4-307.   Apprentices.
   
11-4-308.   Transferability.
   
11-4-309.   Inactive licenses.
Subtitle 4. Gasfitter Licenses
   
11-4-401.   Definitions.
   
11-4-402.   Scope.
   
11-4-403.   Qualifications.
   
11-4-404.   Application fee; license fees.
   
11-4-405.   Insurance.
   
11-4-406.   Inactive licenses.
Subtitle 5. Mechanical Contractor Licenses
   
11-4-501.   Definitions.
   
11-4-502.   Classes; permissible uses.
   
11-4-503.   State license.
   
11-4-504.   Fees.
   
11-4-505.   Insurance.
   
11-4-506.   Inactive licenses.
Subtitle 6. Plumbing Licenses
   
11-4-601.   Definitions.
   
11-4-602.   Scope of subtitle.
   
11-4-603.   Disposal system contractor.
   
11-4-604.   Utility contractor.
   
11-4-605.   Qualifications.
   
11-4-606.   Insurance.
   
11-4-607.   Supervision of unlicensed persons.
   
11-4-608.   Transferability.
   
11-4-609.   Fees.
   
11-4-610.   Inactive licenses.
SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11-4-101. Scope.
   This title applies to electrical, gasfitting, mechanical, and plumbing
licenses.
§ 11-4-102. Licenses required.
   (a)   Electrical. A person may not engage in or pursue the work, trade, or
business of installing, erecting, repairing, or providing maintenance service
for electrical conductors, appliances, or devices that utilize electric current
for their operation or for the production of light, heat, or power without an
electrician's license issued by the Department.
   (b)   Gasfitting. A person may not work as a journeyman gasfitter, master
gasfitter, restricted gasfitter, or restricted journeyman gasfitter without a
license issued by the Department.
   (c)   Mechanical.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsections (c)(2) and (c)(3), a person may
not engage in the pursuit of the mechanical trade or business without a license
issued by the Department.
      (2)   A person possessing a master electrician's license issued by the
Department is not required to be licensed to install, service, repair, or
replace individually-controlled electric resistance heat.
      (3)   A license is not required for a person employed by a public utility
or by the United States Government while the person is performing work on
installations or systems on or within buildings or structures owned or occupied
by the employer; for the installation, maintenance, repair, or replacement of
refrigeration, air conditioning, or heating equipment in or on motor vehicles
or railroad rolling stock; or for the installation, maintenance, repair, or
replacement of self-contained heating, cooling, refrigerating, ventilating, or
other appliances requiring 115 volts or less of electrical current.
   (d)   Plumbing. A person may not engage in the business or work of plumbing,
including constructing, altering, repairing, modifying, or installing sewage
disposal systems in the County, as a master plumber, journeyman plumber,
utility contractor, or disposal system contractor in the County, or do any
plumbing work in the County, without a license issued by the Department.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 6-301, 7-301, 11-301, 14-301) (Bill No. 23-04)
State Code reference – Business Occupations and Professions Article, Titles 6
and 12.
§ 11-4-103. Term; renewal.
   (a)   Term. A license issued under this title is valid for a term of one
year from the month of issuance.
   (b)   Renewal before expiration. A license is renewable if an application
for renewal is filed on or before the expiration date, the required renewal fee
is paid, and the applicant complies with the provisions of this title. An
electrician's license is renewable without examination if the application for
renewal is filed on or before the expiration date.
   (c)   Renewal after expiration. The Director may renew a license that has
not been renewed before the expiration date if an application for renewal is
filed within 30 days after the expiration date, the applicant pays the renewal
fee and a late fee of $25, and the applicant complies with the provisions of
this title. Otherwise, a license that has not been renewed on or before the
expiration date may not be renewed unless the applicant complies with the
requirements for an original license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 6-314, 7-312, 11-313, 14-313) (Bill No. 46-92)
§ 11-4-104. Display of license; sign.
   (a)   Possession. A licensee shall carry the license while engaged in work
and exhibit the license upon request.
   (b)   At place of business. A licensee shall display the license
conspicuously in the office or place of business of the licensee.
   (c)   Motor vehicle. A licensee shall display a sign conspicuously on the
licensee's motor vehicle when the licensee is actually pursuing the licensee's
trade. The sign shall contain the name of the licensee as it appears on the
face of the license and the licensee's telephone number.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 6-313, 7-310, 11-312, 14-312) (Bill No. 75-91)
§ 11-4-105. Change of business location.
   A licensee shall notify the Department promptly of a change in the location
of the principal place of business and shall remove advertising signs from the
premises vacated.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 7-311)
§ 11-4-106. Compliance with all laws and regulations.
   All work performed by licensees shall comply with all applicable federal,
state, and County law, regulations, the Design Manual, and the County's
Standard Specifications and Details for Construction.
§ 11-4-107. Suspension; revocation.
   (a)   Grounds. The Director may suspend or revoke a license for:
      (1)   performing or permitting the performance of defective or dangerous
work;
      (2)   permitting an unlicensed person to utilize the license to secure a
permit from the Department;
      (3)   securing a permit for the use of an unlicensed person whose work is
not done under the licensee's supervision;
      (4)   failing to correct a violation within 30 days after having been
notified of the violation by the Department; and
      (5)   a violation of the provisions of this article.
   (b)   Hearing. Except for a suspension under §
11-1-103, a license may be suspended or revoked only after a hearing before the
Director and the applicable Board or Commission. At least 14 days before the
hearing, the Director shall notify the licensee by certified mail of the
nature, time, and place of the alleged violation, the date, hour, and place of
the hearing, and possible penalties. If the Director revokes or suspends the
license, the licensee shall surrender the license immediately. When justified
by the circumstances, the Director may issue a written warning to the licensee
or may allow the licensee to rectify the violation within a specified time.
   (c)   Advice of Board or Commission. In all matters of suspension and
revocation, the Director shall seek the advice and guidance of the applicable
Board or Commission but is not bound by that advice.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 6-315, 7-314, 11-315, 14-314)
Charter reference – §§
601 et seq.
SUBTITLE 2. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 11-4-201. General provisions.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to the Board of Electrical Examiners, the
Gas Commission, the Board of Environmental Systems Examiners, and the Plumbing
Commission.
   (b)   Terms. The terms of the members run concurrently with the term of the
County Executive or until the successors of the members are duly appointed.
   (c)   Vacancy. Whenever a vacancy occurs during the term of a member, the
County Executive shall appoint a qualified successor to complete the unexpired
balance of the term.
   (d)   Officers. The Board or Commission shall elect from its membership a
Chair and a Vice Chair. It shall be the Chair's duty to preside over the
meetings.
   (e)   Meetings. The Board or Commission shall meet at the request of the
Director. The Chair also shall schedule meetings on the request of four members
of the Board.
   (f)   Notice. Unless all members waive notice, each member is entitled to at
least five days' written notice of a meeting.
   (g)   Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum. Business shall be
conducted by majority vote.
   (h)   Reimbursement of expenses. Members are not entitled to compensation
for their services, but are entitled to reimbursement for reasonable and
necessary expenses as provided in the budget.
   (i)   Rules of procedure. The Board or Commission may adopt rules of
procedure and bylaws for the orderly conduct of business.
   (j)   Duties. The Board or Commission shall advise the Director on the
issuance of licenses; hear complaints relating to violations of this title and
advise the Director of its findings and recommendations; advise and assist in
the adoption of rules and regulations; and generally advise and assist the
Director with respect to the provisions of this title. In addition, the Board
of Electrical Examiners shall ascertain by appropriate written examination the
qualifications and capabilities of persons who are or who desire to be engaged
in the electrical trade.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 6-202, 6-203, 6-204, 7-202, 7-203, 7-204, 11-202, 11-
203, 11-204, 14-202, 14-203, 14-204) (Bill No. 57-89; Bill No. 61-91; Bill No.
75-91; Bill No. 23-04)
§ 11-4-202. Board of Electrical Examiners.
   (a)   Established. There is a Board of Electrical Examiners.
   (b)   Membership. The Board consists of seven members appointed by the
County Executive who shall be residents of the County or actively engaged in
business in the County. Of the seven members:
      (1)   four shall hold a master general electrician's license and, of
these four, one shall be actively engaged in line construction and high-voltage
cable and switch gear installation and two shall be actively engaged in general
electrical construction;
      (2)   one shall be a professional electrical engineer;
      (3)   one shall be a representative of a public service corporation
enfranchised to distribute electrical power in the County; and
      (4)   one shall be appointed from the public at large.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 6-201, 6-202)
§ 11-4-203. Gas Commission.
   (a)   Established. There is a Gas Commission.
   (b)   Membership. The Commission consists of 11 members appointed by the
County Executive. Of the 11 members:
      (1)   eight shall be the same persons appointed to the Plumbing
Commission;
      (2)   one shall be a master gasfitter who is a resident of the County and
engaged in full-time practice of the profession in the County;
      (3)   one shall be a representative of a public service corporation
enfranchised to distribute gas in the County; and
      (4)   one shall be a representative of the suppliers of liquefied
petroleum gases.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 7-201, 7-202)
§ 11-4-204. Board of Environmental Systems Examiners.
   (a)   Established. There is a Board of Environmental Systems Examiners.
   (b)   Membership. The Board consists of seven members appointed by the
County Executive who shall be residents of the County or actively engaged in
business in the County. Of the seven members:
      (1)   at least two shall hold a master heating, cooling, and
refrigeration license;
      (2)   at least one shall hold a master restricted mechanical license;
      (3)   at least one shall hold a master electrician's license;
      (4)   at least one shall hold a master plumber's license; and
      (5)   one shall be appointed from the public at large.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 11-201, 11-202) (Bill No. 57-89; Bill No. 61-91)
§ 11-4-205. Plumbing Commission.
   (a)   Established. There is a Plumbing Commission.
   (b)   Membership. The Plumbing Commission consists of eight members
appointed by the County Executive. Of the eight members:
      (1)   one shall be an employee of the Department of Public Works;
      (2)   one shall be designated by the Health Officer;
      (3)   four shall be master plumbers who are residents of the County and
engaged in the full-time practice of the profession in the County;
      (4)   one shall be a utility contractor who is a resident of the County
and engaged in the full-time practice of the profession in the County; and
      (5)   one shall be a disposal system contractor who is a resident of the
County and engaged in the full-time practice of the profession in the County.
   (c)   Appointment from lists. The master plumbers shall be appointed from a
list of eight names submitted to the County Executive by the Annapolis and Anne
Arundel County Master Plumbers' Association, Inc. The utility contractor shall
be appointed from a list of three names submitted to the County Executive by a
majority of the utility contractors licensed to do business in the County, or
if there exists a formal organization to which a majority of the contractors
belong, the list shall be submitted by that organization. The disposal system
contractor shall be appointed from a list of three names submitted to the
County Executive by the Anne Arundel County Disposal Systems Contractors'
Association.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 14-201, 14-202) (Bill No. 75-91; Bill No. 23-04)
SUBTITLE 3. ELECTRICAL LICENSES
§ 11-4-301. Scope.
   (a)   Applicability. This subtitle applies to electrical equipment and the
installation of electrical equipment for:
      (1)   light, heat, or power within or on public or private buildings,
structures, or premises, including yards, carnival and parking lots, and
industrial substations;
      (2)   power supply to radio and television transmitting and receiving
systems in or on buildings, structures, or premises; and
      (3)   burglary alarm systems or robbery alarm systems.
   (b)   Inapplicability. This subtitle does not apply to:
      (1)   employees or agents of electric light and power companies, electric
railway companies, telegraph or telephone companies, while performing work on
the companies' own buildings, plants, installations, or systems; or
      (2)   employees of the State or the United States government while
performing work on State or federal buildings, plants, installations, or
systems; or
      (3)   persons making electrical installations in ships, boats,
automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles, other than trailers being used for
residential or office use or repairing equipment installed in any of them.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 6-101) (Bill No. 41-89)
§ 11-4-302. License classes.
   (a)   Three classes. There are three classes of electrician's licenses:
master general electrician; master limited electrician; and restricted
electrician.
   (b)   Master general electrician. A master general electrician's license may
be issued to an applicant who is eligible under this subtitle. The license
authorizes the licensee or a person under the supervision of the licensee to
perform work described in §
11-4-301(a).
   (c)   Master limited electrician. A master limited electrician's license may
be issued to an applicant who is eligible under this subtitle. The license
authorizes the licensee or a person under the supervision of a licensee to
perform the work described in §
11-4-301(a), provided the work is performed only on the premises occupied by
the licensee and is performed only in existing buildings from an existing
distribution system.
   (d)   Restricted electrician. A restricted electrician's license shall be
issued to a person determined to be qualified by an examination given by the
Board of Electrical Examiners. The license authorizes the holder to make
installation only from the point of distribution to the equipment being
installed and to maintain and repair the particular type of electrical
equipment specified in the license. Holders of licenses restricted to
electrical household appliances, radio, television, electronics, motor repairs,
and motor services may not make installation of electrical wiring from the
point of distribution to the equipment being installed.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 6-302)
§ 11-4-303. Qualifications.
   (a)   Master general electrician. An applicant seeking to take the written
examination for the license for a master general electrician shall have engaged
continuously during the three years immediately preceding the date of the
application as an apprentice, journeyman, or helper under the direction and
supervision of a licensed master general electrician or master limited
electrician and have a total of seven years' experience. The Board of
Electrical Examiners may award a credit not to exceed two years against these
time and experience requirements for a successfully completed trade school or
any other educational institution course of study that in the opinion of the
Board of Electrical Examiners provides a person with the knowledge and skill
required of a master general electrician.
   (b)   Master limited electrician. An applicant seeking to take the written
examination for the license for a master limited electrician shall have worked
under the direction and supervision of a licensed master general electrician or
master limited electrician for at least two years immediately preceding the
date of the license application.
   (c)   Restricted electrician. An applicant seeking to take the written
examination for the license for a restricted electrician shall have worked
under the direction and supervision of a licensed restricted or master
electrician for at least one year immediately preceding the date of the license
application.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 6-303, 6-304, 6-305)
§ 11-4-304. Application; fees.
   An applicant for an electrician's license shall file at least 30 days before
the date of the examination an application to take the examination and pay an
application fee of $25. In addition, an individual shall pay a fee of $60 for
the original issuance or annual renewal of a license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 6-306, 6-308) (Bill No. 11-86; Bill No. 46-92)
§ 11-4-305. Examination.
   (a)   Generally. The Board of Electrical Examiners shall conduct written
examinations of eligible applicants for the licenses of master general, master
limited, and restricted electrician. Written notice of the date, hour, and
place of examination shall be mailed to each eligible applicant at least 10
days before the date of the examination.
   (b)   Examination fee. Applicants granted permission to take the written
examination shall pay a fee of $50 to the County before commencing the
examination.
   (c)   Nature of examination. The written examination for an electrician's
license shall be based on the National Electrical Code, trade practices and
standards, and electrical theory.
   (d)   Passing grade. To qualify for the granting of an electrician's
license, an applicant shall obtain a grade of at least 70% on the examination.
   (e)   Misconduct during examination. The use of unauthorized material or
other misconduct by an applicant during an examination causes the immediate
rejection of the application and bars the applicant from reexamination for at
least six months.
   (f)   Notification. The Director shall notify an applicant who has taken a
written examination for a license required by this subtitle as soon as
practicable after the examination of the grade received on the examination. An
applicant who has received a passing grade shall be notified that on payment to
the County within 60 days of the appropriate license fee, the applicant shall
be issued the license for which the applicant was examined.
   (g)   Reexamination. Persons who have failed the examination and who have
not successfully appealed to the Board of Appeals may not be reexamined until
the following periods have elapsed from the date of the preceding examination:
after the first examination, three months; after the second examination, six
months; and after the third examination, one year.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 6-307) (Bill No. 11-86; Bill No. 46-92)
Charter reference – §
602.
§ 11-4-306. Insurance.
   A person engaging in the business of electrical contracting under this
subtitle may not undertake to do any electrical work within the County unless
the person carries general liability insurance in the amount of $300,000 and
property damage insurance in the amount of $100,000. Inactive license holders
are exempt from this requirement.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 6-309) (Bill No. 11-86)
§ 11-4-307. Apprentices.
   Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to prevent an employee,
including an apprentice, journeyman, or helper, from performing any of the
kinds of work enumerated in this subtitle provided that the work is performed
under the supervision of a fully licensed master or restricted electrician,
whichever is applicable. The work performed is the responsibility of the
licensee.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 6-311)
§ 11-4-308. Transferability.
   A license under this subtitle may not be transferred.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 6-312)
§ 11-4-309. Inactive licenses.
   (a)   How accomplished. On written request and the payment of a $25
conversion fee, a person issued a license under this subtitle may place the
license on inactive status.
   (b)   Renewal. An inactive license shall be renewed annually by paying a
renewal fee of $10.
   (c)   Insurance; work. During the period the license is inactive, the
licensee is not required to furnish proof of insurance and may not perform work
for which the license was required.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 6-316) (Bill No. 46-92)
SUBTITLE 4. GASFITTER LICENSES
§ 11-4-401. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Journeyman gasfitter" means a person who hires out to work at the
gasfitting business for or under the direction of a master gasfitter.
      (2)   "Master gasfitter" means a person who regularly engages in and
works at the gasfitting business on the person's own account or as the licensed
representative of a firm or corporation; employs and directs journeyman
gasfitters and apprentice gasfitters; and has or represents a firm or
corporation which has an established place of business within the State.
      (3)   "Restricted gasfitter" means a person who regularly engages in and
works in the gasfitting business utilizing liquid petroleum gases only on the
person's own account or as the licensed representative of a firm or corporation
and has or represents a firm or corporation which has an established place of
business within the State.
      (4)   "Restricted journeyman gasfitter" means a person who hires out to
work at the gasfitting business pertaining to liquid petroleum gases only under
the direction of a restricted gasfitter.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 7-101)
§ 11-4-402. Scope.
   (a)   Applicability. This subtitle applies to new connections and new
gasfitting installations, including the venting of new fixtures or appliances
on installation if necessary; to an extension of a gas piping system in an
existing structure; and to repairs to and alterations of existing gas piping
systems. This subtitle also applies to constructing, installing, repairing, or
equipping from the outlet of a meter or regulator supplying natural gas,
manufactured gas, a mixture of natural gas or manufactured gas, undiluted and
liquefied petroleum gases, liquefied petroleum gas-air mixtures, or mixtures of
these gases to a structure within the County:
      (1)   low-pressure (not exceeding one-half pound a square inch or 14
inches water column) domestic and commercial piping systems extending from the
outlet of the meter set assembly, or the outlet of the service regulator when a
meter is not provided, to the inlet connections of appliances;
      (2)   domestic and commercial appliances supplied at a pressure of one-
half pound a square inch or less; or
      (3)   gas distribution systems that are wholly located on private
property and designed to serve more than two individual dwelling units,
multifamily construction, industrial or commercial units, or a combination of
individual dwelling units, multifamily construction, or industrial or
commercial units.
   (b)   Inapplicability. This subtitle does not apply to constructing,
installing, repairing, or equipping gas piping systems for operating at
pressures greater than two pounds per square inch; gas equipment supplied
through gas piping systems operating at pressures greater than two pounds per
square inch; or gas equipment designed and installed for specified
manufacturing, production, processing, and power generating applications.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 7-102) (Bill No. 75-91)
§ 11-4-403. Qualifications.
   An applicant for a license as a master gasfitter, restricted gasfitter,
journeyman gasfitter, or restricted journeyman gasfitter shall hold a State of
Maryland license and be familiar with this subtitle, applicable provisions of
the County Building Code, and the rules and regulations of the County Health
Department and the State Department of Health and Mental Hygiene applicable to
gasfitting work.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 7-302)
§ 11-4-404. Application fee; license fees.
   (a)   Application fee. An applicant for a license shall pay an application
fee of $25.
   (b)   License fees. The annual license fee for a master gasfitter or
restricted gasfitter license is $60 and the annual license fee for a journeyman
gasfitter or restricted journeyman gasfitter license is $25, except that the
annual license fee for a master plumber licensed by the County who obtains a
master gasfitter's license is $30 and the annual license fee for a journeyman
plumber licensed by the County who obtains a journeyman gasfitter's license is
$25.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 7-303, 7-305) (Bill No. 46-92)
§ 11-4-405. Insurance.
   A person engaging in the business of plumbing under this subtitle may not
undertake to do any plumbing work within the County unless the person carries
general liability insurance in the amount of $300,000 and property damage
insurance in the amount of $100,000. Inactive license holders are exempt from
this requirement.
§ 11-4-406. Inactive licenses.
   (a)   Generally. A person who holds a master gasfitter's or restricted
gasfitter's license and who is not actively engaged in or working at the
gasfitting business on the person's own account shall inactivate the license by
written request to the Director, enclosing the license and license pocket card
and payment of a $25 conversion fee. An applicant who desires to hold a master
or restricted gasfitter's license and then inactivate the license may file an
application and, if determined qualified, may request that the license be
issued on an inactive basis. The Director shall order the license and file copy
marked "Voluntarily Inactivated" and attach the written request to the file
copy.
   (b)   Renewal. An inactive license shall be renewed annually by paying a
renewal fee of $10. During the period the license is inactive, the licensee is
not required to furnish proof of insurance and may not perform work for which
the license was required.
   (c)   Reactivation. A person who voluntarily inactivates a master or
restricted gasfitter's license may at a later date reactivate the license by
written request addressed to the Director and on payment of the license renewal
fee and filing the required insurance. If a person surrendering a master
gasfitter's license or restricted gasfitter's license requests, the person may
be issued either a journeyman gasfitter's license or restricted journeyman
gasfitter's license on payment of the required fee in order to continue in the
gasfitting industry in a journeyman capacity.
   (d)   Acknowledgement. An acknowledgement shall be furnished to a person
inactivating a license stating the type of license being inactivated. The
statement shall be evidence of the person's prior qualification whenever the
person applies to reactivate the license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 7-313) (Bill No. 46-92)
SUBTITLE 5. MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR LICENSES
§ 11-4-501. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
       (1)   "Pursuit of the mechanical trade or business" means an act of
installing, maintaining, or repairing air conditioning, heating, or
refrigeration systems excluding the transport of materials and equipment to the
job site, the act of rigging for placement of equipment, the act of insulating
and components of the system, and the act of manufacturing and assembling such
systems in a shop or manufacturing environment not on the job site. For
purposes of this definition, "refrigeration system" means a system used to cool
a surface or area below 55 degrees Fahrenheit or 12.8 Celsius.
      (2)   "Ventilation" means a system of supply or removal of air by natural
or mechanical means.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 11-101)
§ 11-4-502. Classes; permissible uses.
   (a)   Generally. The following licenses may be issued under this subtitle
and shall specify the type of work the licensee is authorized to perform:
master heating, cooling, and refrigeration license; master restricted mechanic
license; and journeyman mechanic.
   (b)   Master heating, cooling, and refrigeration license. The holder of a
master heating, cooling, and refrigeration license may perform any of the work
authorized to holders of any of the licenses listed in subsection (a).
   (c)   Master restricted mechanic license. The holder of a master restricted
mechanic license may perform only the type of work that is specified on the
license.
   (d)   Journeyman mechanic license. The holder of a journeyman mechanic
license may perform only the same type of work that the holder's employer is
authorized to perform. The master licensee is responsible for all work
performed by the journeyman mechanic.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 11-302)
§ 11-4-503. State license.
   A master heating, cooling, and refrigeration license, a master restricted
mechanic license, and a journeyman mechanic license may not be issued unless
the individual holds a State license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 11-303)
§ 11-4-504. Fees.
   (a)   Application fees. An applicant shall pay an application fee of $25.
   (b)   License fees. The annual license fee for a master heating, cooling,
and refrigeration license or for a master restricted mechanic license is $60,
except that the annual license fee is $30 if the individual holds a current
master electrician's license, master plumber's license, or master gasfitter's
license. The annual license fee for a journeyman mechanic license is $25,
except that the annual fee is $12.50 if the individual holds a current
journeyman plumber's license or journeyman gasfitter's license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 11-304, 11-306) (Bill No. 46-92)
§ 11-4-505. Insurance.
   A person other than a journeyman mechanic who is licensed under this
subtitle may not undertake to do any work within the County unless the person
carries general liability insurance in the amount of $300,000 and property
damage insurance in the amount of $100,000. Inactive license holders are exempt
from this requirement.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 11-308) (Bill No. 2-88)
§ 11-4-506. Inactive licenses.
   On written request and the payment of a $25 conversion fee, a person issued
a license under this subtitle may place the license on inactive status. An
inactive license may be renewed annually by paying a renewal fee of $10. While
the license is inactive, the licensee may not perform work for which a license
is required.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 11-314) (Bill No. 2-88; Bill No. 46-92)
SUBTITLE 6. PLUMBING LICENSES

State Code reference – Business Occupations and Professions Article, Title 12.
§ 11-4-601. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Private sewerage system" means a system of sewers and
appurtenances for the collection and treatment of sewage located in private
property and disposed of into the soil.
      (2)   "Semi-public sewerage system" means a system of sewers and
appurtenances for the collection, transportation, and treatment of sewage and
industrial wastes operated by an individual or commercial enterprise solely for
a single ownership property and operated under the supervision of the
Department of Public Works.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 14-101) (Bill No. 23-04)
§ 11-4-602. Scope of subtitle.
   This subtitle applies to all plumbing, private and semi-public sewage
disposal system construction, private water distribution systems, private
sewage collection systems, and private storm drain collection systems,
including work authorized to be performed by utility contractors under this
subtitle, done in any structure or on any public or private property in the
County. This subtitle also applies only to that portion of disposal systems
contracting that includes installing septic tanks, drywells, drainfield
systems, and semi- public package sewage disposal systems.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 14-102)
§ 11-4-603. Disposal system contractor.
   (a)   Scope of license. A licensed disposal system contractor may construct,
alter, repair, modify, and install private sewerage systems and semi-public
sewerage systems beginning at a point not less than five feet from the wall
through which the sewage outlet runs from the building to be served by the
sewerage system in other than single-family dwellings and beginning at the
inlet to the septic tank for single-family dwellings.
   (b)   Licensed master plumber. Nothing in this section precludes a licensed
master plumber from performing work described in this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 14-302)
§ 11-4-604. Utility contractor.
   (a)   Scope of license. A licensed utility contractor may construct, alter,
repair, or modify a private water distribution system, private sewerage system
or private storm drain system or any component part of these systems that
connects to a public system beginning at the boundary line of the property on
which the work is performed to five feet from an exterior wall of any structure
on the property, with the exception of a single-family dwelling. The physical
connection from the structure to the system shall be made by a licensed
plumber.
   (b)   Licensed master plumber. Nothing in this section precludes a licensed
master plumber from performing the work described in this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 14-303)
§ 11-4-605. Qualifications.
   (a)   Master plumbers. A person may not be issued a master plumber's license
unless the person holds a master plumber's certificate issued by the State.
   (b)   Journeymen plumbers. A person may not be issued a journeyman plumber's
license unless the person holds a journeyman plumber's certificate issued by
the State.
   (c)   Disposal system contractors. A person may not be issued a disposal
system contractor's license unless the person has at least two years'
experience in constructing, altering, repairing, modifying, and installing
sewage disposal systems under the supervision of a licensed master plumber or a
licensed disposal system contractor and passes the examination administered by
the Plumbing Commission.
   (d)   Utility contractors. A person may not be issued a utility contractor's
license unless the person has at least four years' experience in constructing,
altering, repairing, modifying, and installing water distribution and sewage
collection systems and storm drainage systems under the supervision of a
licensed master plumber or a person actively engaged in the utility contractor
business and passes the examination administered by the Plumbing Commission.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 14-304, 14-305, 14-306, 14-307) (Bill No. 12-86; Bill
No. 46-92)
State Code reference – Business Occupations and Professions Article, Title 12.
§ 11-4-606. Insurance.
   A person engaging in the business of plumbing under this subtitle may not
undertake to do any plumbing work within the County unless the person carries
general liability insurance in the amount of $300,000 and property damage
insurance in the amount of $100,000. Inactive license holders are exempt from
this requirement.
§ 11-4-607. Supervision of unlicensed persons.
   A master plumber may not permit an unlicensed person to work on any plumbing
installation without direct supervision of the master plumber or a journeyman
plumber under the direct supervision of the master plumber.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 14-310)
§ 11-4-608. Transferability.
   A license required by this subtitle may not be transferred.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 14-311)
§ 11-4-609. Fees.
   (a)   Application fee. On submission of an application for a license under
this subtitle, an individual shall pay an application fee of $25.
   (b)   Issuance and annual renewal fee. An individual shall pay to the County
for the issuance or annual renewal of a license a fee as follows:
      (1)   for a master plumber, $60;
      (2)   for a journeyman plumber, $25;
      (3)   for a disposal system contractor, $60; and
      (4)   for a utility contractor, $60.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 14-315) (Bill No. 46-92)
§ 11-4-610. Inactive licenses.
   On written request and the payment of a $25 conversion fee, a person issued
a license under this subtitle may place the license on inactive status. An
inactive license shall be renewed annually by paying a renewal fee of $10.
During the period the license is inactive, the licensee may not perform work
for which the license was required.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 14-316) (Bill No. 46-92)
TITLE 5. FIRES
Section
   
11-5-101.   Definitions.
   
11-5-102.   Authorization for certain fires without a license.
   
11-5-103.   License.
   
11-5-104.   Notice of violation and cure.
§ 11-5-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Air pollution" means the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of any
substance that is present in such quantities and is of such duration that it
may be predicted with reasonable certainty to be injurious to property or to
human, plant, or animal life or unreasonably interferes with the proper
enjoyment of property because of the emission of odors, solids, vapors,
liquids, or gases.
      (2)   "Emission" means any substance other than water, in an uncombined
form, discharged into the atmosphere, including odors, particulate matter,
vapors, and gases.
      (3)   "Household refuse" means waste generated by household activities
that contains a mixture of trash, rubbish, and garbage, a moisture content of
up to 50%, and up to 7% incombustible solids.
      (4)   "Opacity" means the degree to which emissions reduce the
transmission of light and obscure the view of an object in the background as
described in the United States Environmental Protection Agency's April, 1983,
Reference Method 9 - "Visible Determination of the opacity of Emissions From
Stationary Sources," and any subsequent revisions.
      (5)   "Open fire" means a fire in which material is burned in the open or
in a receptacle other than one connected to a stack or chimney.
      (6)   "Salamander" means a device fueled by oil or gas that is designed
specifically for space heating or warming of outdoor workers or facilities.
(1985 Code, Art. 14, § 7-101) (Bill No. 70-92)
§ 11-5-102. Authorization for certain fires without a license.
   (a)   With approval from the Health Officer and under supervision by the
Fire Chief. With the approval of the Health Officer and with all reasonable
means taken to minimize smoke, the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee may
permit an open fire when necessary to instruct public firefighters or
industrial employees under supervision of the Fire Control Official or to
protect public health or safety when other means for disposing of hazardous
materials are not available.
   (b)   When license not required. The following open fires are allowed
without a license if the fire does not create a nuisance or air pollution:
      (1)   In those areas where no provision is made for public collection of
leaves, burning of leaves originating on the premises by householders is
allowed if the fire is located at least 300 feet from any habitable dwelling or
place where people work or congregate.
      (2)   In those areas where there is no public collection of refuse,
burning of household refuse originating on the premises by the householder is
allowed if the fire is located at least 300 feet from any habitable dwelling or
place where people work or congregate and materials are not burned that create
smoke emissions of an opacity of 20% or greater.
      (3)   An open fire is allowed for the cooking of food on other than
commercial premises.
      (4)   An open fire with a volume of less than one cubic yard is allowed
for recreational purposes, such as campfires and bonfires.
      (5)   A salamander designed specifically for space heating or warming of
outdoor workers and facilities is allowed.
(1985 Code, Art. 14, §§ 7-203, 7-204) (Bill No. 70-92; Bill No. 7-03)
§ 11-5-103. License.
   (a)   Generally required. Except as otherwise provided in this title, a
person may not cause or allow an open fire without a license.
   (b)   Issuance. The Health Department shall issue a license allowing an open
fire if the Health Officer makes written findings that:
      (1)   the material to be burned originated on the premises on which it is
to be burned;
      (2)   there is no practical alternate method for the disposal of the
material to be burned or to conduct the desired activity;
      (3)   the fire will not create a hazardous condition of air pollution or
nuisance;
      (4)   there will be no burning within 500 yards of an occupied structure
or a heavily traveled public road, except that the Health Officer may recommend
that a license be issued for disposal by burning by a method acceptable to the
Health Officer if this distance limitation cannot be met;
      (5)   fire control laws or regulations will not be violated; and
      (6)   other conditions to minimize the creation of smoke, prevent
nuisances and air pollution, and to protect the public health, safety, comfort,
and property of any person will be met.
(1985 Code, Art. 14, §§ 7-201, 7-202) (Bill No. 70-92)
§ 11-5-104. Notice of violation and cure.
   A person who starts, causes, allows, or facilitates a fire without a license
issued by the Health Department or otherwise in violation of this subtitle
shall promptly extinguish the fire on notice from the Health Department, Fire
Department, or Police Department.
(1985 Code, Art. 14, § 7-104) (Bill No. 70-92)
TITLE 6. FOOD SERVICE FACILITIES
Section
   
11-6-101.   Licenses
   
11-6-102.   Inspections.
   
11-6-103.   Polystyrene foam products.
   
11-6-104.   Electronic smoking devices.
§ 11-6-101. Licenses.
   (a)   Health Department responsibility. The Health Department shall be
responsible for conducting plan reviews and issuing licenses for food service
facilities as required by applicable State law and regulation.
   (b)   Plan review fees. The fees for plan reviews are:
      (1)   high/medium priority facilities, structural, $750;
      (2)   high/medium priority facilities, hazard analysis critical control
point, $750; and
      (3)   low priority facilities, structural, $500.
   (c)   License fees. The fees for the licenses are as follows:
      (1)   for a high priority permanent food service facility, $590;
      (2)   for a high priority food service facility that operates fewer than
four months per licensing period, $395;
      (3)   for a medium priority permanent food service facility, $395;
      (4)   for a medium priority food service facility that operates fewer
than six months per licensing period, $195;
      (5)   for a low priority permanent food service facility, $195;
      (6)   for a high or medium priority food service facility operating for a
temporary period, $114;
      (7)   for a low priority food service facility operating for a temporary
period, $35;
      (8)   for a food service facility operating from a mobile unit, $395;
      (9)   for a high priority food service facility operated at a bed and
breakfast, $400;
      (10)   for a medium priority food service facility operated at a bed and
breakfast, $270;
      (11)   for a food service facility operated by an excluded organization,
as defined in the General Health Article, § 21-301, of the State Code, exempt;
and
      (12)   for a semi-permanent food service facility, $395.
   (d)   Penalty fee. Failure to apply for a license renewal or an initial
license within 30 days of notice by the County shall result in a penalty fee of
20% of the license fee. This fee shall be assessed for each 30-day period until
a renewal or initial license application plus penalty fee is received by the
County.
(1985 Code, Art. 14, § 6-101) (Bill No. 37-91; Bill No. 46-92; Bill No. 37-95;
Bill No. 13-05; Bill No. 42-08; Bill No. 56-09; Bill No. 83-12; Bill No. 93-18)
§ 11-6-102. Inspections.
   (a)   Generally. The Health Department shall conduct inspections of food
service facilities as required by applicable State law and regulation.
   (b)   Correction of violations. If an initial inspection determines that the
food service facility is in violation of State law or regulation, the owner
shall correct the violation prior to the re-inspection date.
   (c)   Reinspection fee. If the violation is not corrected at the first re-
inspection, the owner of the food service facility shall be assessed a fee of
$175 for each additional re-inspection.
(1985 Code, Art. 14, § 6-102) (Bill No. 37-95; Bill No. 13-05; Bill No. 42-08)
§ 11-6-103. Polystyrene foam products.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Expanded polystyrene" means blown polystyrene and expanded and
extruded foams that are thermoplastic petrochemical materials utilizing a
styrene monomer and processed by a number of techniques, including fusion of
polymer spheres or expandable bead polystyrene, injection molding, foam
molding, and extrusion-blow molding or extruded foam polystyrene.
      (2)   "Expanded polystyrene food service products" means food containers
or service ware, including dishes, hot and cold beverage cups, trays, cartons
for eggs and other foods, prepared food or leftover containers, and other
products made of expanded polystyrene and used for selling, providing, or
serving food that are intended by the manufacturer to be used once for eating
or drinking or generally recognized by the public as items to be discarded
after one use.
      (3)   "Food service business" means a full-service restaurant, limited-
service restaurant, fast food restaurant, café, delicatessen, coffee shop,
supermarket, grocery store, commercial retailer with grocery departments or
food service, vending truck or cart, food truck, business or institutional
cafeteria, including those operated by or on behalf of County departments and
agencies, and other businesses selling or providing food within the County for
consumption on or off the premises.
   (b)   Prohibition on use of expanded polystyrene food service products. A
food service business may not provide food in expanded polystyrene food service
products, regardless of where the food will be consumed. This prohibition does
not apply to food or beverages filled and sealed in expanded polystyrene
containers outside of the County prior to receipt by a food service business or
to materials used to package raw, uncooked, or butchered meat, fish, poultry,
or seafood for off-premises consumption.
   (c)   Prohibition on sale. A food service business may not sell or offer for
sale expanded polystyrene food service products.
   (d)   Violations. It is a Class E civil offense to violate any provision of
this section. A food service business shall be entitled to a warning for the
first offense.
(Bill No. 5-19)
§ 11-6-104. Electronic smoking devices.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Electronic smoking device" has the meaning stated in § 16.7-101 of
the Business Regulation Article of the State Code.
      (2)   "Restaurant" means a commercial establishment for the sale of food
for on-premises consumption.
   (b)   Prohibition. A restaurant shall prohibit the indoor use of electronic
smoking devices.
   (c)   Violations. It is a Class E civil offense to violate any provision of
this section.
(Bill N. 63-20)
TITLE 6A. HOTELS
Section
   
11-6A-101.   Definitions.
   
11-6A-102.   License required.
   
11-6A-103.   Fees.
   
11-6A-104.   Designation of agent by nonresident applicant.
   
11-6A-105.   Right of entry.
   
11-6A-106.   Approval by Director and Health Officer.
   
11-6A-107.   Term; renewal.
   
11-6A-108.   Display.
   
11-6A-109.   Records.
   
11-6A-110.   Transfer; notice of sale.
   
11-6A-111.   Occupancy limitations.
   
11-6A-112.   Notice of violations.
   
11-6A-113.   Suspension and revocation.
§ 11-6A-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Hotel" means a facility that offers sleeping accommodations to the
transient public and includes a motel and inn.
      (2)   "Unit" means each guest room of a hotel.
(Bill No. 117-15)
§ 11-6A-102. License required.
   A person may not operate a hotel without a license issued by the Department.
A separate license is required for each hotel.
(Bill No. 117-15)
§ 11-6A-103. Fees.
   (a)   Fees generally. Except as provided in subsection (b), fees for initial
issuance of a license and each renewal of a license are:
 
Number of units Fee
1 to 4          $30 per unit
5 to 50         $120 plus $25 per unit
51 and above    $1,370 plus $18 per unit
 
   (b)   Late fee. In addition to any other remedy, for each 30 days or
fraction thereof that the owner of a hotel has operated without a current and
valid license, the County may impose a late fee of 10% of the applicable
license fee or $25, whichever is greater.
   (c)   Collection. Any license fees, including late fees, remaining unpaid
for six months after the licensee has been notified of the imposition of the
fees by the County shall be collected as provided in § 1-9-101 of this Code.
(Bill No. 117-15)
§ 11-6A-104. Designation of agent by nonresident applicant.
   A license may not be issued or renewed for an applicant who is not a
resident of the County unless the applicant has first designated an agent and
an alternate agent for the receipt of notices of violation of this title and
for service of process under this title. Either the agent or the alternate
agent must be a resident of the County. The applicant must provide a notarized
statement authorizing the agent and the alternate agent to act on the
applicant's behalf for the purpose of receiving notices and for service of
process.
(Bill No. 117-15)
§ 11-6A-105. Right of entry.
   For the purposes of licensure approval and periodic inspection of hotels,
the Health Officer and the Director shall have the right of entry upon
reasonable notice to all common areas, all food preparation and food service
areas, and all units. Each hotel shall be inspected by the Director or the
Health Officer at least once every two years. The areas of inspection, the
number and types of units inspected and the frequency of inspection shall be
based on criteria established by the Director and the Health Officer.
(Bill No. 117-15)
§ 11-6A-106. Approval by Director and Health Officer.
   (a)   Issuance. The Department may not issue or renew a license for a hotel
without the approval of the Director and the Health Officer.
   (b)   Approval. The Director and the Health Officer shall approve the
issuance or renewal of a license if an inspection of the hotel for which the
license is sought reveals that the hotel complies with all applicable
requirements of the County Code and all applicable health and safety provisions
of State law over which the Department or the Health Officer has jurisdiction.
   (c)   Noncompliance after inspection; fee. If an applicant for initial
licensure or the renewal of a license for a hotel does not comply with all
applicable requirements of the County Code and all applicable health and safety
provisions of State law over which the Department or the Health Officer has
jurisdiction after an initial inspection and one re-inspection, the Health
Officer may charge a fee of $80 for a second re-inspection and for any
additional inspections needed until the hotel is approved for initial licensure
or the renewal of a license.
(Bill No. 117-15)
§ 11-6A-107. Term; renewal.
   Each initial hotel license expires on January 31 of the second year
following the year of application unless sooner revoked. Subject to the
provisions of this title, a hotel license may be renewed by the Director for
successive two year periods.
(Bill No. 117-15)
§ 11-6A-108. Display.
   A license and any notice of license suspension or revocation shall be
displayed in a conspicuous place within a common area of the hotel.
(Bill No. 117-15)
§ 11-6A-109. Records.
   The owner or other person in charge of a licensed hotel shall keep or cause
to be kept records of each request for repair and each complaint by a guest
that is related to the provisions of the County Code or of applicable health or
safety provisions of State law over which the Department or the Health Officer
has jurisdiction and of each correction made in response to such requests and
complaints. The records shall be made available by the licensee to the Health
Officer or the Director for inspection and copying on demand. The records are
admissible in any administrative or judicial proceeding as prima facie evidence
of the violation or the correction of a violation of the County Code or of
applicable health or safety provisions of State law over which the Director or
the Health Officer has jurisdiction.
(Bill No. 117-15)
§ 11-6A-110. Transfer; notice of sale.
   (a)   Nontransferable. A license is not transferable to another person or to
another hotel.
   (b)   Notice of sale or other disposition. Each licensee shall give written
notice to the Director within one week after having transferred or otherwise
disposed of the legal control of a licensed hotel. The notice shall include the
name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of the
hotel.
(Bill No. 117-15)
§ 11-6A-111. Occupancy limitations.
   Each unit in a hotel shall comply with the occupancy limitations in Section
404 of the Property Maintenance Code, as adopted by the County in the
Construction and Property Maintenance Codes Supplement.
(Bill No. 117-15)
§ 11-6A-112. Notice of violations.
   If, at any time, the Director or the Health Officer finds that conditions of
or practices at a licensed hotel are in violation of the County Code or of
applicable health or safety provisions of State law over which the Director or
the Health Officer has jurisdiction, the Director or the Health Officer shall
provide the licensee with notice of the violation in writing. The notice shall
state that, unless the violations cited are corrected within a designated
reasonable time, the license may be suspended.
(Bill No. 117-15)
§ 11-6A-113. Suspension and revocation.
   (a)   Suspension. At the end of the time designated pursuant to §
11-6A-112 for correction of a violation, the Director or the Health Officer
shall re-inspect the hotel. If the Director or the Health Officer determines
that the violations have not been corrected, the Director shall issue an order
suspending the license, which shall be promptly provided to the licensee. The
order shall provide that the violation cited in the notice and order of
suspension shall be corrected within 30 days of the issuance of the order or
the license shall be revoked.
   (b)   Reinstatement for compliance. If the violation cited in the notice and
the order of suspension is corrected within the 30 days after the issuance of
the order of suspension, the Director shall lift the suspension.
   (c)   Revocation. If the violation cited in the notice and order of
suspension is not corrected within 30 days of the issuance of the order, the
license shall be revoked.
   (d)   Effect of suspension or revocation.
      (1)   Suspension. A hotel may not admit new guests while its license is
suspended.
      (2)   Revocation. A hotel may not operate after its license is revoked. A
revoked license shall not be reinstated.
(Bill No. 117-15)
TITLE 7. HUCKSTERS
Section
   
11-7-101.   License.
§ 11-7-101. License.
   (a)   Definition. In this title "huckster" means a person who moves about
the County on foot, in a vehicle, or by means of a horse or other animal for
the purpose of selling and simultaneously delivering or offering for sale and
simultaneous delivery, at retail, goods of any kind or food other than seafood;
uncooked meats; or fish, produce, farm products, or other perishables in their
natural state, but the term does not include children under the age of 18 who
sell items for the benefit of a civic or charitable endeavor.
   (b)   Required. A person may not operate as a huckster without a huckster's
license issued by the Department.
   (c)   Fee. The fee for a huckster's license is $250 for a term or $25 per
day.
   (d)   Contents. A license issued to a huckster shall describe the licensee
and the purpose for which the license is issued.
   (e)   Term. Except for a huckster's license issued for a single day, a
huckster's license expires one year after the date of issuance.
   (f)   Display. A huckster shall display the license while engaged in the
business.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 8-101, 8-103, 8-104, 8-105, 8-106, 8-107) (Bill No. 46-
92; Bill No. 39-95)
State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-202.
TITLE 8. LIQUID WASTE HAULERS
Section
   
11-8-101.   "Liquid waste hauler" defined.
   
11-8-102.   License.
   
11-8-103.   Vehicles and equipment.
   
11-8-104.   Disposal.
   
11-8-105.   State Code penalties.
§ 11-8-101. "Liquid waste hauler" defined.
   In this title "liquid waste hauler" means a person engaged in the business
of cleaning and emptying a septic tank, seepage pit, privy, or other sewage
disposal facility.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 9A-101) (Bill No. 69-94)
§ 11-8-102. License.
   (a)   Requirement. A person may not engage in business as a liquid waste
hauler unless the person's vehicle is licensed by the Department.
   (b)   Fee. The fee for a liquid waste hauler license is $50.
   (c)   Vehicle inspection and fee. Each vehicle to be used for waste hauling
purposes shall be inspected annually and approved by the Health Department
before the license is issued and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of
$150 for each vehicle inspection.
   (d)   Insurance. A person engaging in the business of liquid waste hauling
under this subtitle may not undertake to do any work in the County unless the
person carries general liability insurance in the amount of $300,000 and
property damage insurance in the amount of $100,000.
   (e)   Transferability. A liquid waste hauler license is not transferable.
   (f)   Term. A liquid waste hauler license expires on May 1 of each year.
   (g)   Renewal. The license may be renewed for a period of one year if an
application for renewal is filed with the Department 30 days before the
expiration of the current license accompanied by a renewal fee of $25 for each
vehicle used for waste hauling purposes.
   (h)   Suspension or revocation. On the advice of the Health Department or
the Department of Public Works that a licensed liquid waste hauler has violated
the provisions of this title, the Director may suspend or revoke the license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 9A-102, 9A-103, 9A-105, 9A-106, 9A-107) (Bill No. 69-94;
Bill No. 13-05; Bill No. 42-08)
§ 11-8-103. Vehicles and equipment.
   (a)   Vehicles. The name and permit number of the liquid waste hauler shall
be legibly lettered in letters that are at least three inches high on both
sides of each vehicle used for waste hauling purposes. Each vehicle used for
waste hauling purposes shall be equipped with a watertight tank or body and be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (b)   Equipment. Portable receptacles used for transporting liquid or solid
waste shall be watertight, equipped with tight-fitting lids, and shall be
cleaned daily. Pumps and hose lines shall be maintained so as to prevent
leakage.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 9A-108, 9A-109) (Bill No. 69-94)
§ 11-8-104. Disposal.
   (a)   Generally. Approval in writing shall be obtained from the Health
Department and the Department of Public Works for each site at which a liquid
waste hauler plans to discharge the waste material collected. Waste material
collected by a liquid waste hauler may not be discharged into ditches,
watercourses, lakes, ponds, tidewater, or at any point where it can pollute a
water supply, bathing area, shellfish-growing area, or at a point not
previously so approved.
   (b)   Prohibition. Waste material collected by a liquid waste hauler may not
be dumped or otherwise deposited into the County wastewater system without
written permission from the Department of Public Works.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 9A-110) (Bill No. 69-94)
§ 11-8-105. State Code penalties.
    In addition to the penalties provided under this Code, any person who
violates any provision of this title is subject to the penalties provided in
the State Code and the regulations promulgated under the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 9A-112) (Bill No. 69-94)
TITLE 9. MANUFACTURED MOBILE HOMES
Section
   
11-9-101.   Definitions.
   
11-9-102.   Dealer's license required; term; revocation.
   
11-9-103.   Mobile home park license.
   
11-9-104.   License for manufactured home outside a mobile home park.
   
11-9-105.   Revocation, denial, or suspension of license – In general.
   
11-9-106.   Summary revocation or suspension of license.
§ 11-9-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Manufactured home" means a structure that is transportable in one
or more sections; that, in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet (2,438 body mm)
or more in width or 40 body feet (12,192 body mm) or more in length or that,
when located onsite, is 320 square feet (30m2) or more; that is built on a
permanent chassis; and that is designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
the term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical
systems contained in the home; a mobile home; a structure that meets all the
requirements of this definition other than the size requirements and with
respect to which the manufacturer has filed the certification required by the
United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development or, for mobile homes
built prior to June 15, 1976, a label certifying compliance to the Standard for
Mobile Homes, NFPA501, in effect at the time of manufacture.
      (2)   "Mobile home park" means a plot of ground on which two or more
manufactured homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located,
regardless of whether a charge is made for the accommodation.
      (3)   "Mobile home space" means a plot of ground in a mobile home park
designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home.
(1985 Code, Art. 23, § 1-101) (Bill No. 23-04)
§ 11-9-102. Dealer's license required; term; revocation.
   (a)   Requirement. A person may not regularly engage in the sale of
manufactured homes in the County without a license issued by the Department.
   (b)   Application. To apply for a license, an applicant shall file an
application with the Department.
   (c)   License issuance; fee. The Director shall issue a license on payment
of a license fee of $100 by the applicant and on determining that the applicant
has complied with all applicable zoning laws and keeps adequate records of
sales.
   (d)   Expiration; late fee. A license issued under this section expires on
June 30 of each year. A license that has not been renewed prior to its
expiration may be renewed on payment of the license fee and a late penalty of
$25.
   (e)   Display. A license issued under this subtitle shall be conspicuously
displayed in the office or place of business of the licensee.
(1985 Code, Art. 23, § 1-103) (Bill No. 46-92)
§ 11-9-103. Mobile home park license.
   (a)   Requirement. A person may not maintain or operate a mobile home park
without a mobile home park license issued by the Department.
   (b)   Issuance. On the completion of construction of a mobile home park or
an addition, revision, or modification of an existing mobile home park the
Director shall issue a mobile home park license.
   (c)   Fees. The annual license fee for a mobile home park is $5 per space.
There is a late fee of $25 for every 30 days that the fee remains unpaid or 10%
of the license fee, whichever is greater. The fee for the transfer of a mobile
home park license is $50.
   (d)   Term. A mobile home park license expires on December 31 of each year.
   (e)   Renewal; transfer. A mobile home park license may not be renewed or
transferred by the Department unless for the license year in question:
      (1)   the Department determines that mobile home spaces, premises, and
buildings and fixtures in the mobile home park comply with the applicable
Building, Electrical, and Plumbing Codes, applicable subdivision regulations,
and other applicable provisions of law;
      (2)   a certificate from the Fire Chief is filed that mobile home spaces,
premises, buildings, and fixtures in the mobile home park comply with the Fire
Prevention Code of the County and this title;
      (3)   a certificate from the Health Department is filed that the mobile
home spaces, premises, buildings, and fixtures in the mobile home park comply
with the standards and regulations of the County Board of Health, the State
Board of Health, and the State Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
   (f)   Display. The mobile home park license certificate shall be
conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the mobile home
park.
(1985 Code, Art. 23, § 1-303) (Bill No. 46-92; Bill No. 59-92; Bill No. 7-03)
§ 11-9-104. License for manufactured home outside a mobile home park.
   (a)   Requirement. The owner of the property outside of a mobile home park
on which a manufactured home is located shall annually apply for and obtain a
manufactured home space license for the manufactured home.
   (b)   Fee. The fee for a manufactured home space license is $100 and is
payable in January of each year.
(1985 Code, Art. 23, §§ 1-201, 1-304) (Bill No. 46-92; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No.
57-20)
§ 11-9-105. Revocation, denial, or suspension of license – In general.
   (a)   Grounds. The Director may deny, revoke, or suspend any license issued
under this title for a violation of this title or any provision of County law.
   (b)   Notice and hearing. Before denying, suspending, or revoking a license
, the Director shall give notice to the applicant or licensee specifying the
specific violation or reasons for the proposed action. The notice shall direct
the applicant or licensee to appear before the Director at a specified time to
show cause why the license should not be denied, suspended or revoked.
   (c)   Decision. On failure or refusal of the applicant or licensee to appear
or on findings at the hearing, the Director may deny, suspend, or revoke the
license.
   (d)   Service. Orders or notices by the Director under this section shall be
served on the applicant or licensee by certified mail at the address shown on
the application or by personal delivery. If the applicant or licensee cannot be
found, it shall be sufficient to serve the person in charge of the enterprise
at the premises or to post a copy of the order or notice on the premises.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 1-305, 1-306, 1-307)
§ 11-9-106. Summary revocation or suspension of license.
   (a)   Issuance of order. Whenever the operation of a mobile home park is so
inimical to the public health, safety, and general welfare as to constitute a
present public nuisance or immediate danger and thus give rise to an emergency,
the Director may summarily order the immediate cessation of the violation and
immediate corrective action. On failure to comply with the order, the license
may be suspended or revoked without another notice or hearing.
   (b)   Subsequent notice and hearing. Unless waived in writing by the
licensee, the Director shall conduct a special hearing with respect to the
summary order within 10 days after acting summarily. Notice of the hearing
shall be given to the affected person in the manner set forth in §
11-9-105(b).
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 1-308)
TITLE 9A. MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
11-9A-101.   Definitions.
   
11-9A-102.   License required.
   
11-9A-103.   Massage therapy establishment license.
   
11-9A-104.   Violations; enforcement.
   
11-9A-105.   Sanctions.
§ 11-9A-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified in this title, “Department” means the
Department of Inspection and Permits.
      (2)   “License” means a massage therapy establishment license issued
under this title, as authorized by § 6-405 of the Health Occupations Article of
the State Code, unless otherwise indicated.
      (3)   “Massage therapy” has the meaning stated in § 6-101 of the Health
Occupations Article of the State Code.
      (4)   “Massage therapy establishment” means:
         (i)   a location where one or more persons are offering, purporting to
offer, holding themselves out as providing, or administering massage therapy
onsite or offsite; or
         (ii)   one or more persons offering, overseeing, or sending a person
or persons to offer, provide, or administer massage therapy at a client’s
residence or other location in the County selected by a client, whether or not
operating from a fixed location, except for a person licensed or registered
under § 6-301 of the Health Occupations Article of the State Code who is
operating as a sole practitioner and engaging in massage therapy only at the
licensee’s residence or at a client’s residence or other location selected by a
client.
         (iii)   “Massage therapy establishment” does not include a location
where all of the individuals providing massage therapy are not required to have
a license or registration under § 6-301 of the Health Occupations Article of
the State Code.
(Bill No. 76-22)
§ 11-9A-102. License required.
   A person may not own, operate, or manage a massage therapy establishment
without a license issued by the Department. A separate license is required for
each massage therapy establishment.
(Bill No. 76-22)
§ 11-9A-103. Massage therapy establishment license.
   (a)   Term; renewal. A license issued under this title shall expire on
December 31 in the fifth year following issuance. A licensee shall apply to
renew the license prior to its expiration.
   (b)   Application.
      (1)   An application for a license shall include:
         (i)   the names and addresses of the applicant and all owners,
operators, and managers of the massage therapy establishment;
         (ii)   the location of the massage therapy establishment and the names
and addresses of all lessees and owners of the real property where the
establishment is located;
         (iii)   the names and addresses of all persons providing massage
therapy at the massage therapy establishment; and
         (iv)   copies of all licenses and registrations for persons identified
in subparagraph (iii).
      (2)   The applicant shall report any changes to the information contained
in the application to the Director in writing within 30 days of those changes.
   (c)   Fees. The fee for a massage therapy establishment license and each
renewal is $25.
   (d)   Issuance. A massage therapy establishment license shall be issued if
the applicant has provided all information required by this section, has paid
the fee, and is otherwise in compliance with all provisions of this title.
   (e)   Display of license. A massage therapy establishment license shall be
displayed conspicuously in a public area of the massage therapy establishment.
   (f)   Transfer. A license is non-transferrable to another person or
location.
   (g)   Suspension; revocation. The Department may suspend or revoke a license
for any violation of
Title 1 of this article or this title by a licensee, or any agent or employee
of a licensee.
(Bill 76-22)
§ 11-9A-104. Violations; enforcement.
   (a)   Persons not authorized to administer massage therapy. A licensee,
owner, operator, or manager of a massage therapy establishment may not
authorize or permit the administration of massage therapy by a person not
authorized to administer massage therapy under Title 6 of the Health
Occupations Article of the State Code.
   (b)   Property owner. The owner of real property where a massage therapy
establishment is located may not allow a massage therapy establishment to
operate in violation of this title.
   (c)   Notice; enforcement against a property owner. The Police Department
shall notify the owner of the real property where a massage therapy
establishment is located if a massage therapy establishment is operated in
violation of this title. If the violation remains 30 days after the date of the
notice from the Police Department, the property owner shall be subject to
enforcement and fines under this title.
   (d)   Enforcement prohibited. The County may not enforce the provisions of
subsection (c) against a property owner if the property owner commences
proceedings for breach of lease under § 8-402.1 of the Real Property Article of
the State Code based on a violation of this title.
   (e)   Enforcement. Except as otherwise prohibited in subsection (d), the
County may enforce the provisions of this title against the person operating,
owning, or managing a massage therapy establishment, or against a property
owner, through any appropriate court proceedings and may seek any appropriate
forms of relief to restrain or correct a violation of this title, including
abatement and injunctive proceedings.
(Bill No. 76-22)
§ 11-9A-105. Sanctions.
   A violation of this title is a Class C civil offense, punishable by civil
fine as provided in §
9-2-101 of this code.
(Bill No. 76-22)
TITLE 10. MULTIPLE DWELLINGS AND ROOMING HOUSES
Section
   
11-10-101.   Definitions.
   
11-10-102.   License required.
   
11-10-103.   Fees.
   
11-10-104.   Designation of agent by nonresident applicant.
   
11-10-105.   Approval by Health Officer.
   
11-10-106.   Term; renewal.
   
11-10-107.   Display.
   
11-10-108.   Records.
   
11-10-109.   Transfer; notice of change of operator.
   
11-10-110.   Notice of violations.
   
11-10-111.   Suspension.
§ 11-10-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Multiple dwelling" means a structure containing more than two
dwelling units or a non-owner occupied dwelling containing two or more dwelling
units.
      (2)   "Rooming house" means a building arranged or occupied for lodging,
with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-
family dwelling.
(Bill No. 87-19)
§ 11-10-102. License required.
   A person may not operate a multiple dwelling or rooming house without a
license issued by the Department. A separate license is required for each
multiple dwelling or rooming house.
(1985 Code, Art. 22, § 3-101) (Bill No. 25-92; Bill No. 23-04)
§ 11-10-103. Fees.
   (a)   Definition. For the purpose of determining a license fee for a rooming
house, "unit" means each rooming unit.
   (b)   Fees generally. Except as provided in subsection (c), the license fees
are:
 
Number of Units  Fee
1 to 4, per unit $30
5 to 50          $120 plus $25 per unit
51 and above     $1,370 plus $18 per unit
 
   (c)   Penalty fee. The County shall notify a current licensee or owner of an
unlicensed multiple dwelling that a license will expire or that a license is
required. Failure to apply for license renewal or an initial license within 30
days of notice by the County will result in a penalty fee of 10% or $25,
whichever is greater. This penalty fee shall be assessed for each 30-day period
until a renewal or initial license application plus penalty fee is received by
the County.
   (d)   Collection. The amount of fees, including penalty fees, remaining
unpaid for six months after the licensee has been notified by the County shall
be collected as provided in § 1-9-101 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 22, § 3-104) (Bill No. 37-91; Bill No. 25-92; Bill No. 82-93)
§ 11-10-104. Designation of agent by nonresident applicant.
   A license may not be issued or renewed for an applicant who is not a
resident of the County unless the applicant has first designated an agent and
an alternate agent for the receipt of notices of violation issued pursuant to §
15-5-105 of this Code and for service of process under §
15-5-105. Either the agent or the alternate agent must be a resident of the
County, and a nonresident applicant may be designated to fill the other
position. The applicant must provide a notarized statement authorizing the
agent and the alternate agent to act on the applicant's behalf for the purpose
of receiving notices and for service of process under this title and §
15-5-105.
(1985 Code, Art. 22, § 3-105) (Bill No. 25-92; Bill No. 87-19)
§ 11-10-105. Approval by Health Officer.
   (a)   Issuance. The Department of Inspections and Permits may not issue an
initial operating license without the approval of the Health Officer. The
Health Officer shall approve the issuance of a license if an inspection of the
multiple dwelling or rooming house for which the license is sought reveals that
the multiple dwelling or rooming house complies with the requirements of
Article 15, Title 4 of this Code.
   (b)   Noncompliance after inspection; fee. If a rooming house or multiple
dwelling does not comply with the requirements of Article 15, Title 4 of this
Code after an initial inspection and one re-inspection, the Health Officer may
charge a fee of $80 for a second re-inspection and for any additional
inspections needed until the multiple dwelling or rooming house complies with
the requirements of
Article 15, Title 4 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 22, § 3-106) (Bill No. 25-92; Bill No. 37-95; Bill No. 13-05;
Bill No. 87-19)
§ 11-10-106. Term; renewal.
   Each operating license expires on January 31 of the second year following
the year of application unless sooner revoked. A license may be renewed for
successive periods not to exceed two years each.
(1985 Code, Art. 22, § 3-107) (Bill No. 25-92)
§ 11-10-107. Display.
   An operating license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within a
common way of the multiple dwelling or rooming house for which it was issued.
(1985 Code, Art. 22, § 3-108)
§ 11-10-108. Records.
   The owner or other person in charge of a licensed multiple dwelling or
rooming house shall keep or cause to be kept records of each request for repair
and each complaint by a tenant that is related to the provisions of
Article 15, Title 4 of this Code and of each correction made in response to
such requests and complaints. The records shall be made available by the owner
or other person in charge to the Health Officer or the Director of Inspections
and Permits for inspection and copying on demand. The records are admissible in
any administrative or judicial proceeding as prima facie evidence of the
violation or the correction of violation of
Article 15, Title 4 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 22, § 3-109) (Bill No. 87-19)
§ 11-10-109. Transfer; notice of change of operator.
   (a)   Nontransferable. A license is not transferable to another person or to
another multiple dwelling or rooming house.
   (b)   Notice of sale or other disposition. Each person holding a license
shall give written notice to the Director of Inspections and Permits within one
week after having transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of a
licensed multiple dwelling or rooming house. The notice shall include the name
and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of the
multiple dwelling or rooming house.
(1985 Code, Art. 22, § 3-110)
§ 11-10-110. Notice of violations.
   Whenever after an inspection of a licensed multiple dwelling or rooming
house or an inspection of the records required to be kept by §
11-10-108, the Health Officer finds that conditions or practices exist which
are in violation of the provisions of this title or of
Article 15, Title 4 of this Code, the Health Officer shall serve the owner or
other person in charge with notice of the violation as provided in §
15-5-105 of this Code. The notice shall state that unless the violations cited
are corrected within a reasonable time, the license may be suspended.
(1985 Code, Art. 22, § 3-111) (Bill No. 87-19)
§ 11-10-111. Suspension.
   (a)   Generally. At the end of the time allowed for correction of a
violation cited the Health Officer shall re-inspect. If the Health Officer
determines that the violations have not been corrected, the Director of
Inspections and Permits shall issue an order suspending the license.
   (b)   Reconsideration. A person whose license has been suspended is entitled
to a reconsideration of the order in the manner provided by this title. If a
request for reconsideration does not reach the Health Officer within 21 days
after the issuance of the order of suspension, the license shall be revoked
unless before revocation re-inspection reveals that the violation cited in the
notice has been corrected.
   (c)   Reinstatement for compliance. Whenever after a re-inspection the
Health Officer finds that the multiple dwelling or rooming house is in
compliance with Article 15, Title 4 of this Code and with applicable rules and
regulations issued under this title or Article 15, Title 4 of this Code, the
Director of Inspections and Permits shall reinstate the license. A request for
re-inspection may not extend the suspension period unless the Health Officer
grants the request.
(1985 Code, Art. 22, § 3-112) (Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 87-19)
TITLE 11. SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
11-11-101.   Definitions.
   
11-11-102.   Special event permit.
   
11-11-103.   Permit application requirements.
   
11-11-104.   Consideration of a permit application.
   
11-11-105.   Application fees.
   
11-11-106.   Special service charges.
   
11-11-107.   Inspections.
   
11-11-108.   Miscellaneous provisions.
State Code reference – Transportation Article, §§ 25-101.1, 25-102(a)(3).
§ 11-11-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Agritourism” has the meaning stated in §
18-1-101.
      (2)   “Athletic event” means any organized event involving athletics,
sports, games, or similar types of organized activities including, without
limitation, a bicycle race, bicycle or motorcycle group rides, foot races,
triathlons, or group walks.
      (3)   “Concert” means a gathering of people to view a live performance.
      (4)   A “farm or agricultural heritage site special event” has the
meaning stated in §
18-1-101.
      (5)   “Multiple-day event” means an event that occurs on multiple,
consecutive or non-consecutive days.
      (6)   “Nonprofit organization” means a corporation, foundation, or other
legal entity, that is exempt from taxation under § 501(c)(3) or (d) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      (7)   “Owner” means any person in whom is vested the ownership, dominion,
control of, or title to real property, whether by deed, lease, sublease, or by
any form of right or agreement.
      (8)   “Parade” means any march, procession, or other similar activity
consisting of persons, animals, vehicles, or things, or any combination
thereof, upon any public street.
      (9)   “Permit” means a special event permit issued under this title.
       (10)   “Public assembly” means a group of 500 or more persons collected
together in one place for the same purpose.
      (11)   (i)   “Special event” means an activity, athletic event, concert,
parade, or public assembly, that does not have regularity or permanence
throughout the year, and is held on a designated day or series of days, whether
or not admission is charged, for which:
            1.   specific and exclusive use of public streets, alleys, rights-
of-way, county waters, or other public property is required;
            2.   there will be a physical impediment to the safe flow of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic along roadways, or the physical blocking of
access to a part or a whole roadway or the special event, that does not comply
with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls; or
            3.   use of County services exceeding normal operations, including
personnel, is required.
         (ii)   “Special event” does not include:
            1.   an event held inside a theater, church, school, assembly hall,
arena, social hall, government facility, wedding venue, restaurant, hotel
ballroom, conference center, or other like structure if the structure is
specifically designed to be used as a place for assembly of individuals,
provided the anticipated attendance does not exceed the established legal
occupancy;
            2.   a funeral procession, a vigil, or a spontaneous response to a
current event;
            3.   an agritourism event held on private property that does not
require the exclusive use of public streets or roads or the use of County
services exceeding normal operations;
            4.   an agritourism event and a farm or agricultural heritage site
special event as defined in Article 18 of this Code authorized by the Planning
and Zoning Officer in accordance with §
18-2-203 of this Code;
            5.   a renaissance festival allowed as a special exception use
under Article 18 of this Code;
            6.   an activity at a private marina; or
            7.   the Anne Arundel County Fair.
      (12)   “Sponsor” means the manager, operator, organizer, producer,
promoter, or the individual or entity staging a special event.
      (13)   “Vigil” means a public gathering of individuals to memorialize the
recent death of one or more individuals.
(Bill No. 13-23)
§ 11-11-102. Special event permit.
   (a)   Required. A person who organizes a special event shall obtain a permit
under this title.
   (b)   Duty of venue owner. A venue owner may not allow a special event to
occur at the venue if the owner knows or may be reasonably expected to know
that the sponsor has not applied for or has not been granted a permit.
   (c)   Park events. A special event held on public property managed by the
Department of Recreation and Parks, or conducted in coordination with the
Department of Recreation and Parks, is exempt from the requirements of this
title unless the special event meets the condition described in §
11-11-101(11)(i)2.
(Bill No. 13-23)
§ 11-11-103. Permit application requirements.
   (a)   Generally. An application for a permit shall be:
      (1)   in a format provided by the Department;
      (2)   except as provided in subsection (c), filed at least 90 calendar
days, but not more than one year, before the special event; and
      (3)   accompanied by the application fee if required by §
11-11-105.
   (b)   Contents. An application shall include:
      (1)   the name, address, email address, and telephone number of the
sponsor;
      (2)   the location or venue of the special event;
      (3)   the name, address, email address, and telephone number of the owner
of the location of the special event, if applicable;
      (4)   the name of the special event;
      (5)   a description of the special event;
      (6)   the dates and times of the special event;
      (7)   the estimated or projected attendance or number of participants;
      (8)   the resources to be supplied by the sponsor to ensure the security
of the special event and the health and safety of attendees based on the
anticipated attendance or participation, and copies of any contracts for those
resources;
      (9)   documentation from the venue owner indicating permission to use the
venue on the date or dates of the special event for the intended use; and
      (10)   any other information as the County may require in its review of
the application.
   (c)   Alteration or waiver of filing deadlines. The County may alter or
waive the application filing deadline if the County determines that it can
supply adequate resources to support the special event and the special event is
in the best interest of the County.
(Bill No. 13-23)
§ 11-11-104. Consideration of a permit application.
   (a)   Timing. The County shall:
      (1)   grant, deny, or request modification of the permit application
within 30 days of receipt of the application; and
      (2)   grant the permit application at least 30 days before the proposed
date of the special event or deny the permit application at least 30 days
before the proposed date of the special event if the sponsor has not made all
modifications requested by the County to ensure the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public or participants of the special event.
   (b)   Issuance. The County shall issue a permit for a special event, unless:
      (1)   the sponsor has outstanding monetary obligations to the County;
      (2)   the sponsor has made intentional or willful material
misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of a special event for which
they had previously received a permit from the County, or has violated the
terms of a prior permit issued by the County;
      (3)   the sponsor has made intentional or willful material
misrepresentations or committed violations regarding a special event in another
jurisdiction that threatened the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public, spectators, or participants of that special event;
      (4)   there is intentional or willful falsehood or misrepresentation in
the application;
      (5)   the sponsor is unable to safely control the anticipated number of
spectators or participants;
      (6)   there are inadequate traffic facilities to accommodate the
anticipated number of spectators or participants;
      (7)   there are inadequate security or emergency response services;
      (8)   the venue is inadequate to support the anticipated number of
attendees;
      (9)   ingress or egress at the venue is insufficient for emergency
situations;
      (10)   the special event requires County services beyond a level that
will be available at the time of the special event;
      (11)   the sponsor fails to provide evidence that the sponsor or others
providing sales or service to the public at the special event have obtained
other required licenses or permits, including County, State, federal, or liquor
board licenses or permits;
      (12)   the application is not fully completed and executed;
      (13)   there is a fully executed prior application and application fee
for a special event on the same date and the necessary County resources are not
available for both special events;
      (14)   the sponsor has not complied with applicable State law or
regulations related to the special event; or
      (15)   the intended use or activity is prohibited by law.
   (c)   Authority to deny, modify or cancel. The County shall provide notice
to a sponsor and an opportunity for the sponsor to take corrective action prior
to denying, modifying or canceling a permit. The County may deny, modify, or
cancel a permit at any time when the denial, modification, or cancellation is
required:
      (1)   to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public or
participants of a special event;
      (2)   because the sponsor fails to comply with any County, State, or
federal laws or regulations applicable to the special event; or
      (3)   because the sponsor does not have the legal authority or the
permission of the owner to use the property upon which the special event is
located for the special event.
   (d)   Staffing. The County shall determine the adequate level of staffing
for the special event based on best practices and generally accepted public
safety standards. The County shall make publicly available the public safety
agencies’ special events regulatory and agency specific safety requirements,
based on best practices and generally accepted public safety standards. The
Office of Emergency Management and public safety agencies shall annually
evaluate current regulatory and agency specific safety requirements against
evolving threats and changes in best practices and generally accepted public
safety standards.
   (e)   Multiple-day events. If the application for a multiple-day event meets
the criteria set forth in this section, one permit shall be issued for all days
of a multiple-day event.
   (f)   Cancelled event. An issued permit becomes void if a special event is
cancelled. An issued permit for a multiple-day event, of which a portion is
cancelled, becomes void only for the cancelled portion of the multiple-day
event.
(Bill No. 13-23)
§ 11-11-105. Application fees.
   (a)   Application fee. Except as provided in subsection (b), the application
fee for a permit issued under this title is:
      (1)   $100 if the application is filed less than 90 days prior to the
special event and there has been a waiver of the filing deadline as provided
for in §
11-11-103(c);
      (2)   nonrefundable;
      (3)   due upon application for the permit; and
      (4)   due one time for an event held on multiple consecutive days.
   (b)   Fee exemption. The County may exempt a sponsor from paying an
application fee if the County determines that an exemption is in the best
interest of the County, such as:
      (1)   an activity of an educational institution;
      (2)   an activity of a community association;
      (3)   an activity of a non profit organization;
      (4)   an activity which requires a license issued under
Title 2;
      (5)   a farm or agricultural heritage site special events under §§
18-2-203,
18-10-127, or
18-11-125 of this Code; or
      (6)   an activity requiring a County Department of Recreation and Parks
permit for the same event.
(Bill No. 13-23)
Editor’s note – Section 3 of Bill No. 13-23 provides that the fees provided for
in this section may not begin to be collected under January 1, 2024.
§ 11-11-106. Special service charges.
   (a)   Reimbursement. As a special service charge, a sponsor and the
organizer of a renaissance festival or the Anne Arundel County Fair shall
reimburse the County for all costs incurred by the County for equipment usage
and personnel in support of the special event or, the renaissance festival, or
the Anne Arundel County fair, as specified in subsection (c).
   (b)   Cost estimate.
      (1)   Prior to issuing a permit, the County shall provide the sponsor
with an estimate of costs the County expects to incur supporting the special
event based on a publicly available standardized rate schedule for personnel
and equipment.
      (2)   At least 30 days before the first day of a renaissance festival or
the Anne Arundel County Fair, the County shall provide the organizer of the
renaissance festival or the Anne Arundel County Fair with an estimate of costs
the County expects to incur supporting the renaissance festival or the Anne
Arundel County Fair based on a publicly available standardized rate schedule
for personnel and equipment.
   (c)   Payment of special service charges.
      (1)   A sponsor shall pay special service charge as follows:
         (i)   Prior to the issuance of the permit under this title, at least
75% of the estimated costs to be incurred by the County in supporting the
special event; and
         (ii)   Any remaining outstanding actual costs incurred by the County
in supporting the special event within 30 days of the conclusion of the special
event.
      (2)   The organizer of a renaissance festival or the Anne Arundel County
Fair shall pay the special service charge as follows:
         (i)   At least 30 days before the first day of the renaissance
festival or the Anne Arundel County Fair, at least 75% of the estimated costs
to be incurred by the County in supporting the renaissance festival or the Anne
Arundel County Fair; and
         (ii)   Any remaining outstanding actual costs incurred by the County
in supporting the renaissance festival or the Anne Arundel County Fair within
30 days of the conclusion of the renaissance festival or the Anne Arundel
County Fair.
   (d)   Refund of special service charges. Within 30 days of the conclusion of
the special event, a renaissance festival, or the Anne Arundel County Fair, the
County shall refund to the sponsor or the organizer of a renaissance festival
or the Anne Arundel County Fair any special service charges paid to the County
in excess of the actual costs incurred by the County in supporting the special
event, a renaissance festival, or the Anne Arundel County Fair.
   (e)   Waiver of special service charges. The County may waive payment of all
or a portion of the special service charges if the county determines that a
waiver is in the best interest of the County, such as:
      (1)   an activity of an educational institution;
      (2)   an activity of a community association;
      (3)   an activity of a non profit organization;
      (4)   an activity which requires a license issued under
Title 2;
      (5)   a farm or agricultural heritage site special events under §§
18-2-203,
18-10-127, or
18-11-125 of this Code; or
      (6)   an activity requiring a County Department of Recreation and Parks
permit for the same event.
(Bill No. 13-23)
Editor’s note – Section 3 of Bill No. 13-23 provides that the fees provided for
in this section may not begin to be collected under January 1, 2024.
§ 11-11-107. Inspections.
   (a)   Requirement to obtain licenses, permits, and inspections. In addition
to the permit required under this title, a sponsor shall obtain all necessary
licenses, permits, and inspections for a special event, including inspections
for compliance with fire, electrical, and environmental health regulations, the
Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of the State Code, and
Article 9 of this Code.
   (b)   Access for County personnel. A sponsor shall ensure that County
personnel are afforded access to the special event venue both prior to and
during a special event in order to perform any inspections as may be required
by law or regulation.
(Bill No. 13-23)
§ 11-11-108. Miscellaneous provisions.
   (a)   Emergency termination. In addition to the provisions of §
11-11-104(c), the County may revoke a permit and immediately terminate a
special event at any time if the County determines that an immediate risk to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the public or participants in a
special event exists, due to:
      (1)   intentional or willful misrepresentation or mismanagement by the
sponsor; or
      (2)   circumstances beyond a sponsor’s reasonable control, including
weather, a state of emergency declared under
Title 14 of the Public Safety Article of the State Code, or a civil emergency
declared under §§
1-6-101 et seq. of this Code.
   (b)   Reimbursement for emergency termination costs. The special services
charges under §
11-11-106 shall include the costs incurred by the County for the special event
up to and including termination under subsection (a)(1).
(Bill No. 13-23)
TITLE 12. PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
11-12-101.   Pawnbrokers.
   
11-12-102.   Records and reports.
   
11-12-103.   Disposal of property.
   
11-12-104.   Transactions with intoxicated individuals or minors.
§ 11-12-101. Pawnbrokers.
   (a)   Definition. In this title, "pawnbroker" means a person who loans money
on deposits or pledges of personal property other than securities or printed
evidences of indebtedness or who deals in the purchasing of personal property
on the condition of selling it back to the same person or someone acting on
that person's behalf at a stipulated price.
   (b)   License required. A person may not do business as a pawnbroker without
a license issued by the Department.
   (c)   Standards. No person required to obtain a pawnbroker's license may
have:
      (1)   ever been convicted, held liable, or found to have committed acts
involving moral turpitude, including any violation of federal, state, or local
law or regulation;
      (2)   ever had a judgment entered in an action for fraud, deceit, or
misrepresentation by any court of competent jurisdiction;
      (3)   associations with individuals known to have engaged in organized
crime or racketeering;
      (4)   a financial relationship with any person known to have engaged in
organized crime or racketeering;
      (5)   had direct managerial or supervisory control over an enterprise in
which there was a pattern of cheating, fraud, or employee dishonesty; or
      (6)   engaged in any other conduct that the Director determines to be a
threat to the integrity of pawnbrokering.
   (d)   Fee. The fee for a pawnbroker's license for the first individual
licensed to work at a pawnshop is $250. The fee for each additional individual
licensed at the same pawnshop is $50.
   (e)   Insurance. A person who acts as a pawnbroker may not undertake to do
any work within the County unless the person carries general liability
insurance in the amount of $300,000 and property damage insurance in the amount
of $100,000.
   (f)   Contents of license. A license shall designate the address where the
licensee is authorized to act as a pawnbroker.
   (g)   Expiration. A pawnbroker's license expires on April 30 of each year.
   (h)   Revocation. A violation of this title is cause for revocation of a
pawnbroker's license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 13-101, 13-102, 13-104, 13-106, 13-107, 13-108) (Bill
No. 13-89; Bill No. 46-92; Bill No. 55-97)
State Code reference – Business Regulation Article, Title 12.
§ 11-12-102. Records and reports.
   Pawnbrokers shall maintain permanent records of items received by them in
the course of their business. A pawnbroker shall submit to the Police
Department on forms prescribed by the Department a legible and correct
transcription from the records maintained by the pawnbroker of the description
of items received in pawn or pledge during the preceding day's business. The
transcription of the preceding day's business shall be transmitted
electronically by 10:00 a.m. on the next business day. In preparing these
forms:
      (1)   diamonds and other precious stones shall be designated by giving
the approximate weight of the stone, style, or mounting; whether lady's or
gentleman's ring; the number of stones and initials, inscriptions, scratch
numbers, or peculiar distinguishing marks or characteristics;
      (2)   watches shall be designated by the kind of metal; maker's name;
whether lady's, gentleman's, or child's; and initials, inscriptions, scratch
numbers, or peculiar distinguishing marks or characteristics;
      (3)   jewelry shall be described as to kind; character, whether lady's,
gentleman's, or child's; number of stones; name of each stone; and any
initials, inscriptions, or peculiar distinguishing marks or characteristics;
      (4)   chains shall be designated by kind; character of metal or other
material; design or link; whether lady's, gentleman's, or child's; and
inscriptions, initials, or peculiar distinguishing marks and characteristics;
      (5)   silverware shall be designated by the kind and character, maker's
name, and initials, inscriptions, or peculiar distinguishing marks or
characteristics;
      (6)   furs shall be designated by kind; character; whether lady's,
gentleman's, or child's; color; maker's name; owner's name, if attached; or
initials, inscriptions, or peculiar distinguishing marks or characteristics;
      (7)   field, marine, and opera glasses, binoculars, and other optical
equipment shall be designated by full description, maker's or owner's name and
initials, inscriptions, or peculiar distinguishing marks or characteristics;
      (8)   instruments, such as surgical, architectural, mathematical,
surveying, and the like, shall be designated by the kind, character, design,
name or maker and any initials, inscriptions, or peculiar distinguishing marks
or characteristics, whether upon the case or the instruments;
      (9)   tools shall be designated by the trade in which the same may be
used whether carpenter's, machinist's, or otherwise and numbers, name of maker
or number, and initials, inscriptions, or peculiar distinguishing marks or
characteristics whether on the tools or upon the box or case;
      (10)   clothes shall be designated by kind; character; whether lady's,
gentleman's, or child's; color; size; material; maker's, owner's or alterer's
name, if attached; and initials, inscriptions, or peculiar distinguishing marks
or characteristics; and
      (11)   electronics, computer and office equipment, and any other tangible
personal property shall be designated by kind, name of maker, model number,
serial number, owner applied number, inscription or peculiar distinguishing
marks or characteristics, and a statement as to whether the item is in its
original box and whether it appears to be new in box.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 13-109)
State Code reference – Business Regulation Article, Title 12.
§ 11-12-103. Disposal of property.
   (a)   Generally. A pawnbroker may not transfer or dispose of property for a
period of 30 days after the date upon which the transaction was reported to the
Police Department, except that the property may be redeemed or repurchased with
the original pawn ticket by the person who pawned the property or by that
person's authorized agent.
   (b)   Stolen items. If an item located in a pawnshop has been identified as
having been stolen, the pawnbroker shall release the item without payment or
reimbursement to the Police Department on written demand signed by the Chief of
Police or the designee of the Chief of Police. The item shall be returned to
the pawnbroker if the identification is proven erroneous.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 13-110, 13-111)
§ 11-12-104. Transactions with intoxicated individuals or minors.
   A pawnbroker may not transact business with a person who is obviously under
the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs or who is a minor.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 13-112)
State Code reference – Business Regulation Article, § 12-213.
TITLE 12A. SECOND-HAND DEALER LICENSE
Section
   
11-12A-101.   Second-hand sales.
   
11-12A-102.   Records and reports.
   
11-12A-103.   Disposal of property.
   
11-12A-104.   Transactions with minors.
§ 11-12A-101. Second-hand sales.
   (a)   Definition. In this title, “second-hand dealer” means a person who
acquires commercially from the public and trades commercially with the public
in tangible personal property, but the term does not include a pawnbroker; a
business that deals primarily with the purchase and sale of antiques; a
charitable organization that accepts only donations; garage or yard sales; the
purchase on consignment of second-hand clothing, furniture, books, or baby
accessories and toys; activities of a club, school, church, or charitable
organization that include the sale of donated items; a business that deals
primarily with the sale of children’s clothing; or auctions, estate sales,
conventions, or trade shows.
   (b)   License required. A person may not do business as a second-hand dealer
without a license issued by the Department.
   (c)   Standards. No person required to obtain a second-hand dealer's license
may have:
      (1)   ever been convicted, held liable, or found to have committed acts
involving moral turpitude, including any violation of federal, State, or local
law or regulation;
      (2)   ever had a judgment entered in an action for fraud, deceit, or
misrepresentation by any court of competent jurisdiction;
      (3)   associations with individuals known to have engaged in organized
crime or racketeering;
      (4)   a financial relationship with any person known to have engaged in
organized crime or racketeering;
      (5)   had direct managerial or supervisory control over an enterprise in
which there was a pattern of cheating, fraud, or employee dishonesty; or
      (6)   engaged in any other conduct that the Director determines to be a
threat to the integrity of the business of second-hand sales.
   (d)   Fee. The fee for a second-hand dealer's license for the first
individual licensed to work as a second-hand dealer is $250. The fee for each
additional individual licensed at the same location is $50.
   (e)   Insurance. A person who acts as a second-hand dealer may not undertake
to do any work within the County unless the person carries general liability
insurance in the minimum amount of $300,000 and property damage insurance in
the minimum amount of $100,000.
   (f)   Contents of license. A license shall designate the address where the
licensee is authorized to act as a second-hand dealer.
   (g)   Expiration. A second-hand dealer's license expires on September 30 of
each year.
   (h)   Revocation. A violation of this title is cause for revocation of a
second-hand dealer's license.
(Bill No. 76-10; Bill No. 71-24)
§ 11-12A-102.   Records and reports.
   Second-hand dealers shall maintain permanent records of items received by
them in the course of their business. A second-hand dealer shall submit to the
Police Department on forms prescribed by the Department a legible and correct
transcription from the records maintained by the second-hand dealer of the
items purchased for resale during the preceding day's business. The
transcription of the preceding day's business shall be transmitted
electronically by 10:00 a.m. on the next business day. In preparing these
forms:
      (1)   the person from whom the item was purchased shall be identified by
name, address, telephone number, date of birth, driver's license number, and
physical description, including sex, race, distinguishing features, height,
weight, and hair and eye color;
      (2)   the form shall include a statement as to whether the item was
received in its original box and whether it appears to be new in the box;
      (3)   diamonds and other precious stones shall be designated by the
approximate weight of the stone, style, or mounting, whether a lady's or
gentleman's ring, the number of stones and initials, inscriptions, scratch
numbers, or peculiar distinguishing marks or characteristics;
      (4)   watches shall be designated by the kind of metal, maker's name,
whether lady's, gentleman's, or child's, and initials, inscriptions, scratch
numbers, or peculiar distinguishing marks or characteristics;
      (5)   jewelry shall be described as to kind, character, whether lady's,
gentleman's, or child's, number of stones, name of each stone, and any
initials, inscriptions, or peculiar distinguishing marks or characteristics;
      (6)   chains shall be designated by kind, character of metal or other
material, design or link, whether lady's, gentleman's, or child's, and
inscriptions, initials, or peculiar distinguishing marks and characteristics;
      (7)   silverware shall be designated by the kind and character, maker's
name, and initials, inscriptions, or peculiar distinguishing marks or
characteristics;
      (8)   field, marine, and opera glasses, binoculars, and other optical
equipment shall be designated by full description, maker's or owner's name and
initials, inscriptions, or peculiar distinguishing marks or characteristics;
      (9)   instruments, such as surgical, architectural, mathematical,
surveying, and the like, shall be designated by the kind, character, design,
name or maker and any initials, inscriptions, or peculiar distinguishing marks
or characteristics, whether upon the case or the instruments;
      (10)   tools shall be designated by the trade in which used, whether
carpenter's, machinist's, or otherwise, and numbers, name of maker or number,
and initials, inscriptions, or peculiar distinguishing marks or characteristics
whether on the tools or upon the box or case; and
      (11)   electronics, electronic gaming systems and games, computer and
office equipment, and any other tangible personal property shall be designated
by kind, name of maker, model number, serial number, owner applied number,
inscription or peculiar distinguishing marks or characteristics.
(Bill No. 76-10)
§ 11-12A-103. Disposal of property.
   (a)   Generally. A second-hand dealer may not alter, transfer, or dispose of
property for a period of 30 days after the date upon which the transaction was
reported to the Police Department.
   (b)   Stolen items. If an item located in a second-hand store has been
identified as having been stolen, the second-hand dealer shall release the item
without payment or reimbursement to the Police Department on written demand
signed by the Chief of Police or the designee of the Chief of Police. The item
shall be returned to the second-hand dealer if the identification is proven
erroneous.
(Bill No. 76-10)
§ 11-12A-104. Transactions with minors.
   A second-hand dealer may not transact business with a person who is a minor.
(Bill No. 76-10)
TITLE 13. ROADSIDE VENDORS
Section
   
11-13-101.   Roadside vendors.
   
11-13-102.   Performance standards.
   
11-13-103.   Suspension; revocation.
§ 11-13-101. Roadside vendors.
   (a)   Definition. In this title, "roadside vendor" means a person who sells
or offers for sale goods or food of any kind at a fixed location on or abutting
any road in the County, but the term does not include a person who sells
Christmas trees, produce grown on the premises, or, in an RA District, produce
of any kind.
   (b)   License required. A person may not operate as a roadside vendor in the
County without a roadside vendor's license issued by the Department.
   (c)   Display. The vendor shall display the license in a conspicuous
location at each site where the vendor is operating.
   (d)   Fees. The fee for a roadside vendor's license is:
      (1)   $250 per year, expiring one year from the date of issuance;
      (2)   $50 for relocation of an existing annual license during the term of
the license; or
      (3)   $25 per day.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 15-101, 15-102, 15-103, 15-104) (Bill No. 39-95; Bill
No. 87-95)
§ 11-13-102. Performance standards.
   A roadside vendor shall:
      (1)   operate only where the use is allowed by
Article 18 of this Code;
      (2)   obtain the written permission of each property owner on whose
property the vendor's operation is located;
      (3)   operate in a manner that permits safe ingress and egress to and
from the site of the operation, as may be required by the Department;
      (4)   provide sufficient off-street parking for the vendor's customers
and employees, as may be required by the Department;
      (5)   meet all applicable criteria of the Health Department;
      (6)   at each site, utilize no more than one display sign, that may be no
larger than 24 square feet; and
      (7)   adhere to the provisions of this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 15-105) (Bill No. 39-95; Bill No. 87-95)
§ 11-13-103. Suspension; revocation.
   The Director may suspend or revoke a roadside vendor's license if the
Director finds that the vendor has violated the provisions of this article.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 15-106) (Bill No. 39-95)
TITLE 13A. SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTALS
Section
   
11-13A-101.   Definitions.
   
11-13A-102.   Hosts.
   
11-13A-103.   Hosting platforms.
   
11-13A-104.   Enforcement.
§ 11-13A-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   "Booking transaction" means a reservation transaction between a
host and a prospective transient guest for a short-term residential rental.
      (2)   "Dwelling unit" has the meaning stated in §
18-1-101 of this Code, except that the term does not include a boat that is or
could be used as a dwelling unit.
      (3)   "Host" means the owner of a dwelling unit who, in exchange for
rent, provides all or part of the dwelling unit for short-term residential
rental use.
      (4)   "Hosting platform" means an internet-based entity that, in exchange
for rent, facilitates reservations and booking transactions of short-term
residential rentals.
      (5)   (i)   "Rent" means the consideration paid for the use or occupancy
of a short-term rental in the County.
         (ii)   "Rent" includes both the "net rent" and the "additional rent"
when the use or occupancy of a short-term rental is reserved, booked, brokered,
or otherwise arranged for by a remarketer and the full amount of the rent is
not paid by the occupant directly to the owner or operator.
         (iii)   "Rent" includes charges for services and booking fees that are
a condition of use or occupancy and any amount for which credit is allowed by
the owner or operator or remarketer to the occupant.
         (iv)   "Rent" does not include charges for optional services provided
by the owner or operator of a short-term rental to the occupant that are in
addition to the charge for use or occupancy and that are set forth separately
on the bill presented to the occupant.
      (6)   "Short-term residential rental" means the use or occupancy,
facilitated by a hosting platform in exchange for rent, of all or part of a
dwelling unit to provide accommodations to transient guests for no more than
120 consecutive days in a calendar year.
      (7)   "Transient guest" means a person who pays rent to occupy or have
the right to occupy all or part of a dwelling unit.
      (8)   "Unhosted rental" means a short-term residential rental under which
the host does not occupy the dwelling unit during the transient guest's stay.
(Bill No. 89-19)
§ 11-13A-102. Hosts.
   (a)   Requirements and prohibitions.
      (1)   A host may not enter into a short-term residential rental agreement
with a transient guest or rent a dwelling unit to a transient guest without
first obtaining an approved registration from the Department.
      (2)   A host may not register more than two dwelling units as short-term
residential rentals.
      (3)   A host may be an individual, corporation, partnership, limited
partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability company, or other
business entity, but a dwelling unit registered by any host counts as a
registration by any individual or other business entity with an ownership or
financial interest in the host.
      (4)   The rental period for a short-term residential rental shall be no
less than 24 hours.
      (5)   A host may not enter into a short-term residential rental agreement
with a transient guest or rent a dwelling unit to a transient guest, if overdue
taxes, fines, or fees are owed to the County.
      (6)   The host shall provide to the Department the names of all hosting
platforms to be used in connection with a short-term residential rental and
shall update the list within ten days after any additions or deletions.
      (7)   A host shall provide hosting platforms with the registration number
issued by the Department for the dwelling unit.
      (8)    A host shall ensure that a hosting platform includes the
registration number in an advertisement, listing, or post for the short-term
residential rental.
      (9)   The host shall prominently display a sign within the dwelling unit
stating that the dwelling unit is registered by the Department for short-term
residential rentals and providing the registration number.
      (10)   For an unhosted rental, the host shall provide to the transient
guest the name of a person who is available for the term of the rental and a
24-hour emergency telephone number for prompt assistance.
      (11)   A host shall keep records relating to all short-term residential
rentals for a period of at least three years and, upon written request from the
County, shall provide the records for inspection to the County.
   (b)   Application. A host shall file an application for registration on a
form provided by the Department and shall pay the applicable fee. The
registration form shall include, at a minimum:
      (1)   the name, mailing address, email address, and phone number(s) of
the host and of all persons with an ownership or financial interest in the
host;
      (2)   the address of the dwelling unit; a unit number, if applicable; the
number of bedrooms and bathrooms in the dwelling unit; and the number of
available on-site parking spaces;
      (3)   the host's proof of insurance for the short-term residential
rental; and
      (4)   the host's certification under oath that the short-term residential
rental property meets the minimum safety criteria set forth in the registration
form.
   (c)   Term; renewal. Each registration has a two-year term. The host may
seek to renew the registration by filing an application with the Department,
together with the applicable fee, at least 30 days before the existing
registration expires.
   (d)   Fees. The fee for the registration or renewal of a short-term
residential rental is $100.00.
   (e)   Denial; suspension; revocation.
      (1)   Notice and an opportunity to be heard. The Department shall give a
host at least 10 days' advance notice of an intention to deny, suspend, or
revoke a registration and give the host an opportunity within the notice period
to state why the registration should not be denied, suspended, or revoked.
      (2)   Action by the Department. After consideration of the host's
comments, the Department may deny, suspend, or revoke a short-term residential
registration for a failure to comply with the provisions of this subtitle; a
failure to comply with the provisions of Article 18, Title 12, Subtitle 6 of
this Code; false statements in the application; or a failure to pay overdue
County taxes, fines, or fees.
   (f)   Assignment and transfer prohibited. An approved registration is not
assignable and it does not transfer upon the sale or other transfer of the
property.
(Bill No. 89-19; Bill No. 45-20; Bill No. 15-21)
§ 11-13A-103. Hosting platforms.
   A hosting platform shall comply with all of the following:
      (1)   A hosting platform may not advertise, list, post, or otherwise
facilitate a booking transaction for a short-term residential rental without
having a registration field in place for hosts to input their valid, current
registration numbers from the Department for short-term residential rentals.
      (2)   A hosting platform shall include the host's registration number in
an advertisement, listing, or post for a short-term residential rental.
      (3)   A hosting platform shall remove an advertisement, listing, or post
as promptly as possible after the hosting platform learns from the Department
or the host that the host's registration has been suspended or revoked.
      (4)   A hosting platform may not facilitate reservations for, or
advertise, list, or post, a short-term residential rental if the host has
failed to enter a registration number into the registration field.
      (5)   A hosting platform shall keep, for a period of at least three
years, records relating to all short-term residential rentals advertised,
listed, posted, or otherwise facilitated by the hosting platform.
      (6)   The records kept by a hosting platform shall include the name and
address of the host; the street address of the short-term residential rental;
the date of the booking transaction; the start and end date of the short-term
residential rental; and the rent and other fees charged by the host and hosting
platform.
      (7)   Upon a written request from the County, a hosting platform shall
make available for inspection those records which contain information used in
its advertisements, listings, or posts and those records containing information
that is otherwise public information.
      (8)   A hosting platform shall collect from the host and remit to the
County the occupancy tax required by §
4-6-105 of this Code.
(Bill No. 89-19; Bill No. 45-20)
§ 11-13A-104. Enforcement.
   In addition to any other remedies provided by law, a violation of any
provision of this subtitle is punishable as a Class C civil offense as provided
in § 9-2-201 of this Code.
(Bill No. 89-19)
TITLE 14. SWIMMING POOLS
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; General Provisions
   
11-14-101.   Definitions.
   
11-14-102.   Scope.
   
11-14-103.   Rules and regulations.
   
11-14-104.   Plan review; fees.
Subtitle 2. Licenses
   
11-14-201.   Pool license required.
   
11-14-202.   Pool operator license required.
   
11-14-203.   Term.
   
11-14-204.   Denial, suspension, and revocation.
Subtitle 3. Operation
   
11-14-301.   Scope.
   
11-14-302.   Duties of owners and operators.
   
11-14-303.   Plans and specifications; no hazards.
   
11-14-304.   Personnel; safety equipment.
   
11-14-305.   Condition of pool.
Subtitle 4. Modifications and Previously Approved Pools and Spas
   
11-14-401.   Modifications.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11-14-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Health club" means a "health club or spa" as defined in §
18-1-101 of this Code.
      (2)   "Health Officer" means the Anne Arundel County Health Officer or
the Health Officer's designee.
      (3)   "Operator" means a person designated by the owner of a pool to be
in immediate control of the pool.
      (4)   "Owner" means any person under whose authority a pool is being
constructed, remodeled, reconstructed, or operated.
      (5)   "Private swimming pool" means a swimming pool at a single-family
dwelling located on private property under the control of a homeowner or
tenant, the use of which is limited to members of the homeowner's or tenant's
family and nonpaying invited guests.
      (6)   "Public pool" means a pool or spa other than a private or semi-
public swimming pool that is intended to be used for swimming or bathing.
      (7)   "Semi-public pool" means a swimming pool for use by residents of a
development restricted to adults aged 55 or older with a maximum surface area
of 2,500 sq. ft. and maximum depth of five feet.
      (8)   "Spa" means a pool, hot tub, or whirlpool that is primarily
designed for relaxation or therapeutic use and not for swimming; not more than
four feet in depth; equipped with built-in seats or benches; and usually
equipped with hydrotherapy jets, heated water, an air injection system, or some
combination of these features.
      (9)   "Therapy pool" means a pool that is exclusively used in the
physical treatment of a disease, injury, or disorder.
      (10)   "Wading pool" means a pool with a water depth of 24 inches or less
that is intended for use by children.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-101) (Bill No. 16-85; Bill No. 89-97; Bill No. 49-12;
Bill No. 65-18)
§ 11-14-102. Scope.
    This title applies to existing and newly constructed public and semi-public
pools.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-102) (Bill No. 89-97)
§ 11-14-103. Rules and regulations.
   The Health Officer may adopt rules and regulations to standardize procedures
for the administration of this title and to provide reasonable and necessary
standards for the construction, operation, or safety of public and semi-public
pools and their equipment. Copies of rules and regulations shall be provided to
each person holding licenses issued under this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-103) (Bill No. 89-97)
§ 11-14-104. Plan review; fees.
   (a)   Requirement. The Health Department shall conduct plan reviews for
public and semi-public swimming pools and spas as required by applicable State
law and regulation.
   (b)   Fees. The fees for plan review are $500 for a public or semi-public
pool and $750 for a public or semi-public pool with a spa.
(Bill No. 13-05; Bill No. 42-08)
SUBTITLE 2. LICENSES
§ 11-14-201. Pool license required.
   (a)   Generally. A public or semi-public pool may not be operated or
maintained without a license issued by the Health Officer.
   (b)   Issuance. The Health Officer shall issue a nontransferable license
after an application is filed with the Health Officer by the owner of the
public or semi-public pool on the form required by the Health Officer, the
payment of required fees, and the written approval of the Health Officer.
   (c)   Fees. The application fees are:
      (1)   $725 for public and semi-public pools and spas operating six months
or more per year; and
      (2)   $350 for public and semi-public pools and spas operating less than
six months per year.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-201) (Bill No. 37-91; Bill No. 46-92; Bill No. 37-95;
Bill No. 89-97; Bill No. 13-05; Bill No. 42-08)
§ 11-14-202. Pool operator license required.
   (a)   Generally. A person may not operate a public or semi-public pool
without an operator's license issued by the Health Officer.
   (b)   Issuance. The Health Officer shall issue a license on:
      (1)   application for a license filed by an individual who is at least 16
years old on forms required by the Health Officer;
      (2)   payment of an application fee of $60; and
      (3)   approval of the Health Officer based on a finding that the
applicant has successfully completed a training course approved by the Health
Officer qualifying the applicant to operate a public or semi-public pool,
including training courses offered in high school, college, or by
correspondence or demonstrated ability to operate a public or semi-public pool
by passing an examination administered by the Health Officer, which approval of
the Health Officer is valid for a period of three years from the date an
applicant successfully completes the training course or passes the examination.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-202) (Bill No. 37-91; Bill No. 46-92; Bill No. 89-97;
Bill No. 42-08; Bill No. 71-21)
§ 11-14-203. Term.
   The term of a license issued under this title is as follows:
   (1)   A pool license expires on April 30 of each year.
   (2)   A pool operator license shall be valid for up to three years
concurrent with the approval described in §
11-14-202(b)(3).
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-204) (Bill No. 71-21)
§ 11-14-204. Denial, suspension, and revocation.
   (a)   Denial. When a public or semi-public pool does not meet the
requirements of this title, the Health Officer shall deny the license within 30
days of receipt of an application by notifying the owner in writing of the
reason or reasons for the denial; of the action to be taken in order for the
pool or spa to qualify for a license; that the owner may request from the
Health Officer an opportunity for a hearing on the denial; and that to preserve
the right to a hearing, the owner shall contact the Health Officer within 30
days of the receipt of the notice of denial.
   (b)   Suspension or revocation. The Health Officer may suspend or revoke a
license issued under this title if the license was fraudulently obtained or
erroneously issued; the licensee violated or is liable for violation of any
provision of this title or rules and regulations adopted in accordance with
this title; or the negligence or recklessness of a licensee results in death or
injury to a patron at a public or semi-public pool.
   (c)   Notice of reasons and hearing. A license may not be suspended or
revoked unless:
      (1)   the licensee is given written notice by certified mail of the
reasons for the proposed suspension or revocation at least 10 days before a
hearing; and
      (2)   a hearing is held at which the licensee is permitted to be
represented by counsel, present evidence, and cross-examine witnesses and the
grounds for the suspension or revocation are proved by a preponderance of the
evidence.
   (d)   Immediate suspension; hearing unless violations are corrected.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c), the Health Officer shall
immediately suspend a license issued under this title whenever an inspector has
reasonable grounds to believe that violations of the provisions of this title
or rules and regulations adopted in accordance with this title present an
immediate threat to the health or safety of patrons at a public or semi-public
pool. Within three days after receipt of a written request from the licensee,
the Health Officer shall conduct a hearing to determine whether the license
should be reinstated. At the hearing the licensee may be represented by
counsel, present evidence, and cross-examine witnesses. The license may not be
reinstated unless it is proven by clear and convincing evidence that the
violations have been corrected or do not present an immediate threat to the
health or safety of patrons at a public or semi-public pool. The Health Officer
may reinstate a license that has been suspended in accordance with this
subsection without a hearing if the violations have been corrected.
   (e)   Decisions. Decisions made after a hearing shall be in writing, state
the reasons for the decision, and be rendered within five days after the
hearing.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-205) (Bill No. 89-97; Bill No. 71-21)
Charter reference – §§
601 et seq.
SUBTITLE 3. OPERATION
§ 11-14-301. Scope.
   The provisions of this subtitle apply to the construction and operation of
public and semi-public pools.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-301) (Bill No. 89-97)
§ 11-14-302. Duties of owners and operators.
   (a)   Owners. Each owner of a public or semi-public pool shall operate the
pool in conformance with the provisions of this title, the rules and
regulations adopted in accordance with this title, and State law as set forth
under COMAR, 10.17.01, and is liable for violations of the provisions of this
title and State and County rules and regulations. For purposes of this title,
the operator of a public or semi-public pool is the agent of the owner of the
pool and may be served with a notice under this title on behalf of the owner.
   (b)   Operators. Each operator of a public or semi-public pool shall operate
the pool in conformance with the provisions of this title and the rules and
regulations adopted in accordance with this title, and is liable for violations
of the provisions of this title and the rules and regulations that occur or
continue while the person is acting as operator of the pool.
   (c)   Reports to Health Officer. A public or semi-public pool owner shall
ensure that an injury occurring at a pool that results in death or
resuscitation or admission to a hospital is reported to the Health Officer
within five days of the incident and that a waterborne illness contracted at a
pool is reported to the Health Officer no more than 24 hours after the owner or
operator becomes aware of the incident.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-302) (Bill No. 89-97)
§ 11-14-303. Plans and specifications; no hazards.
   (a)   Plans and specifications. A person may not construct or make changes
to a public or semi- public swimming pool or its appurtenances until the plans
and specifications have been submitted to and received approval from the Health
Officer. Approval of plans shall be based upon compliance with State
regulations, including those set forth under COMAR, 10.17.01, and the rules and
regulations adopted in accordance with this title.
   (b)   No hazards. An owner shall maintain a public or semi-public pool free
from suction entrapment hazards. Conditions that constitute or cause or may
reasonably be known to constitute or cause health or safety hazards may not be
permitted in or in the vicinity of a public or semi-public pool. Bathhouses,
locker rooms, and similar types of changing areas associated with a public or
semi-public pool shall be kept free of health and safety hazards.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-303) (Bill No. 89-97)
§ 11-14-304. Personnel; safety equipment.
   (a)   Pool operator. A public or semi-public pool may be operated only under
the immediate supervision and control of an individual possessing a current and
valid pool operator's license issued by the Health Officer. The license shall
be conspicuously displayed in the immediate vicinity of the pool when the
operator is on duty.
   (b)   Lifeguards. Except as provided in subsection (d), a public pool may be
operated only under the active, onsite supervision and under the direct
observation of a lifeguard. The number of lifeguards required shall be
determined by the following table:
 
Number of Persons in Water     Number of Lifeguards
1 to 50                        1
51 to 100                      2
101 to 150                     3
For each additional 50 persons 1
 
   (c)   Simultaneous operator and lifeguard. Except as provided in subsection
(d), a public pool may not be operated with the same person acting
simultaneously as an operator and lifeguard unless the pool is closed to use
whenever the lifeguard is not physically present on the deck of the pool.
   (d)   Exceptions to lifeguard requirement. The requirements in subsections
(b) and (c) do not apply to:
      (1)   a spa; or
      (2)   a pool or multiple pools within one enclosure with a total water
surface area of less than 2,500 square feet and a maximum depth of five feet on
the grounds of:
         (i)   a hotel or motel, when it is used exclusively by its registered
guests; or
         (ii)   a health club, when it is used exclusively by its members and
guests who are at least 18 years old.
   (e)   CPR and first aid certificates. A public or semi-public pool may be
operated only under the onsite supervision of an individual possessing a
current and valid infant/child/adult CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation)
certificate and a valid first aid certificate issued by the American Heart
Association, the American Red Cross, or a similar organization recognized by
the Health Officer.
   (f)   Required equipment. Each public and semi-public pool shall be equipped
with a first aid kit and an automated external defibrillator (AED) device
approved by the Health Officer and the following safety equipment: a face mask
for CPR; disposable latex plastic gloves; a bloodborne pathogen control kit; a
light, strong rescue pole not less than 10 feet long; a rescue tube designed
for lifesaving for each required lifeguard; two blankets; a cot; a backboard
designed for medical emergency use that is equipped with straps and head
immobilizer; a telephone shall be provided within the pool enclosure or other
approved location.
   (g)   Signs. An owner of a public or semi-public pool or of a public or
semi-public spa, as those terms are defined in COMAR 10.17.01.05, shall post
signs as required by COMAR 10.17.04.40F at each pool and spa.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-304) (Bill No. 89-97; Bill No. 52-12; Bill No. 18-16;
Bill No. 65-18; Bill No. 71-21)
§ 11-14-305. Condition of pool.
   (a)   Water-testing kits. Approved water-testing kits shall be provided at
each public and semi-public pool for determining the pH level, the free
available chlorine, and the total available chlorine. The test kit shall use
the DPD (diethyl-phenylene diamine) method for testing free available chlorine.
If a pool is stabilized by the use of cyanuric acid, an approved test kit for
measuring cyanuric acid shall be provided.
   (b)   Turbidity. The turbidity of the water in a public or semi-public pool
may not visually obscure the view of the main drain or the bottom of the pool.
   (c)   Free chlorine residual. The free chlorine residual shall be maintained
between 1.5 and 5.0 parts per million in public or semi-public pools, between
3.0 and 5.0 parts per million in wading and therapy pools, and between 4.0 and
5.0 parts per million in spas.
   (d)   Combined chlorine. The maximum amount of combined chlorine shall be
0.2 parts per million for public and semi-public pools and spas.
   (e)   Disinfectants other than chlorine. Disinfectants other than chlorine
may be utilized in a pool when approved by the Health Officer and must be
maintained in the concentrations specified in State regulations as set forth
under COMAR, 10.17.01.
   (f)   Cyanuric acid. In pools stabilized by use of cyanuric acid, the level
of cyanuric acid must be maintained between 30 and 100 parts per million.
   (g)   pH level. The pH level of public and semi-public pools shall be
maintained between 7.2 and 7.8.
   (h)   Filtered water. The delivery of filtered water to a public or semi-
public pool may not be interrupted for more than one hour in any one continuous
24-hour period, excluding time required for backwashing operation, cleaning
hair and lint traps, and cleaning of the chlorinator.
   (i)   Disinfectants. The owner shall ensure that a disinfectant or
combination of disinfectants is added to the water automatically through an
approved chemical feeder to maintain chlorine or disinfectant residuals. The
automatic disinfectant feeder may not be inoperative in excess of 24
consecutive hours. Chemicals may not be added during any inoperative period
except in the manner prescribed by the Health Officer.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-305) (Bill No. 89-97)
SUBTITLE 4. MODIFICATIONS AND PREVIOUSLY APPROVED POOLS AND SPAS
§ 11-14-401. Modifications.
   (a)   Request. An owner may request a modification from a requirement of
this title by submitting a written request to the Health Officer that contains
specific details of the alternative procedure proposed; specifies the
applicable regulation to which the modification pertains; explains the reason
for the request; provides the name and address of the owner; provides the name
and location of the facility; and demonstrates that the alternate procedure
proposed meets or produces the intended effect of the regulation for which the
modification is requested and maintains the protection of the health and safety
of the individuals using the facility at or above the level required by the
regulation from which the variance is requested.
   (b)   Decision. Decisions on modification requests submitted under this
section shall be made in writing and rendered by the Health Officer within 30
days after receipt of the written request. The decision shall specify the
section of this title to which the variance applies, state the reasons for the
decision, and require the owner to indemnify the County against liability
arising from the modification.
   (c)   Exemption. The owner of a pool that was approved by the Health Officer
for construction before the adoption of this title may submit a written request
to the Health Officer which exempts the previously approved pool or spa from
complying with this title and State regulation as set forth under COMAR,
10.17.01, except when the previously approved pool or spa has a condition that
jeopardizes the health or safety of the public or an owner intends to alter the
previously approved pool or spa, including appurtenant structures and
equipment.
   (d)   Maintenance and repairs of pools and spas approved before adoption of
this title without compliance with this subtitle. The owner of a pool or spa
that was approved by the Health Officer for construction before the adoption of
this title shall maintain the pool or spa, including appurtenant structures and
equipment, as originally approved and may complete a repair that restores the
pool or spa to its original condition before damage or deterioration without
complying with the requirements of this title when the repair:
      (1)   costs less than 25% of the replacement value of the pool or spa,
including appurtenant structures and equipment;
      (2)   consists of the same or equivalent materials and components having
the same specifications, operating characteristics, and certifications as the
original construction; and
      (3)   does not create a danger or allow a danger to continue that
threatens the health and safety of an individual using the pool or spa.
   (e)   Repairs of pools and spas approved before adoption of this title in
compliance with this title. The owner of a pool or spa that was approved by the
Health Officer for construction before the adoption of this title shall ensure
that a repair complies with all applicable provisions of this title when
completing a repair that:
      (1)   costs more than 25% of the replacement value of the pool or spa,
including appurtenant structures and equipment; or
      (2)   alters the materials or components of the original construction.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 16-501) (Bill No. 89-97)
TITLE 15. TAXICABS
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; General Provisions
   
11-15-101.   Definitions.
   
11-15-102.   Taxicabs not licensed by the County.
   
11-15-103.   Suspension; revocation.
Subtitle 2. Licenses
   
11-15-201.   Change of owner, location, or address; notifications.
   
11-15-202.   Vehicle license and decal.
   
11-15-203.   Operator's license.
   
11-15-204.   Provisional taxicab operator's license.
Subtitle 3. Operation of Taxicabs
   
11-15-301.   Compliance with title.
   
11-15-302.   Rate schedule and fares.
   
11-15-303.   Duties.
   
11-15-304.   Daily records; trip manifest; inspection.
   
11-15-305.   Accident reports.
Subtitle 4. Taxicab Condition and Equipment
   
11-15-401.   Identification of taxicab.
   
11-15-402.   Taximeters.
   
11-15-403.   Other equipment and general condition.
   
11-15-404.   Inspections.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11-15-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Owner" means the person in whose name a taxicab is registered with
the State Motor Vehicle Administration and the taxicab company.
      (2)   "Taxicab" means a motor vehicle for hire that is a closed passenger
vehicle with at least three doors; is designed to carry seven or fewer
individuals, including the taxicab operator; and operates on call or demand,
soliciting or accepting passengers indiscriminately for transportation for hire
from points along streets in the County to destinations that the passengers
request.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-101) (Bill No. 56-97; Bill No. 24-00)
§ 11-15-102. Taxicabs not licensed by the County.
   A taxicab that does not have a taxicab vehicle license issued by the County
or a municipal corporation within the County may not provide any service in the
County except that it may bring passengers from a community outside of the
County into the County and may wait at the destination of those passengers to
provide further service to a destination outside of the County if requested to
do so by the passengers.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-102) (Bill No. 56-97; Bill No. 24-00)
§ 11-15-103. Suspension; revocation.
   The Department may suspend or revoke a vehicle license or taxicab operator's
license upon a failure to meet the qualifications for obtaining the license or
for any violation of this title. The Department shall provide notice and the
opportunity for a hearing before suspending or revoking a license.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-501) (Bill No. 24-00)
SUBTITLE 2. LICENSES
§ 11-15-201. Change of owner, location, or address; notifications.
   (a)   Notification by owner and return of license. An owner shall notify the
Department in writing within 48 hours:
      (1)   of a change in business or residence address;
      (2)   of a change in ownership or ownership interest;
      (3)   whenever a taxicab operator leaves the service of the owner, in
which event the owner shall return the operator's license if the license is in
the possession of the owner;
      (4)   if a taxicab has been sold, junked, or permanently taken out of
service or taken out of service for more than 72 hours for a reason other than
that it has been sold, junked, or permanently taken out of service, in which
event the owner shall return the vehicle license; and
       (5)   if the vehicle registration for a taxicab is revoked, in which
event the owner shall return the vehicle license.
   (b)   Notification by operator; operation only for designated owner; return
of license. A taxicab operator shall:
      (1)   notify the Department in writing of a change of residence address
within 48 hours of the change;
      (2)   operate only for the owner designated on the operator's license
unless the Department provides written permission for the operator to operate
for another owner; and
      (3)   surrender the taxicab operator's license to the owner or to the
Department if the operator leaves the service of the owner.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-201) (Bill No. 24-00)
§ 11-15-202. Vehicle license and decal.
   (a)   Requirement. An owner may not allow a taxicab to be operated in the
County without a valid vehicle license and decal issued by the County.
   (b)   Qualifications. A vehicle license and decal may be issued to an
applicant whose vehicle:
      (1)   is ten or fewer model years old, measured by the period of time
from October 1 through the following September 30;
      (2)   is registered with the State of Maryland Motor Vehicle
Administration as a Class B (for hire) vehicle;
      (3)   has been inspected by and obtained a certificate of inspection from
an inspection station licensed by the State;
      (4)   is insured by a liability insurance policy or is certified as a
Class B self-insurer with a valid certificate of self-insurance issued by the
State of Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration in compliance with the
Transportation Article of the State Code and COMAR 11.18.02.01, et seq. and
11.18.02.04, that insures the owner and operator against liability to
passengers or members of the general public for property damage or bodily
injury arising out of an accident, as follows: the payment of claims for bodily
injury or death of at least $50,000 for any one person and at least $100,000
for any two or more persons, in addition to interest and costs, and the payment
of claims for property damage of at least $20,000, in addition to interest and
costs; and
      (5)   complies with all other provisions of this title.
   (c)   Denial. The Department may deny a vehicle license if an applicant:
      (1)   has had a vehicle license or similar permit or license permanently
revoked in another jurisdiction;
      (2)   has had a vehicle license revoked once or suspended twice;
      (3)   has made a false statement under oath of a material question on a
form required by the Department;
      (4)   filed an application within the preceding six months that was
denied; or
      (5)   has violated provisions of this title or of County, State, or
federal law.
   (d)   Application. An applicant for a vehicle license and decal shall file
an application with the Department on forms required by the Department and
shall sign the application under oath.
   (e)   Fees. The fee for a vehicle license and decal is $100. The fee to
transfer a license during the term of the existing license is $25. The fee to
issue a duplicate license is $25.
   (f)   Issuance. The Department shall issue a vehicle license and decal to an
applicant who has submitted all information required by the application form,
paid the required fees, and met the qualifications for obtaining the license.
   (g)   Display. A vehicle license shall be displayed publicly in a
conspicuous place in the taxicab for which it was issued and be subject to
inspection on demand of the proper representatives of the County or by police
authorities of the State, County, or a municipal corporation. A vehicle license
decal shall be attached to the exterior of the taxicab as required by the
Department.
   (h)   Expiration. A vehicle license and decal expire on October 31 of each
year.
   (i)   Renewal. An application for renewal shall be filed on or before
October 21 of each year.
   (j)   Late fee. The Department may impose a $2.50 per day late fee for each
day after October 31 that an application remains incomplete or the fee is not
paid.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 17-204, 17-205, 17-206, 17-207, 17-208) (Bill No. 56-
97, Bill No. 24-00; Bill No. 70-03; Bill No. 50-04; Bill No. 21-12)
§ 11-15-203. Operator's license.
   (a)   Requirement. A person may not operate a taxicab for hire in the County
without a valid taxicab operator's license issued by the Department.
   (b)   Qualifications. A taxicab operator's license may be issued to an
applicant who:
      (1)   is at least 21 years old;
      (2)   is a citizen of the United States or a permanent resident alien
authorized to work in the United States by the United States Immigration
Service;
      (3)   holds a valid State driver's license;
      (4)   demonstrates an ability to read and find locations on a map of the
County and to comprehend and follow oral directions to a destination; and
      (5)   is not subject to an infirmity of body or mind that may render the
applicant unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab.
   (c)   Denial. The Department may deny an operator's license if an applicant:
      (1)   has a record of repeated and persistent violations of motor vehicle
laws;
      (2)   has been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere to the violation of a law involving moral turpitude, including a
sexual offense, an alcohol or narcotics offense, or a gambling offense;
      (3)   is on parole or probation for a criminal or traffic offense;
      (4)   has, within three years immediately preceding the date of the
application, been released from a penal or correctional institution;
      (5)   has diplomatic immunity;
      (6)   has had a taxicab operator's license or a similar permit or license
permanently revoked in another jurisdiction;
      (7)   has had a license to operate a taxicab revoked once or suspended
twice;
      (8)   has made a false statement under oath of a material question on a
form required by the Department;
      (9)   filed an application within the preceding six months that was
denied; or
      (10)   has violated provisions of this title or of County, State, or
federal law.
   (d)   Fees. The fee for a taxicab operator's license is:
      (1)   $100 for the initial license;
      (2)   $75 for a renewal license;
      (3)   $25 when a licensed operator transfers to a different owner during
the term of an existing license; and
      (4)   $25 for a duplicate license.
   (e)   Investigation. The Department shall forward each application to the
Police Department, and the Police Department shall inquire into the
qualifications of the applicant and forward to the Department a report of its
findings. The Department shall determine whether to issue the operator's
license.
   (f)   Issuance. The Department shall issue a taxicab operator's license to
an applicant who has submitted all information required by the application
form, paid the required fees, and met the qualifications for obtaining the
license.
   (g)   Display. A licensee shall wear the license card issued by the
Department whenever operating a taxicab for business purposes.
   (h)   Expiration. A taxicab operator's license expires on January 31 of each
year.
   (i)   Renewal. An application for renewal shall be filed by January 21 of
each year.
   (j)   Late fee. The Department may impose a $1 per day late fee for each day
after January 31 that the application remains incomplete or the required fee is
not paid.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 17-211, 17-212, 17-213, 17-215, 17-216, 17-217) (Bill
No. 46-92; Bill No. 56-97; Bill No. 24-00; Bill No. 50-04)
§ 11-15-204. Provisional taxicab operator's license.
   (a)   Generally. On receipt of a completed taxicab operator's license
application, a copy of the applicant's driving record from the Motor Vehicle
Administration, and a $25 payment towards the initial license fee, the
Department may issue a provisional taxicab operator's license.
   (b)   Content. A provisional taxicab operator's license shall identify the
applicant and the owner.
   (c)   Expiration. A provisional taxicab operator's license expires 45 days
after the date of issuance.
   (d)   Fingerprinting; release form; fee. Within 20 days after the date of
issuance of a provisional taxicab operator's license, the applicant shall be
fingerprinted by the County police and provide the Department with a completed
criminal history release form and pay the processing fee required to obtain the
history.
   (e)   Investigation. The Department shall forward each application to the
Police Department, and the Police Department shall inquire into the
qualifications of the applicant and forward to the Department a report of its
findings. The Department shall determine whether to issue the operator's
license.
   (f)   Issuance. The Department shall issue a provisional taxicab operator's
license to an applicant who has submitted all information required by the
application form, paid the required fees, and met the qualifications for
obtaining the license.
   (g)   Display. A licensee shall wear the provisional license card issued by
the Department whenever operating a taxicab for business purposes.
   (h)   Doctor's certification; fee. Before the expiration of the provisional
taxicab operator's license, the applicant shall provide the Department with a
doctor's certification that the applicant is not subject to an infirmity of
body or mind that may render the applicant unfit for the safe operation of a
taxicab and pay the balance of the fee required for an initial taxicab
operator's license.
   (i)   Extension. The Department may extend a provisional taxicab operator's
license for up to 30 days.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-214) (Bill No. 56-97; Bill No. 24-00; Bill No. 14-01)
SUBTITLE 3. OPERATION OF TAXICABS
§ 11-15-301. Compliance with title.
   An owner may not knowingly permit a taxicab to be driven on a street in the
County unless the taxicab complies with the provisions of this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-301) (Bill No. 24-00)
§ 11-15-302. Rate schedule and fares.
   (a)   Fare rates. Each taximeter shall be set to register fares on the
following schedule of rates:
      (1)   for the first one-tenth of a mile or fraction thereof, $2.00;
      (2)   for each additional one-tenth of a mile or fraction thereof, $0.25;
and
      (3)   for each 37.5-second period of waiting time, $0.25.
   (b)   Charges for suitcases and the like. The charge for each suitcase
carried, in excess of two, is $0.25. The charge for each trunk, footlocker, or
other oversized personal property is $1.00.
   (c)   Proximity to cab stand. The charge for a call answered three or more
miles from the cab stand that does not return within a three-mile zone of the
cab stand is $5.00 or the taximeter charge, whichever is greater.
   (d)   Ride sharing. The Department shall approve the fares to be charged
when passengers agree to share a taxicab to different destinations, and the
fares shall be posted in each taxicab.
   (e)   Tolls. The passenger shall pay all tolls, on both the outgoing and
return trip.
   (f)   Animals. A taxicab operator may refuse to transport an animal or may
agree to do so for a charge not to exceed $5.00, except that a taxicab operator
shall transport without charge an animal licensed to assist the disabled.
   (g)   Airport taxicab surcharge. Airport taxicabs holding the concession
rights to work out of Baltimore-Washington International Airport may add a
$0.90 surcharge for trips originating from the airport.
   (h)   Weather-related emergency conditions. During weather-related emergency
conditions designated for the County by the Maryland State Police, taxicab
operators may add a surcharge of 25% of the metered fare, with a minimum
surcharge of $1.00.
   (i)   Display. An owner or taxicab operator shall display the rate schedule
in the passenger section of the taxicab.
   (j)   Prohibition. An owner or taxicab operator may not charge or attempt to
charge a customer a fare in excess of the rates authorized under this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-302) (Bill No. 14-91; Bill No. 56-97; Bill No. 24-00;
Bill No. 50-04; Bill No. 62-05; Bill No. 47-06; Bill No. 73-08; Bill No. 95-08)
§ 11-15-303. Duties.
   (a)   Owner duties. An owner may not permit a taxicab to be operated by the
same taxicab operator for more than a total of 12 hours in a 24-hour period.
   (b)   Operator duties. A taxicab operator shall:
      (1)   accept an orderly person as a passenger upon request, unless
previously engaged or prohibited from doing so by the provisions of this title
or another law or regulation;
      (2)   proceed with a passenger to the requested destination by the
shortest practicable route;
      (3)   give a receipt for fares on an authorized form upon request;
      (4)   deliver fares and other legal charges received to the owner;
      (5)   answer promptly all communications from the Department; and
      (6)   carry only one person in the front seat with the driver and, in
other seats, no more than the number of passengers for which passenger
restraints are available.
   (c)   Operator prohibitions. A taxicab operator may not:
      (1)   permit another person to use the taxicab operator's license;
      (2)   permit an unlicensed person to drive the taxicab for hire;
      (3)   operate a taxicab for more than a total of 12 hours in a 24-hour
period;
      (4)   smoke while transporting a passenger without the passenger's
consent;
      (5)   refuse or fail upon request to inform a passenger or prospective
passenger of the number of the taxicab or the correct rate or fare;
      (6)   willfully mislead or misconvey a passenger;
      (7)   use abusive, indecent, or offensive language;
      (8)   operate a taxicab recklessly, in an unsafe manner, or in disregard
of the public general or local laws of this State governing the operation of
motor vehicles;
      (9)   require a passenger to share a taxicab with another person;
      (10)   refuse service in order to group passengers more profitably; or
      (11)   transport non-paying passengers in the taxicab unless an off-duty
sign is displayed.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-303) (Bill No. 24-00)
§ 11-15-304. Daily records; trip manifest; inspection.
   (a)   Daily records. Daily records, including records of telephone calls
accepted and calls refused, shall be kept in a form that will ensure their
accuracy. Daily records shall be preserved and available for examination for
one year and be maintained at the taxicab company's place of business in the
County.
   (b)   Trip manifest. A taxicab operator shall keep a trip manifest in which
the operator shall enter for each engagement immediately on completion the
points of origin and destination, the times of beginning and completion, the
fare collected, and the number of passengers. Entries in a trip manifest shall
be made legibly, and the trip manifest shall be signed by the operator. The
trip manifest shall be preserved and made available for examination for a
period of one year.
   (c)   Inspection. The Department and police officers may inspect daily
records and trip manifests and confiscate incomplete or inaccurate daily
records and trip manifests.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-304) (Bill No. 56-97; Bill No. 24-00)
§ 11-15-305. Accident reports.
   If a taxicab is involved in an accident resulting in injury to person or
property or an accident occurs while a taxicab is occupied by a passenger, a
written report of the accident shall be submitted to the Department within
three days after the accident. The report shall include the following
information: date and time of the accident; operator's name and license number;
vehicle license number; extent of the damage; and whether the cab was in
service at the time of the accident.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-305) (Bill No. 24-00)
SUBTITLE 4. TAXICAB CONDITION AND EQUIPMENT
§ 11-15-401. Identification of taxicab.
   (a)   Name and vehicle license number. The owner shall have the full name of
the taxicab company permanently printed on one door on each side of the taxicab
in letters at least two and one-half inches high and the vehicle license number
painted on each side of the taxicab near the rear window.
   (b)   Color scheme. An owner may adopt and employ a distinctive color scheme
or insignia and shall register the color scheme or insignia with the
Department. An owner may not attempt to mislead the public by imitating a color
scheme or insignia already approved by the Department.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-403) (Bill No. 56-97; Bill No. 24-00)
§ 11-15-402. Taximeters.
   (a)   Generally. A taxicab shall be equipped with a taximeter of a make and
design approved by the Department. Unless a rate schedule approved by the
Department applies, a taximeter shall be the exclusive means for measuring
fares. A taximeter may not have an error in calibration in excess of 3% and may
not operate under multiple tariff schedules.
   (b)   Prohibitions. A taxicab may not be operated unless the Department has
inspected, tested, approved, and sealed the taximeter; the taximeter is mounted
and connected to the transmission or front wheel in an approved manner and, if
mounted on the dashboard, does not obscure the vision of the operator or
present a hazard to passengers; and the taximeter reading is visible to
passengers at all times.
   (c)   Inspection. The Department shall inspect a taximeter semiannually and
may conduct periodic spot checks as needed.
   (d)   Notice. A taxicab shall contain a notice approved by the Department
and mounted in the passenger section of the taxicab advising passengers that
the taxicab operator may not charge them a fare if the taximeter is not
operating during the ride.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-405) (Bill No. 24-00)
§ 11-15-403. Other equipment and general condition.
   (a)   General condition. The owner and the operator shall keep taxicabs that
are operating under County licenses in proper physical and mechanical condition
to render safe, adequate, and convenient public service. The owner and the
operator shall keep taxicabs in a clean and sanitary condition. The owner and,
on being assigned to a taxicab, the operator shall ascertain that the taxicab
and its equipment are in good working order.
   (b)   Tampering prohibited. An owner and the operator may not tamper with
rate schedules, taximeters, speedometer cables, or any other equipment required
by law to be in a taxicab.
   (c)   Doors. The doors of a taxicab shall remain securely fastened while the
taxicab is in motion and open readily in case of an emergency.
   (d)   Dome light. The passenger compartment of a taxicab shall be equipped
with a dome light that is capable of being lighted or extinguished by the
passenger or controlled by the operation of the doors.
   (e)   Climate control. All factory-installed climate control devices shall
be maintained in working order.
   (f)   Windows. All windows shall be maintained in working order.
   (g)   Exterior roof light. A taxicab shall be equipped with an exterior roof
light approved by the Department. The roof light shall be connected to the
taximeter so that the roof light is extinguished when the taximeter is
activated.
   (h)   Communication device. A taxicab, other than a taxicab operating out of
Baltimore-Washington International Airport under a written concession contract
with the State Aviation Administration, shall be equipped with a functioning
communication device to be used by the operator to receive and accept requests
for service from the dispatch facility.
   (i)   Equipment prohibitions. A taxicab may not:
      (1)   have shades or curtains that shield the occupants or the operator
from observation;
      (2)   have placards or other obstructions that are attached to or rest
against the windshield or rear window, except for the certificates of
inspection required by State law;
      (3)   contain or be equipped with or operate in response to any device
used to intercept radio communications not made to that taxicab or that taxicab
operator; or
      (4)   contain or be equipped with any device used to intercept
instruments that law enforcement officers use to enforce motor vehicle laws.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 17-401, 17-404) (Bill No. 56-97; Bill No. 24-00)
§ 11-15-404. Inspections.
   (a)   Annually. Annually, each taxicab shall be inspected at an inspection
station licensed by the State.
   (b)   Semiannually. Semiannually, the Department shall inspect each taxicab
for general safety and cleanliness and to determine the proper functioning of
the taximeter.
   (c)   Failure to pass Departmental inspection. If a taxicab is not in proper
physical and mechanical condition to render safe, adequate, and convenient
public service, the owner shall be notified of the nature of the defect, the
owner shall return the vehicle license to the Department, and the vehicle may
not operate as a taxicab until the condition has been remedied. Upon
notification from the owner that the condition has been remedied, the
Department shall re-inspect the vehicle and, if the condition has been
remedied, the vehicle license shall be returned to the owner. If a taxicab is
not clean and sanitary, the Department shall give the owner and taxicab
operator a reasonable time to remedy the condition and shall re-inspect the
vehicle after that time has elapsed. If the re-inspection reveals that the
taxicab is still not clean and sanitary, the owner shall return the vehicle
license to the Department until the condition is remedied.
   (d)   Fees. A $25 fee shall be charged for failure to make a taxicab
available for a scheduled inspection and for each re-inspection.
   (e)   Inspection by police. After first displaying their badges to the
operator, the County Police may enter or inspect a taxicab to determine
compliance with this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 17-402) (Bill No. 56-97; Bill No. 24-00)
TITLE 16. TOWING COMPANIES
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; General Provisions
   
11-16-101.   Definitions.
   
11-16-102.   Rules and regulations.
   
11-16-103.   Telephones.
Subtitle 2. License and Insurance
   
11-16-201.   License.
   
11-16-202.   Insurance.
   
11-16-203.   Storage.
   
11-16-204.   Inspection; release of vehicle and personal property.
   
11-16-205.   Rates, charges, and payment.
Subtitle 3. Operation of Tow Trucks
   
11-16-301.   Scope.
   
11-16-302.   Tow areas; rotation list.
   
11-16-303.   Response standards.
   
11-16-304.   (Reserved).
   
11-16-305.   (Reserved).
Subtitle 4. Nonconsensual Towing from Parking Lots and Private Roads
   
11-16-401.   Scope and enforcement.
   
11-16-402.   Parking lot and private road owner and operator requirements.
   
11-16-403.   Commercial liability insurance.
   
11-16-404.   Required nonconsensual towing procedures for towing companies and
parking lot and private road owners and operators.
   
11-16-405.   Penalties and citations.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11-16-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Disabled, abandoned, or recovered vehicle" means a motor vehicle
that has been damaged or rendered inoperative as a result of a collision or
accident; an abandoned motor vehicle that obstructs the free flow of traffic; a
recovered stolen motor vehicle; or a motor vehicle impounded by the police.
      (2)   “Heavy-duty towing” means towing a vehicle with a manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating greater than 26,000 pounds or towing a vehicle for
which specialized equipment is required.
      (3)   “Light-duty towing” means towing a vehicle with a manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating less than 26,000 pounds.
      (4)   “Nonconsensual towing” means towing a vehicle from private property
for compensation and without the consent of the vehicle owner.
      (5)   “Parking lot” means a privately owned facility consisting of two or
more spaces for motor vehicle parking that is accessible to the general public
and intended by the owner of the facility to be used primarily by the owner’s
customers, clientele, residents, lessees, or guests. For nonconsensual towing,
a designated residential parking space or handicapped parking space shall
qualify as a parking lot.   
      (6)   “Police-initiated towing” means towing disabled, abandoned, or
recovered vehicles at the request of the Police Department.
      (7)   “Private road” means any road not otherwise designated as a public
road as defined in this section.
      (8)   “Public road” means any street, highway, shoulder, median, right-
of-way, alley, sidewalk, road, parking lot or area, lane, path, public way, or
any other land that is owned or leased by the County or State and used,
intended, or obtained for use for public conveyance of vehicles or persons.
      (9)   “Redemption area” means a location owned, controlled, or operated
by a towing company that is staffed during the regular business day to allow
for the retrieval of towed vehicles.
      (10)   “Regular business day” means the period between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturday, holidays
excluded.
      (11)   “Storage facility” means an area owned, controlled, or operated by
a towing company that is staffed during the regular business day and used to
store towed vehicles.
      (12)   “Tow truck” means a vehicle registered with the State Motor
Vehicle Administration that is capable of performing towing operations.
      (13)   “Tow truck operator” means any person who operates equipment used
in the towing of vehicles at the request of the Police Department or who tows
vehicles from private property for compensation and without the consent of the
vehicle’s owner.
      (14)   “Towing company” means a person owning, operating, or conducting
the business of towing disabled, abandoned, or recovered vehicles at the
request of the Police Department or a person owning, operating, or conducting
the business of towing vehicles without the consent of the vehicle’s owner.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 18-101) (Bill No. 80-99; Bill No. 18-09; Bill No. 52-13;
Bill No. 71-18; Bill No. 83-19; Bill No. 77-24)
§ 11-16-102. Rules and regulations.
   After consultation with the Police Department, the Department may promulgate
rules, regulations, forms, and procedures that promote the intent of this
title.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 18-103) (Bill No. 80-99)
§ 11-16-103. Telephones.
   (a)   Generally. A towing company shall answer its listed telephone number
24 hours a day by using the business name listed in the application.
   (b)   Extension. A towing company may have an extension at a residence or at
the residence of a designated employee.
   (c)   Answering service. An answering service may be used as long as the
time limits established in this title are met, but beepers and answering
machines may not be used.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 18-209) (Bill No. 80-99)
SUBTITLE 2. LICENSE AND INSURANCE
§ 11-16-201. License.
   (a)   When required. A person may not engage in police-initiated towing or
nonconsensual towing without a license issued by the Department, except that a
license is not required for a towing company that is the personal choice of the
owner of a disabled vehicle or the owner's agent.
   (b)   Standards for issuance. To be eligible for a license, a towing company
shall meet the following standards:
      (1)   the towing company shall comply with all applicable federal, State,
and local statutes, ordinances, and regulations, and all rules, regulations,
forms, and operating procedures that are promulgated by the Department;
      (2)   all tow trucks used by the towing company shall be registered by
the State Motor Vehicle Administration, capable of performing normal towing
operations in a safe and timely manner, and legibly inscribed on each side with
the name and address of the towing company in letters at least four inches in
height;
      (3)   the tow trucks shall be in good mechanical condition and equipped
with necessary towing gear and safety apparatus; and
      (4)   the towing company shall ensure that each tow truck operator:
         (i)   holds a valid driver's license issued by the United States
Government or the State of the person's residence for the class vehicle that
the driver operates while employed as a tow truck operator;
         (ii)   is at least 18 years old;
         (iii)   is courteous and does not use abusive or offensive language
when dealing with the public or police;
         (iv)   within the three-year period prior to the date of the
application, has not been convicted of a felony or entered a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere to a felony;
         (v)   is not a consistent violator of motor vehicle laws; and
         (vi)   does not have a history of drug or alcohol abuse.
   (c)   Additional standards for police-initiated towing. A towing company
that engages in police-initiated towing shall:
      (1)   (i)   if performing light-duty towing, possess at least three tow
trucks capable of conducting light-duty towing registered by the State Motor
Vehicle Administration; and
         (ii)   if performing heavy-duty towing, possess at least one tow truck
capable of conducting heavy-duty towing registered by the State Motor Vehicle
Administration;
      (2)   be operational and available 24 hours a day, seven days a week,
with sufficient qualified, licensed, and trained personnel to respond to
requests and operate the tow trucks and related equipment; and
      (3)   be able to respond to calls for service in a tow area within 30
minutes for light- duty towing and 45 minutes for heavy-duty towing and shall
have an acceptable response record or be expected to be able to respond in the
required time frame.
   (d)   Additional standards for nonconsensual towing. A towing company that
engages in nonconsensual towing shall have, within the County or within two
miles measured by driving distance of the County’s boundary line, a storage
facility and, if separate from the storage facility, a redemption area.
   (e)   Application. A towing company shall report to the Director in writing
within three business days all changes to the information contained in an
application.
   (f)   Fees. The annual application fee is $250. The annual license fee is
$25 for each tow truck.
   (g)   Investigation and approval by Police Department. The Director shall
forward the application to the Police Department for an investigation and
inspection and approval. The Police Department shall approve the application,
following an inspection of all tow trucks and towing equipment, on finding that
the towing company, tow trucks, and towing equipment comply with the standards
set forth in this title and the towing company has no pattern of violations of
this title.
   (h)   Issuance. The Director shall issue a license if the Police Department
has approved it; the towing company complies with all applicable zoning laws;
and no other factors or conditions exist that warrant denial of the license.
The Director may not issue a license to a company that performs police-
initiated towing unless the towing company has an adequate, secure off-street
storage facility located in the County. The license shall indicate whether the
towing company is approved for heavy- duty towing, light-duty towing, or both.
   (i)   Approved list. The Department shall establish and maintain a list of
licensed towing companies and provide the list to the Police Department and
shall separately designate those companies licensed to conduct heavy-duty
police-initiated towing and light-duty police-initiated towing.
   (j)   Denial; revocation; suspension. After providing a hearing, the
Director may deny, revoke, or suspend the license of a towing company that:
      (1)   violates any of the provisions of this title;
      (2)   violates any rules or regulations adopted under this title;
      (3)   violates any of the provisions of §
12-3-107 of this Code;
      (4)   fails to submit timely and proper State and County forms or
reports; or
      (5)   has a license to tow suspended or revoked by another jurisdiction
after opportunity for a hearing.
   (k)   Additional grounds for denial, revocation, or suspension of license
for police- initiated towing. After providing a hearing, the Director may deny,
revoke, or suspend the license of a towing company that performs police-
initiated towing if the company:
      (1)   has five responses in excess of the required response time in
subsection (c)(3) within any two-month period that were not excused pursuant to
§
11-16-302; or
      (2)   fails to respond to seven tow requests within a six-month period.
   (l)   Expiration. A license issued under this title expires on August 31 of
each year.
   (m)   Display of license and decal. A license issued under this title shall
be carried in each tow truck of the licensed towing company when the tow truck
is in use. The Department shall issue a decal to each licensed tow truck, and
the towing company shall display the decal prominently on the exterior of each
tow truck.
   (n)   Equipment required for police-initiated towing. A towing company that
engages in police-initiated towing shall have:
      (1)   in each tow truck:
         (i)   a broom, shovel, and bucket for debris;
         (ii)   an operable fire extinguisher;
         (iii)   absorbent;
         (iv)   mechanic’s tools sufficient to perform minor repairs;
         (v)   light bar, reflectors, flares, and other appropriate safety
devices; and
         (vi)   a copy of the current County towing license.
      (2)   for any towing company licensed to conduct light-duty police-
initiated towing, at least one rollback tow truck and each tow truck shall have
all towing equipment necessary appropriate for the safe and timely performance
of towing services for that tow truck.
      (3)   for any towing company licensed to conduct heavy-duty police-
initiated towing, the tow trucks used in heavy-duty towing shall have a gross
vehicle weight rating in excess of 33,000 pounds, and each truck shall be
equipped with:
         (i)   recovery straps;
         (ii)   a chainsaw;
         (iii)   headset communication;
         (iv)   sufficient quantities of 5/8 and 1/2 chains (100 grade);
         (v)   crow bars;
         (vi)   work lights;
         (vii)   cones;
         (viii)   air lines and air fittings;
         (ix)   a cordless impact drill;
         (x)   a copy of the current County towing license; and
         (xi)   sufficient equipment for the safe and timely performance of
heavy-duty towing services.
   (o)   Waiver of heavy-duty equipment requirements. An applicant for a heavy-
duty police-initiated towing license may submit a written waiver request to the
Police Department seeking to be licensed for heavy-duty police-initiated towing
without having all of the equipment specified in subsection (n)(3). If the
Police Department determines that specific equipment listed in subsection (n)
(3) is unnecessary for the heavy-duty tow trucks used by the applicant, the
Police Department may grant the waiver and approve the application for heavy-
duty police-initiated towing.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, §§ 18-201, 18-202, 18-203, 18-204, 18-205, 18-207, 18-208)
(Bill No. 46-92; Bill No. 80-99; Bill No. 18-09; Bill No. 7-12; Bill No. 60-16;
Bill No. 83-19; Bill No. 77-24)
§ 11-16-202. Insurance.
   (a)   Certificates to be provided. A person licensed under the provisions of
this title shall furnish to the Director certificates of insurance that provide
for minimum coverage as required by State law.
   (b)   Information to owner, operator, or agent of towed vehicle. Upon
release of the towed vehicle, the towing company shall provide the name,
address, and telephone number of the towing company's insurance carrier and the
number of the insurance policy to the towed vehicle's owner, an operator of the
vehicle, or an agent of the owner or operator.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 18-206) (Bill No. 84-96; Bill No. 80-99; Bill No. 83-19)
§ 11-16-203. Storage.
   (a)   Zoning certification. A towing company shall provide to the Department
the address of the storage and redemption sites to be used for storing and
redeeming vehicles and shall provide certification that each site complies with
local zoning laws.
   (b)   Separate storage and redemption area. If the storage and redemption
areas are separate, the towing company shall provide safe and reliable
transportation from the redemption site to the storage facility. Violation of
this provision may be grounds for license suspension or revocation.
   (c)   Nonconsensual towed vehicles; delivery to storage facility. A towing
company that performs nonconsensual towing shall immediately deliver any towed
vehicle to the storage facility listed on the signs located in the parking lot
from which the vehicle was towed, as required by §
11-16-402, and may not remove the towed vehicle from the storage facility for
at least 72 hours.
   (d)   Location of storage facility. A towing company conducting
nonconsensual towing may not tow a vehicle, or otherwise remove a vehicle, from
a parking lot to a storage facility that is more than 10 miles away, measured
by driving distance, from the parking lot.
(Bill No. 18-09; Bill No. 52-13; Bill No. 83-19)
§ 11-16-204. Inspection; release of vehicle and personal property.
   (a)   Inspection by police. A towing company shall accommodate all requests
by the police to inspect or view any towed vehicle in its possession.
   (b)   Release of vehicle. A towing company shall release a towed vehicle
during the regular business day and may release a vehicle at other times. A
towing company that performs nonconsensual towing shall be available to release
the towed vehicle at all times, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, to the towed
vehicle's owner or the owner's representative. An owner's representative must
present a copy of a valid driver's license and an original key to the vehicle
to obtain the vehicle.
   (c)   Release of personal property. Personal property shall be released to
the owner or the owner's agent during the regular business day and, if a
nonconsensual tow, personal property shall be made available for release 24
hours a day, seven days a week, from the time the vehicle was received at the
storage facility.
(Bill No. 18-09; Bill No. 52-13)
§ 11-16-205. Rates, charges, and payment.
   (a)   Fees. Each licensed towing company shall adhere to the schedule of
fees approved by the Department. Maximum fees for nonconsensual towing may be
up to two times the approved fee for police-initiated towing.
   (b)   Storage fee restrictions. A company that performs police-initiated
tows may not charge a storage fee for the calendar day of the tow. A company
that performs nonconsensual towing may not charge a storage fee for a calendar
day in which the vehicle was not located at the storage facility.
   (c)   Required forms of payment. In addition to accepting cash payments, a
towing company engaged in nonconsensual towing and storage facility must
provide evidence to the Department confirming acceptance of at least two
nationally recognized major credit cards or provide an operable automated
teller machine on the premises to obtain cash for payment of all towing,
recovery and storage charges. In the event a towing company or storage facility
engaging in nonconsensual towing is unable to process a vehicle owner's credit
card or accepts only cash payment and there is no operable automatic teller
machine (ATM) on the premises, a vehicle owner may pay for the towing fees
necessary to retrieve his vehicle by a personal check. A towing company or
storage facility engaging in nonconsensual towing may refuse to accept a
personal check in the event a vehicle owner's credit card is declined by the
credit card issuing company.
   (d)   Receipt required. A towing company shall issue a receipt in exchange
for payment of towing fees.
   (e)   Damage waivers. A towing company may not require a person to sign a
damage waiver as a condition of vehicle release.
(Bill No. 18-09; Bill No. 52-13; Bill No. 83-19)
SUBTITLE 3. OPERATION OF TOW TRUCKS
§ 11-16-301. Scope.
   This subtitle applies only to towing companies authorized to tow disabled,
abandoned, or recovered vehicles at the request of the Police Department.
(Bill No. 18-09)
§ 11-16-302. Tow areas; rotation list.
   (a)   Assignment to tow area. The Police Department shall divide the County
into separate specific tow areas for heavy-duty towing and light-duty towing
established by the size, road networks, demographic characteristics, and
density of each geographical area. The Police Department shall assign each
licensed towing company to a tow area.
   (b)   Rotation. For each heavy-duty tow area and light-duty tow area, the
Police Department shall maintain a rotation list that includes all licensed
towing companies assigned to the tow area and from which requests for towing
service shall be made. In making a request for towing service from a rotation
list, the Police Department shall determine whether the tow is a heavy-duty tow
or light-duty tow and which licensed towing company received the last request.
The Police Department shall request the next towing company on the relevant
list to respond; and, if the requested towing company is unable to respond,
contact each successive towing company on the relevant list until the service
is arranged.
   (c)   Rotation deviation. The Police Department may deviate from the order
of the rotation lists when, in the sole discretion of the Police Department, it
is determined that deviation is necessary for the public welfare. If a light-
duty towing company is requested to conduct a tow and determines that a heavy-
duty tow truck or equipment or other specialized equipment is necessary to
complete the tow, the requested company shall inform the Director immediately
and a request shall be made to the next company on the heavy-duty towing
rotation list for that area. If such determination is deemed reasonable by the
Police Department, the refusal by the light-duty tower shall not be deemed a
failure to respond for the purposes of §
11-16-201(k) and the light-duty tower shall be returned to the top of the
light-duty towing rotation list.
   (d)   Closure of rotation list. If the Police Department determines that the
number of towing companies assigned to a tow area is detrimental to the public
safety or welfare, the Department may close the rotation list in that tow area.
   (e)   Individual choice. Nothing in this title shall preclude the right of
an individual to request a towing company of the individual’s own choice if the
chosen towing company can dispatch a tow truck that will arrive within 30
minutes after the request.
   (f)   Hearings. The Police Department may immediately suspend a towing
company from the rotation list for a violation of this title that adversely
affects public health, safety or welfare. Otherwise, a towing company may not
be suspended from or removed from the rotation list until a hearing is held
before the Director and the towing company has the chance to respond to any
alleged violation of this title. A hearing shall be held within seven days of
the date of the notice of violation. The Director shall issue a written
decision no later than two days after the date of the hearing.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 18-301) (Bill No. 80-99; Bill No. 60-16; Bill No. 77-24)
§ 11-16-303. Response standards.
   (a)   Timeliness. A light-duty towing company ordinarily shall respond to a
request for service and arrive at the scene no later than 30 minutes after the
request was made. A heavy-duty towing company ordinarily shall respond to a
request for service and arrive at the scene no later than 45 minutes after the
request was made. The Department may determine that a towing company’s arrival
at the scene in excess of the requirements established in this section is
timely after consideration is given to traffic, road, and weather conditions
and whether the request was made between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (b)   Request by Police Department required. A towing company may not
attempt to take a disabled, abandoned, or recovered vehicle in tow without
being requested to do so by the Police Department.
   (c)   Events at the scene. On arriving at the scene, the towing company
shall remove the vehicle to the company’s storage facility specified on the
application. A towing company may not leave the scene until released by the
police personnel in charge of the scene. In addition to any mailed notices
required under this title, the towing company shall ensure, to the fullest
extent possible, that the towed vehicle’s owner has full and correct
information on where, when and how to retrieve the vehicle at the time the
vehicle is towed. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, tow truck operators shall
clean all debris, including glass, auto parts, or absorbents from the scene of
a collision.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 18-302) (Bill No. 80-99; Bill No. 60-16; Bill No. 83-19;
Bill No. 77-24)
§ 11-16-304. (Reserved).
§ 11-16-305. (Reserved).
SUBTITLE 4. NONCONSENSUAL TOWING FROM PARKING LOTS AND PRIVATE ROADS
§ 11-16-401. Scope and enforcement.
   (a)   Scope. This subtitle applies only to towing companies and storage
facilities, and parking lot and private road owners, operators and agents
engaging in nonconsensual towing.
   (b)   Enforcement. The requirements of this subtitle may be enforced by the
Department or the Police Department.
(Bill No. 52-13; Bill No. 71-18)
§ 11-16-402. Parking lot and private road owner and operator requirements.
   (a)   Definition. For purposes of this section, “regional mall” has the
meaning set forth in § 21-10A-02 of the Transportation Article of the State
Code.
   (b)   Requirements. Without a vehicle owner’s permission, the owner or
operator of a parking lot, the agent of an owner or operator, or a duly
designated agent of a community in which there are private roads may not have a
vehicle towed or otherwise removed from the parking lot or private road unless
the owner, operator, or agent has placed in conspicuous locations signs that:
      (1)   are at least 24 inches high and 30 inches wide;
      (2)   are clearly visible to the driver of a vehicle entering or parking
in the parking lot or on the private road;
      (3)   state the name and telephone number of the towing company and the
address of the storage facility to which the vehicle will be towed or removed,
and, if different, the address of the redemption area;
      (4)   state that State and County law requires that a motor vehicle towed
from the parking lot or the private road is available for redemption 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week; and
      (5)   state the maximum amount that the vehicle owner may be charged for
the towing or removal of the vehicle.
   (c)   Number of signs.
      (1)   Except as provided in paragraph (2), an owner or operator of a
parking lot, the agent of an owner or operator, or a duly designated agent of a
community in which there are private roads shall place one sign, conforming to
the requirements of subsection (b), for every 7,500 square feet of parking
space in the parking lot or of the private road. In addition to meeting the
requirements of this section, if the parking lot or private road has more than
one entrance, a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection (b) shall be
placed at each point of entry into the parking lot or private road.
      (2)   An owner or operator of a parking lot of a regional mall, or the
agent of an owner or operator, shall place one sign, conforming to the
requirements of subsection (b), at every entrance to the parking lot.
   (d)   Traffic control devices on private roads. The duly designated agent of
a community in which there are private roads shall clearly designate with a
traffic control device for public view, any area in which parking is not
permitted, and the community shall be responsible for the costs of the traffic
control device.
(Bill No. 52-13; Bill No. 71-18; Bill 83-19; Bill No. 82-21)
§ 11-16-403. Commercial liability insurance.
   A towing company shall comply with all Federal and State commercial
liability insurance requirements and any surety bond requirements.
(Bill No. 52-13)
§ 11-16-404. Required nonconsensual towing procedures for towing companies and
parking lot and private road owners and operators.
   (a)   Notice to police. A towing company shall notify the Police Department
within one hour after towing or removing a vehicle and shall provide the
following information:
      (1)   a description of the vehicle, including the license plate
information and the vehicle identification number;
      (2)   the date and time the vehicle was towed or removed;
      (3)   the reason the vehicle was towed or removed; and
      (4)   the locations from which and to which the vehicle was towed or
removed.
   (b)   Notice to owner. A towing company shall notify a towed vehicle's owner
and the vehicle's insurer of record by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by first class mail within seven days after towing or removing
the vehicle, and shall provide the same information as set forth in subsection
(a). The towing company shall also provide to the owner, any secured party, and
the insurer of record the itemized actual costs of providing notice under this
section if the vehicle is redeemed more than 48 hours after receipt at the
storage facility.
   (c)   Parking lot and private road owner authorization. Before towing or
removing a vehicle from a parking lot or private road, the towing company shall
have authorization from the parking lot owner or operator, the agent of the
owner or operator, or the duly designated agent of a community in which there
are private roads, which shall include the name of the person authorizing the
tow or removal and a statement that the vehicle is being towed or removed at
the request of the parking lot or private road owner or operator or the agent
of the owner or operator. If the signs required by § 11-16-402(a) state that
parking is prohibited without a permit displayed on the vehicle, and if the
parking lot is gated with restricted access, the parking lot owner or operator,
the agent of the owner or operator, or the duly designated agent of the
community in which the parking lot is located may provide a blanket
authorization to their contractual towing company to tow or remove all vehicles
parked without a permit.
   (d)   Photographic evidence required. Before towing or removing a vehicle
from a parking lot or private road, the towing company must have photographic
evidence of the violation or event that gave rise to the vehicle being towed or
removed.
   (e)   Payment to spotters and parking lot or private road owners. A towing
company may not employ or compensate any individuals, commonly referred to as
"spotters", whose primary task is to report the presence of unauthorized parked
vehicles for the purposes of towing or removal and impounding. A towing company
may not compensate or pay any remuneration to the owner, agent, or employee of
a parking lot or private road. A towing company may not deploy, cause the
deployment of, or utilize any form of electronic surveillance to take the place
of or function as a "spotter".
   (f)   Towing for failure to display registration. A towing company may not
tow a vehicle solely for failing to display a valid current registration until
72 hours after a notice of violation is placed on the vehicle.
   (g)   Drop fees and release of vehicle. Before a vehicle is removed from a
parking lot or private road, the tower who possesses the vehicle shall release
the vehicle to the owner, or an agent of the owner, upon request and upon a
payment of a drop fee to the tower not to exceed 50% of the cost of a full tow.
   (h)   Handicapped registration. A towing company may not tow a vehicle with
a valid handicapped registration without the authorization of an officer in the
Police or Fire Department.
   (i)   Blocking of vehicles. A towing company may not block a vehicle to
obtain payment and shall release a vehicle if ordered to do so by the police.
   (j)   Compliance with Federal and State towing law. A towing company shall
comply with all towing requirements listed in Federal and State law.
(Bill No. 52-13; Bill No. 71-18; Bill No. 83-19)
§ 11-16-405. Penalties and citations.
   (a)   Penalties. In addition to any State civil or criminal penalties,
failure to abide by the requirements of this subsection is a Class D civil
offense set forth in §
9-2-101 of this Code, and a violation may be enforced through the issuance of
civil citations or legal injunction proceedings. In addition to the penalties
in this Code, a towing company or lot owner or operator that violates any
provision of this title shall be subject to the penalties provided in the State
Code and the regulations promulgated under the State Code.
   (b)   Citations. Citations issued by the Police Department under this
subtitle shall be in accordance with §§
12-3-301 through
12-3-303 of this Code.
(Bill No. 52-13)
TITLE 17. UNATTENDED DONATION BOXES
Section
   
11-17-101.   Purpose.
   
11-17-102.   Definitions.
   
11-17-103.   Registration required.
   
11-17-104.   Application; registration.
   
11-17-105.   Expiration; renewal.
   
11-17-106.   Maintenance.
§ 11-17-101. Purpose.
   The purpose of this title is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare by establishing minimum blight-related performance standards for the
operation and maintenance of unattended donation boxes in the County.
(Bill No. 72-20)
§ 11-17-102. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   "Blight" means a deteriorated condition on or around an unattended
donation box, and includes donation collection overflow, graffiti, damaged
signs, peeling paint, rust, broken operating mechanisms, dumped material, junk,
litter, garbage, trash, debris, or other refuse material.
      (2)   "Operator" means a person, entity, association, or organization who
places, maintains, or operates an unattended donation box.
      (3)   "Property owner" means the person, entity, association or
organization who owns the real property where an unattended donation box is
located or is proposed to be located.
      (4)   "Unattended donation box" means an unattended drop-off box,
container, receptacle, or similar device used for soliciting and collecting
donations of personal property items.
(Bill No. 72-20)
§ 11-17-103. Registration required.
   Except for unattended donation boxes that are enclosed within a structure or
accessory to a principal use on the property, it is unlawful for a property
owner or operator to place, operate, maintain, or allow an unattended donation
box on real property without a valid registration as required by this title. A
separate registration is required for each unattended donation box.
(Bill No. 72-20)
§ 11-17-104. Application; registration.
   (a)   Application. An application for registration of an unattended donation
box shall include:
      (1)   a signed authorization from the property owner allowing the
placement of an unattended donation box on a property;
      (2)   the name, address, email, website, if available, and telephone
number, with recording capability, of the operator of the unattended donation
box;
      (3)   a vicinity map showing the proposed or actual location of the
unattended donation box on the property; and
      (4)   proof of the operator's 501(c)(3) non-profit status, if applicable.
   (b)   Registration. Upon the filing of a complete application by the
applicant and approval of the location of an unattended donation box by the
Department, the Department shall register the unattended donation box.
   (c)   Fee. An application for registration shall be accompanied by a
registration fee in the amount of $40.00 unless the unattended donation box
operator is a non-profit organization exempt from taxation under 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code.
(Bill No. 72-20)
§ 11-17-105. Expiration; renewal.
   (a)   Expiration. An unattended donation box registration expires two years
after the date of issuance.
   (b)   Renewal. Any application for registration renewal shall be filed at
least one month prior to expiration of the registration. The application shall
confirm or update the information provided in the original application. The
Department may not accept the renewal if there are open citations, unpaid
fines, or unresolved violations or complaints relating to the unattended
donation box.
(Bill No. 72-20)
§ 11-17-106. Maintenance.
   (a)   Blight. No blight shall be on or around an unattended donation box.
   (b)   Condition of unattended donation boxes. An unattended donation box
shall be maintained in good working order and in good condition.
   (c)   Servicing. An unattended donation box shall be serviced not less than
weekly between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
on weekends. Servicing includes the removal of collected donated material in or
around the unattended donation box.
   (d)   Contact information. An unattended donation box shall contain visible
contact information for the operator, including the operator's telephone number
with recording capability.
(Bill No. 72-20)
ARTICLE 12. PUBLIC SAFETY
   Title
      
1.   FIRE SERVICES
      
2.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
3.   TRAFFIC
      
4.   DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL SERVICES
      
5.   BURGLAR AND SECURITY ALARMS
      
6.   SECURITY MEASURES FOR THE SALE OF FIREARMS
      
7.   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Charter reference – §§
545 et seq.
TITLE 1. FIRE SERVICES
Section
Subtitle 1. General Provisions
   
12-1-101.   Authority to provide for in budget.
   
12-1-102.   Contracts with other governments.
   
12-1-103.   Ambulance service.
   
12-1-104.   Ambulance service fee.
ubtitle 2. Volunteers
   
12-1-201.   Volunteer companies – Formation.
   
12-1-202.   Work programs.
   
12-1-203.   Reciprocity agreements.
   
12-1-204.   Reimbursement for court appearance.
Subtitle 3. Service Award Program – Volunteers
   
12-1-301.   Definitions.
   
12-1-302.   Establishment; administration.
   
12-1-303.   Funding.
   
12-1-304.   Eligibility for benefits.
   
12-1-305.   Crediting of points.
   
12-1-306.   Records and statements of eligibility.
   
12-1-307.   Appealing eligibility.
   
12-1-308.   Amount; commencement of benefits.
Subtitle 4. Fire Advisory Board
   
12-1-401.   Board established.
   
12-1-402.   Membership.
   
12-1-403.   Duties.
SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12-1-101. Authority to provide for in budget.
   The County Executive may provide in the current expense budget, the capital
budget, and the capital program of the County sums of money necessary for fire
suppression, fire prevention, fire training, fire communications, rescue
services, and ambulance services in the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-101)
§ 12-1-102. Contracts with other governments.
   After consulting with and seeking the advice of the Fire Chief and the Fire
Advisory Board, the County Executive may enter into contracts or agreements
with another political subdivision or municipal corporation in the State for
the purpose of rendering fire suppression services in the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-102) (Bill No. 7-03)
§ 12-1-103. Ambulance service.
   In addition to the duties set forth in §
547 of the Charter, the Fire Department is responsible for the administration
of the affairs of the County Ambulance Service.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-103)
§ 12-1-104. Ambulance service fee.
   (a)   Service rendered.
      (1)   To defray the cost of the service, an individual who is transported
to a hospital by the County ambulance service of the Fire Department shall pay
an ambulance service fee of:
         (i)   1.   $700 for Basic Life Support or Advanced Life Support I
transport; or
            2.   $750 for Advanced Life Support II transport; and
         (ii)   a fee based upon Medicare allowable amounts for each mile from
the point of pick up to the health care facility.
      (2)   If the County ambulance service provides emergency medical
response, but does not transport an individual to a hospital, the individual is
not required to pay a fee.
   (b)   Ability to pay. The County ambulance service may not:
      (1)   question an individual about ability to pay the ambulance service
fee at the time that ambulance transportation is requested or provided; or
      (2)   fail to provide ambulance transportation and emergency medical
services because of an individual's actual or perceived inability to pay the
ambulance service fee.
   (c)   Contract with hospitals. The County Executive may enter into a
contract with the hospitals to which patients are transported or a private
vendor to collect ambulance service fees for the County, and the contract may
provide that the hospital or vendor shall be paid on the basis of a percentage
of the amount of the fees collected.
   (d)   Rules and regulations. The Controller may adopt rules and regulations
to administer the collection of the ambulance service fees, including rules and
regulations governing:
      (1)   the waiver of the ambulance service fee in the event of financial
hardship; and
      (2)   the acceptance of reduced payments by commercial insurers and other
third-party payors, including Medicare and Medicaid.
   (e)   Applicability. The ambulance service fee shall apply to transports to
a hospital by the ambulance service of the Fire Department on or after April 1,
2009.
(Bill No. 44-08; Bill No. 64-14)
SUBTITLE 2. VOLUNTEERS
§ 12-1-201. Volunteer companies – Formation.
   A volunteer fire company or volunteer ambulance and rescue squad may not be
organized without first, the approval of the Fire Chief, and then the approval
of the County Council.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-201) (Bill No. 7-03)
§ 12-1-202. Work programs.
   (a)   Submission to Fire Chief. At least 150 days before the end of each
fiscal year, each volunteer fire company and each volunteer ambulance and
rescue squad shall submit to the Fire Chief an annual work program setting
forth the nature, volume, costs, and other factors concerning the work to be
performed and the estimate of expenditures for their operations for the ensuing
fiscal year.
   (b)   Submission to Budget Officer. The Fire Chief shall review, adjust, and
compile the work programs and estimates of expenditures for submittal to the
Budget Officer as part of the total annual work program and budgets of the Fire
Department as provided in §
704 of the Charter.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-202) (Bill No. 7-03)
§ 12-1-203. Reciprocity agreements.
   The County shall reimburse a volunteer company for operational expenses
consistent with the County budget if the volunteer company has entered into a
reciprocity agreement with the County in the form required by the Fire Chief.
Each reciprocity agreement shall provide for reimbursement of expenses in
accordance with the operational budget adopted for the company by the County
and delineate the County's authority in matters concerning command and control,
staffing, operational readiness, and dispute resolution.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-203) (Bill No. 81-95; Bill No. 7-03)
§ 12-1-204. Reimbursement for court appearance.
   The County shall reimburse a volunteer fire fighter for income lost as the
result of being required to appear in court in connection with duties as a fire
fighter. The reimbursement may not exceed the pay rate for the lowest
classification of firefighting personnel.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-204) (Bill No. 81-95)
SUBTITLE 3. SERVICE AWARD PROGRAM – VOLUNTEERS

State Code reference – Public Safety Article, §§ 7-201 et seq.
§ 12-1-301. Definitions. [Section effective until January 1, 2020; amended
version follows this section]
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Active volunteer member" means an individual who has accumulated
at least 50 points each calendar year in accordance with the point system set
forth in § 12-1-305.
      (2)   "Active company" means a company that:
         (i)   has volunteer members responding to emergency fire, EMS, and
rescue calls, in-service or response ready company transfers, and/or in-service
standbys as dispatched by the Anne Arundel County Fire Department or the
transfer jurisdiction; and
         (ii)   has a membership as a whole that responds at a minimum to 5% of
the company's total dispatched calls, less career-only staffed units such as
medic and paramedic units, in the credited year.
      (3)   "Inactive company" means a company with a membership that fails as
a whole to respond to a minimum of 5% of the company's total dispatched calls
in a credited year.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-206) (Bill No. 90-16)
§ 12-1-302. Establishment; administration.
   There is a length of service award program for qualified active volunteer
members of the County volunteer fire companies, the Annapolis volunteer fire
companies, and the Anne Arundel Alarmers Association of Anne Arundel County,
Inc. The Controller shall administer the length of service award program.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-207) (Bill No. 23-01; Bill No. 90-16)
§ 12-1-303. Funding.
   The benefits provided for in this subtitle shall be funded as provided in
the annual budget.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-208)
§ 12-1-304. Eligibility for benefits.
   (a)   Conditions. A person who has served as a member of a County volunteer
fire company, an Annapolis volunteer fire company, or the Anne Arundel Alarmers
Association of Anne Arundel County, Inc. is entitled to receive benefits under
this section if the person is eligible under the provisions of subsection (b)
and certified in accordance with the provisions of §
12-1-306.
   (b)   Persons eligible. The following persons are entitled to receive
benefits under this section:
      (1)   persons who are at least 50 years old and who have completed at
least 25 years of active volunteer service in accordance with §
12-1-301(1) and who are a member in good standing with an active County
volunteer fire company, an active Annapolis volunteer fire company, or the Anne
Arundel Alarmers Association of Anne Arundel County, Inc.; and
      (2)   volunteer members who have been determined by the Maryland Workers'
Compensation Commission to have been permanently and totally disabled in the
performance of duties as a volunteer fire fighter.
   (c)   Surviving spouse. The surviving spouse of a volunteer member who, at
the time of death, was receiving benefits under the provisions of subsection
(b) is entitled to benefits under this section. The benefits shall be paid to
the surviving spouse monthly until the death or remarriage of that spouse.
   (d)   Not eligible. An inactive company shall be ineligible to submit
members for the length of service award program credit for that inactive year.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-209) (Bill No. 36-87; Bill No. 23-01; Bill No. 90-16)
§ 12-1-305. Crediting of points.
   To qualify for benefits, points shall be credited to each active volunteer
member as follows:
      (1)   Service points shall be awarded for completion of training courses
that are related to emergency services activities. A maximum of 25 points per
year may be awarded, according to the following scale:
 
Service points Duration of course
5              6-19 hours
10             20-44 hours
15             45 hours or more
 
      (2)   Service points shall be awarded for participation in training
drills; required Fire Department training; and conferences, seminars and
educational sessions that are related to emergency services activities. A
maximum of 10 points per year may be awarded with one point awarded for each
drill of at least two hours.
      (3)   (i)   Service points shall be awarded for on-duty time spent in the
station participating in either operational or administrative duties. A maximum
of 20 points per year may be awarded, according to the following scale:
 
Service points Duration of duty
1              Each full night of sleep-in duty
1              Each block of 4 hours of operational standby duty
1              Each block of 4 hours of collateral duty
 
         (ii)   Every block of four hours of collateral duty carried out by an
active volunteer member shall include at least one of the following types of
activities:
            1.   conducting official business on behalf of the company and/or a
County, State or national emergency services organization, such as the Anne
Arundel County Volunteer Firefighter's Association, the Maryland State
Firemen's Association or the National Volunteer Fire Council, including
fundraising activities, administrative duties in support of the Fire Chief and/
or the organization's leadership;
            2.   conducting public relations activities such as presentations
and firehouse tours, participation in a fire company's open house, or providing
any type of fire, safety and EMS education to the public; or
            3.   performing fire station maintenance including cleaning and
repairing apparatus, equipment and facilities, planning and project managing
company projects, or conducting yard and landscaping activities.
         (iii)   A maximum of one point per day may be awarded for sleep-in
duty, standby duty, or collateral duty.
      (4)   Service points shall be awarded for serving in an elected or
appointed position. A maximum of 25 points per year may be awarded, according
to the following scale:
         (i)   for elected or appointed positions serving active companies or
County, State, or national organizations representing the interests of the
active volunteer fire, EMS, and rescue services, 25 points for a full year of
service or two points per month of prorated service;
         (ii)   for appointment as chairperson of a committee serving the
company or County, State, or national organizations representing the interests
of the active volunteer fire, EMS, and rescue services, 15 points for a full
year of service or 1.25 points per month of prorated service; and
         (iii)   for appointment as a member of a committee serving the company
or county, state, or national organizations representing the interests of the
volunteer fire, ems, and rescue services, 10 points for a full year of service
or .8 points per month of prorated service.
      (5)   Service points shall be awarded for attendance at meetings serving
the company, or County, State, or national organizations representing the
interests of the volunteer fire, EMS, and rescue services. A maximum of 20
points per year may be awarded, with one point awarded per attendance at an
official meeting.
      (6)   Service points shall be awarded to active volunteer members who
respond to emergency fire, EMS, and rescue calls, in-service or response ready
company transfers, and/or in-service standbys as dispatched by the Anne Arundel
County Fire Department or the transfer jurisdiction. Credit shall be given at a
rate of .5 point per response. There is no maximum for the points earned for
responses.
      (7)   A maximum of four years of certified service may be awarded if an
active volunteer member's service is interrupted for full-time extended service
in the United States Armed Forces. The active volunteer member may be awarded
four points per month for less than one year of interrupted service or 50
points for a full year of interrupted service provided the active volunteer
member:
         (i)   is an active company member in good standing;
         (ii)   has at least one year of prior active certified service; and
         (iii)   provides official military orders showing assignment out of
the local area.
      (8)   An active volunteer member with at least 20 years of service who
cannot complete the length of service award program due to a total and
permanent disability not connected to the performance of duties as a volunteer
fire fighter shall be awarded 50 points per year until reaching 25 years of
service.
(Bill No. 90-16)
§ 12-1-306. Records and statements of eligibility.
   (a)   Records. Participating volunteer fire companies, the Annapolis
volunteer fire companies, and the Anne Arundel Alarmers Association of Anne
Arundel County, Inc. shall maintain detailed and accurate records for each
volunteer member on forms prescribed by the Board of Trustees of the Anne
Arundel County Volunteer Firefighters Association and as approved by the
Controller.
   (b)   Statement under oath. On January 1 of each year, the board of
directors of each volunteer fire company, the Annapolis volunteer fire
companies, and the Anne Arundel Alarmers Association of Anne Arundel County,
Inc. shall furnish to the Board of Trustees of the Anne Arundel County
Volunteer Firefighters Association a statement under oath listing the volunteer
members who have qualified for credit for the previous year along with
documentation supporting the crediting of points for eligibility as approved by
the Fire Chief. The statement shall include any additional information required
in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a).
   (c)   Action by Board of Trustees and Controller. On receipt of a statement
made in accordance with this section, the Board of Trustees of the Anne Arundel
County Volunteer Firefighters Association shall review the list of each
company, the Annapolis volunteer fire companies, and the Anne Arundel Alarmers
Association of Anne Arundel County, Inc. and furnish copies of the list to the
Controller by February 1, together with a certification as to the accuracy of
each list and the documentation supporting the crediting of points for
eligibility as approved by the Fire Chief. If the Controller approves the
certified lists the Controller shall forward copies to the volunteer fire
companies, the Annapolis volunteer fire companies, and the Anne Arundel
Alarmers Association of Anne Arundel County, Inc. by March 1. On receipt, the
approved list shall be posted by the respective companies in a conspicuous
place in the fire hall for 30 days.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-212) (Bill No. 23-01; Bill No. 90-16)
§ 12-1-307. Appealing eligibility.
   An individual whose name does not appear on the approved certified list made
in accordance with §
12-1-306 may appeal in writing to the Controller within 30 days after the
expiration of the period for posting the list. The Controller shall make a
final decision. A person aggrieved by the decision of the Controller may appeal
to the Board of Appeals.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-213) (Bill No. 90-16)
   State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-305.
§ 12-1-308. Amount; commencement of benefits.
   (a)   Member benefits.
      (1)   Effective January 1, 2017, benefits shall be increased for any
current beneficiary who has maintained active status for seven years out of the
past ten years (January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2016). Benefits shall be
increased as follows:
         (i)   25 to 34 years of active service -- $300.00 per month;
         (ii)   35 to 44 years of active service -- $350.00 per month; and
         (iii)   45 or more years of active service -- $400.00 per month.
      (2)   Effective January 1, 2017, any new beneficiaries that become
eligible for benefits shall receive a benefit payment in accordance with the
above scale and shall be eligible for benefit increases as they obtain the next
service milestone on the benefit scale. Beneficiaries who have not maintained
active status for seven years out of the past ten years (January 1, 2007 to
December 31, 2016) shall continue to receive a benefit payment of $250.00 per
month for life.
      (3)   Effective January 1, 2017, any beneficiary who is eligible for
benefits under §
12-1-304(b)(2) of this Code shall receive a benefit payment of $400.00 per
month for life.
   (b)   Surviving spouse benefits. Beginning on or after January 1, 2017, the
surviving spouse benefit for any new surviving spouses shall be 50% of the
member benefit at the time of the member's death.
   (c)   Payment of benefits. The payment of benefits shall begin on the first
day of the first month following eligibility.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-214) (Bill No. 35-90; Bill No. 23-01; Bill No. 90-16)
SUBTITLE 4. FIRE ADVISORY BOARD
§ 12-1-401. Board established.
   There is a Fire Advisory Board, a unit of the executive branch of
government.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-301) (Bill No. 71-95)
§ 12-1-402. Membership.
   (a)   Composition. The Fire Advisory Board consists of nine members. Of the
nine members:
      (1)   three shall be volunteer firefighters appointed by the Anne Arundel
County Volunteer Firefighters Association;
      (2)   two shall be career firefighters and members of Local 1563, Anne
Arundel County Professional Firefighters, International Association of
Firefighters, AFL-CIO-CLC, or any other employee organization representing a
majority of the uniformed fire personnel of the County, appointed by the
employee organization;
      (3)   one shall be a career firefighter at the rank of fire battalion
chief, fire battalion chief/emergency medical technician-paramedic, or deputy
fire chief, appointed by the firefighters holding those ranks; and
      (4)   three shall be citizen members, who shall be from different
geographical areas within the County representing three of the four battalion
areas at any one time on a rotating basis, appointed by the County Executive.
   (b)   Term.
      (1)   The term of each volunteer firefighter and each career firefighter
shall be four years, conterminous with the term of the County Executive.
      (2)   The terms of original citizen members shall be one year, two years,
and three years, respectively. Thereafter, the term of each citizen member
shall be three years. A citizen member may not serve more than two consecutive
terms.
      (3)   A board member whose term has expired shall hold over until a
successor is appointed.
      (4)   A vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
   (c)   Chair. The Chair of the Board shall be appointed by the County
Executive from among the citizen members of the Board.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-302) (Bill No. 71-95; Bill No. 44-23)
§ 12-1-403. Duties.
   The Fire Advisory Board shall have the power and duty to advise and consult
with the County Executive, the Fire Chief, and other County officials and
employees on matters concerning the administration of fire suppression, fire
prevention, fire training, emergency medical services functions, and fire
communication activities.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 1-303) (Bill No. 71-95; Bill No. 7-03)
TITLE 2. POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
Subtitle 1. School Crossing Guards
   
12-2-101.   School crossing guards.
Subtitle 2. Disposition of Unclaimed Property
   
12-2-201.   Definitions.
   
12-2-202.   Notification.
   
12-2-203.   Disposition of found property.
   
12-2-204.   Disposition of unclaimed property.
SUBTITLE 1. SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS
§ 12-2-101. School crossing guards.
   (a)   Generally. The Chief of Police may appoint, train, provide uniforms
for, and equip the number of school crossing guards that the Chief of Police
considers necessary for the safety of children at school crossings. School
crossing guards are subject to the rules and regulations adopted by the Chief
of Police, are under the supervision of the Chief of Police, and are under the
direct supervision of the police officers assigned by the Chief of Police. They
are not a part of the police force and are not entitled to the retirement
benefits of members of the police force. School crossing guards may direct
traffic at all school crossings and other places along the public highways in
the County as the Chief of Police determines.
   (b)   Failure to obey school crossing guard order. A person may not fail to
obey a lawful order of a school crossing guard. A person who violates any
provision of this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is
subject to a fine not exceeding $25.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 3-102)
SUBTITLE 2. DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
§ 12-2-201. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Contraband" means personal property that is illegal to possess
under federal, State, or local law.
      (2)   "Department" means the Anne Arundel County Police Department.
      (3)   "Found property" means personal property that has been found by an
individual and delivered to the Department pending identification of the owner,
but the term does not include firearms seized or held pursuant to the Criminal
Procedure Article, § 13-201, of the State Code, motor vehicles, or contraband.
      (4)   "Unclaimed property" means abandoned, lost, or stolen personal
property that has remained in the possession of the Department for at least 60
days or lawfully seized personal property that has remained in the possession
of the Department for at least 60 days after the conclusion in the court of
last resort of the criminal case associated with its seizure, but the term does
not include firearms seized or held pursuant to the Criminal Procedure Article,
§ 13-201, of the State Code, motor vehicles, or contraband.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 3A-101) (Bill No. 11-94; Bill No. 23-04)
§ 12-2-202. Notification.
   The Department shall make a reasonable effort to determine the owner of
unclaimed and found property. If the Department determines the name and address
of the owner of unclaimed or found property, the Department shall give the
owner notice, by first class mail, that the property is in the possession of
the Department and subject to disposal or return to the finder unless claimed
within 30 days after the date the notice is mailed.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 3A-102) (Bill No. 11-94)
§ 12-2-203. Disposition of found property.
   The Department may return found property to the finder if the property has
been held in the possession of the Department for at least 60 days and the
owner of the property is unknown or has failed to claim and take possession of
the property after notice in accordance with §
12-2-202. If the finder does not want the found property, the property shall be
disposed of as unclaimed property.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 3A-103) (Bill No. 11-94)
§ 12-2-204. Disposition of unclaimed property.
   (a)   Report to Purchasing Agent. At the times and in the form prescribed by
the County Purchasing Agent, the Department shall submit reports to the
Purchasing Agent listing all unclaimed property in the Department's possession
and the Department's recommendation for disposition of the unclaimed property.
   (b)   Disposal. The Purchasing Agent may dispose of unclaimed property or
authorize the Department to dispose of unclaimed property by any method
permitted for the disposal of supplies under §
8-2-116 of this Code. Unless the Purchasing Agent determines that the unclaimed
property is of nominal value, the Purchasing Agent shall cause a notice to be
published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the County at
least seven days before disposal. The notice shall:
      (1)   generally identify the property;
      (2)   state that the property will be subject to disposal if not claimed
within seven days of the date of the notice; and
      (3)   if disposal will be by sale, the date, place, and terms of sale.
   (c)   Forfeiture of rights. All right and title to and interest in unclaimed
property is forfeited if no person entitled to possession claims and takes
possession of the property within 30 days after the date written notice is
mailed pursuant to §
12-2-202 or within seven days after notice is given pursuant to subsection (b).
(1985 Code, Art. 18, §§ 3A-104, 3A-105) (Bill No. 11-94)
TITLE 3. TRAFFIC
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
12-3-101.   Definitions.
   
12-3-102.   Stopping, standing, or parking in specified places.
   
12-3-103.   Vehicles on sidewalks.
   
12-3-104.   Abandonment of motor vehicles.
   
12-3-105.   Removal of motor vehicles from public property.
   
12-3-106.   Removal of motor vehicles from private property.
   
12-3-107.   Passengers in unenclosed areas of motor vehicles.
   
12-3-108.   School bus monitoring cameras.
   
12-3-109.   Speed monitoring systems.
   
12-3-110.   Off-the-road motorcycles.
Subtitle 2. Interference with Emergency Equipment
   
12-3-201.   Definitions.
   
12-3-202.   Designation of fire lanes.
   
12-3-203.   Interference with emergency equipment.
   
12-3-204.   Removal of objects interfering with fire lanes.
   
12-3-205.   Responsibility for violation.
Subtitle 3. Enforcement – Citations
   
12-3-301.   Procedures for violations.
   
12-3-302.   Failure to appear.
   
12-3-303.   Authority to issue citations.
State Code reference – Transportation Article, §§ 25-101, 25-102.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 12-3-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of any
way or thoroughfare of which any part is used by the public for vehicular
travel, whether or not the way or thoroughfare has been dedicated to the public
and accepted by any proper authority.
      (2)   "Park" means to halt a vehicle, whether or not it is occupied,
other than temporarily when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control
device or for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
property or passengers.
      (3)   "Parking lot" means a privately owned facility consisting of at
least three spaces for motor vehicle parking that is accessible to the general
public and is intended by the owner of the facility to be used primarily by the
owner's customers, clientele, residents, lessees, or guests.
      (4)   "Roadway" means that part of a highway, other than the shoulder,
that is improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a
highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term refers to any one
roadway separately and not to all of the roadways collectively.
      (5)   "Safety zone" means an area of a roadway that is set apart for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and is protected or so marked or indicated by
signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
      (6)   "Stand" means to halt a vehicle, whether or not it is occupied,
other than temporarily when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control
device or for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
      (7)   "Stop" means to halt a vehicle, even momentarily, whether or not it
is occupied, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device.
      (8)   "Traffic control device" means any sign, signal, marking, or device
placed in accordance with the Transportation Article of the State Code that is
used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic.
      (9)   "Unattended vehicle" means any vehicle without a person inside who
is licensed to drive and can readily take control of the vehicle in the event
of an emergency.
(Bill No. 90-05; Bill No. 44-07; Bill No. 11-12)
§ 12-3-102. Stopping, standing, or parking in specified places.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to a person who stops, stands, or
parks a vehicle to avoid a conflict with other traffic or to comply with the
directions of a police officer or a traffic control device.
   (b)   Prohibition against certain stopping, standing, and parking. A person
may not stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
      (1)   in front of a public driveway;
      (2)   on a sidewalk;
      (3)   in an intersection;
      (4)   on a crosswalk;
      (5)   between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on a curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless the
State Highway Administration or the Director of Public Works indicates a
different length by signs or markings;
      (6)   along or opposite any highway excavation or obstruction if to do so
would obstruct traffic;
      (7)   on any bridge or other elevated structure on a highway;
      (8)   on any entrance ramp or exit ramp of any highway with two or more
lanes for traffic moving in the same direction; or
      (9)   at any place where prohibited by any traffic control device.
   (c)   Prohibition against certain standing and parking. A person may not
stand or park a vehicle:
      (1)   in front of a private driveway without the consent of the owner or
occupant of the premises;
      (2)   within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (3)   within 20 feet of a crosswalk;
      (4)   within 30 feet of the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign,
or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (5)   within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or, on
the side of a highway opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet
of the entrance if prohibited by a traffic control device;
      (6)   on a roadway side of any other vehicle that is stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a highway;
      (7)   on a curve or hill where a no passing zone is marked by a traffic
control device;
      (8)   in a parking space or zone marked for the use of disabled persons
unless the vehicle bears either a valid special registration plate or parking
permit for disabled persons issued by the Motor Vehicle Administration;
      (9)   in front of a curb ramp designed for the use of disabled persons;
      (10)   in front of or on a passenger loading zone designed or marked for
the use of disabled persons;
      (11)   within a traffic lane clearly intended for vehicular travel; or
      (12)   where obstructing access to a mailbox.
   (d)   Prohibition against certain parking. A person may not park a vehicle:
      (1)   within 50 feet of the nearest rail in a railroad crossing;
      (2)   if it is being used for commercial purposes and is a vehicle having
a gross vehicle weight rating or a registered gross vehicle weight greater than
10,000 pounds, on a public road, except when providing temporary service; or
      (3)   where obstructing access to a mass transit stop.
   (e)   Additional stopping, standing, and parking regulations.
      (1)   Every vehicle stopped, parked, or standing upon a highway shall be
positioned with the front of the vehicle facing the same direction as
authorized traffic movement.
      (2)   Every vehicle stopped, parked, or standing on a two-way highway
shall be positioned parallel to, and with all right-hand wheels within 12
inches of, the right-hand curb or edge of the highway.
      (3)   Every vehicle stopped, parked, or standing on a one-way highway
shall be positioned parallel to, and within 12 inches of, the curb or edge of
the highway.
      (4)   Every vehicle parked or standing in a parking lot, when
practicable, shall be positioned within one parking space as indicated by
pavement markings.
      (5)   A vehicle shall not remain parked on a highway for a period of time
that exceeds what is permitted by a traffic control device.
   (f)   Fines.  Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense,
punishable by the following:
      (1)   A violation of subsections (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(4), (b)(5), (b)(6)
and (b)(9), (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(4), (c)(6), (c)(7), and (c)(12), and (d)(1),
and (e)(1), (e)(2), (e)(3), (e)(4), and (e)(5) is punishable by a fine of $45.
      (2)   A violation of subsections (b)(3), (b)(7), and (b)(8), and (c)(1),
(c)(5), and (c)(11), and (d)(3) is punishable by a fine of $55.
      (3)   A violation of subsection (d)(2) is punishable by a fine of $75.
      (4)   A violation of subsections (c)(8), (c)(9), and (c)(10) is
punishable by a fine of $500.
(Bill No. 90-05; Bill No. 44-07; Bill No. 11-12)
§ 12-3-103. Vehicles on sidewalks.
   (a)   Prohibition. Except as provided in subsection (b), a person may not
drive a vehicle on a sidewalk or sidewalk area unless it is a permanent or
authorized temporary driveway.
   (b)   Exceptions.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, “bicycle” has the meaning set
forth in § 11-104 of the Transportation Article of the State Code, except that
it does not include a “moped” as defined in § 11-134.1 of the Transportation
Article of the State Code.
      (2)   (i)   Except as provided in subparagraph (ii), a person may ride a
bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle on a public sidewalk or public sidewalk
area.
         (ii)   If it is in the public interest for the safety of riders or
pedestrians, the Director of the Department of Public Works may prohibit riding
on sidewalks or sidewalk areas as designated by signage.
         (iii)   Riders on sidewalks and sidewalk areas shall:
            1.   have all rights and duties of a pedestrian under the same
circumstances, except that the rider shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians and persons using a personal assistive mobility device;
            2.   obey all State and County rules of the road; and
            3.   ride at reasonable speeds and not otherwise create a hazard.
   (c)   Sanction for violation. A violation of this section is punishable by a
fine of $50.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-102) (Bill No. 11-12; Bill No. 59-21; Bill No. 45-23)
State Code reference – Transportation Article, § 21-1103.
§ 12-3-104. Abandonment of motor vehicles.
   (a)   Presumption. For purposes of this section, a vehicle that is partially
dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked, unregistered, bearing expired,
suspended, or no registration plates, or bearing registration plates issued to
another vehicle is presumed to have been abandoned unless it is located in an
enclosed building or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner when the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
business enterprise.
   (b)   Prohibition. A person may not abandon a motor vehicle in the County.
The owner, lessee, or custodian in charge of a lot, field, street, or other
property may not permit an abandoned motor vehicle to remain on property in the
County.
   (c)   Sanction for violation. A person may not be convicted of a violation
of this section unless it is shown that the abandoned vehicle has remained on
public or private property for more than 48 hours or in a garage for more than
10 days. A person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not exceeding $25 or
imprisonment not exceeding 10 days or both. Each day a violation continues
constitutes a separate offense.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-105) (Bill No. 90-05; Bill No. 11-12)
State Code reference – Transportation Article, §§ 25-201 et seq.
§ 12-3-105. Removal of motor vehicles from public property.
   (a)   Impoundment. The Police Department may remove and impound a motor
vehicle that is left unattended on a public road or parking lot:
      (1)   in violation of a law, ordinance, or order regarding the parking of
motor vehicles; or
      (2)   for an unreasonable length of time so as to impede the movement of
traffic or constitute a threat to public safety.
   (b)   Costs. The Police Department shall charge the owner of a motor vehicle
that is impounded under the provisions of this section the costs of towing,
storage, and other charges incurred in connection with the removal and
impoundment of the vehicle.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-106) (Bill No. 90-05)
§ 12-3-106. Removal of motor vehicles from private property.
   On request of the owner, lessee, or custodian of a lot, field, property,
road, entranceway, or driveway, the Police Department is permitted to remove or
have removed a parked vehicle on the lot, field, property, road, entranceway,
or driveway contrary to the posted notice of the owner, lessee, or custodian of
the premises. Removal shall be at the risk, cost, and expense of the owner of
the vehicle. The vehicle may be removed and impounded and is subject to a lien
for the costs of towing, storage, and other charges incurred in connection with
the removal and impoundment of the vehicle.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-107) (Bill No. 90-05)
§ 12-3-107. Passengers in unenclosed areas of motor vehicles.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated:
      (1)   "Motor vehicle" means a Class A motor vehicle as defined in the
Transportation Article, § 13-912, of the State Code, a Class E motor vehicle as
defined in the Transportation Article, § 13-916, of the State Code, and a Class
M motor vehicle as defined in the Transportation Article, § 13-937, of the
State Code.
      (2)   "Seat belt" means a seat belt as defined in the Transportation
Article, § 22-412, of the State Code.
   (b)   Prohibitions. A person may not ride or allow another person to ride in
the unenclosed area of a motor vehicle except in a seat and with a seat belt in
use. A person may not allow a dog to ride in the unenclosed area of a motor
vehicle unless the animal is confined by a securely affixed, well-ventilated
container, cage, or other device designed to safely prevent the animal from
falling or jumping from the motor vehicle.
   (c)   Sanction for violation. A violation of this section is punishable by a
fine of $50.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-107.1) (Bill No. 79-87; Bill No. 90-05)
§ 12-3-108. School bus monitoring cameras.
   (a)   Definition. As used in this section, "school bus monitoring camera"
has the meaning set forth in § 21-706.1 of the Transportation Article of the
State Code.
   (b)   Use authorized. The use of school bus monitoring cameras in accordance
with § 21-706.1 of the Transportation Article of the State Code is authorized
in Anne Arundel County.
(Bill No. 1-20)
§ 12-3-109. Speed monitoring systems.
   (a)   Definition. As used in this section, "speed monitoring system" has the
meaning set forth in § 21-809 of the Transportation Article of the State Code.
   (b)   Use authorized. The use of speed monitoring systems in accordance with
§ 21-809 of the Transportation Article of the State Code is authorized in Anne
Arundel County.
   (c)   Citation prohibition. If the County moves or places a mobile or
stationary speed monitoring system to or at a location where a speed monitoring
system had not previously been moved or placed, a citation may not be issued
for a violation recorded by the speed monitoring system until at least 15
calendar days after the installation of signage in accordance with § 21-809 of
the Transportation Article of the State Code.
(Bill No. 11-20)
§ 12-3-110. Off-the-road motorcycles.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "off-the-road motorcycle" has the meaning
stated in § 25-102.1 of the Transportation Article of the State Code.
   (b)   Prohibition. A person may not operate an off-the-road motorcycle
within 300 feet of a dwelling without the written permission of an adult
resident of the dwelling.
   (c)   Sanctions for violations. A person who violates this section is
subject to a fine of $75 for the first three violations. For subsequent
violations, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is
subject to a fine not to exceed $250.
(Bill No. 62-20)
State Code reference – Transportation Article, §§ 26-302 et seq.
SUBTITLE 2. INTERFERENCE WITH EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT
§ 12-3-201. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Emergency vehicle" means a vehicle designated as or authorized as
an emergency vehicle by the Administrator of the Motor Vehicle Administration.
      (2)   "Fire lane" means a Fire Department access road as defined in NFPA
1, Uniform Fire Code, 2009 Edition, which is marked with approved signs or
other approved notices.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-201) (Bill No. 54-11)
§ 12-3-202. Designation of fire lanes.
   The Chief Fire Marshal or the Chief's designee shall determine the
boundaries of fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be clearly designated by a sign and
at least one other traffic control device approved by the Chief Fire Marshal or
the Chief's designee, and the property owner or lessee shall clearly label fire
lanes with a sign and at least one other traffic control device for public
view, and the property owner shall be responsible for the costs.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-202) (Bill No. 54-11; Bill No. 11-12)
§ 12-3-203. Interference with emergency equipment.
   (a)   Prohibition. A person may not obstruct or interfere with the operation
of any emergency vehicle or equipment, obstruct access by emergency equipment
to a fire hydrant or fire sprinkler connection through a designated fire lane,
or park a vehicle in a fire lane.
   (b)   Sanction. A violation of this section is punishable by a fine of $50.
Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-203) (Bill No. 69-87; Bill No. 90-05; Bill No. 54-11)
State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-317; Transportation
Article, §§ 25-102(a)(1), 26-301.
§ 12-3-204. Removal of objects interfering with fire lanes.
   The Police Department may take possession of, remove, tow, impound, or
otherwise remove a vehicle, debris, material, or other object that obstructs or
interferes with previously established and marked fire lanes or a vehicle that
is parked in a fire lane.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-204) (Bill No. 54-11)
§ 12-3-205. Responsibility for violation.
   Whenever an unattended motor vehicle is found in violation of the provisions
of this subtitle, there is a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner
is responsible for the violation.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-205)
SUBTITLE 3. ENFORCEMENT – CITATIONS
§ 12-3-301. Procedures for violations.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "officer" means a police officer or a
person other than a police officer who is authorized to enforce the provisions
of this title as specified in §
12-3-303.
   (b)   Issuance. Whenever an officer issues a citation for a violation of
this title, the officer shall issue the citation to the driver of the vehicle,
or in the case of an unattended vehicle, shall attach the citation to the
vehicle in a conspicuous place. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the
officer and shall bear certification under penalty of perjury by the officer
attesting to the truth of the matters set forth in the citation.
   (c)   Owner of vehicle presumed to be recipient. If a citation is issued for
a violation of this title to an unattended vehicle, the registered owner of the
vehicle is presumed to be the person receiving the citation.
   (d)   Election to pay or stand trial; presence of officer at trial. The
recipient of a citation issued under this title shall:
      (1)   pay the citation in the manner prescribed in the citation within 30
days of the date the citation was issued; or
      (2)   elect to stand trial in the manner prescribed in the citation at
least five days before the payment due date. At the same time as electing to
stand trial, the person shall also give notification if the person desires the
officer who issued the citation to be present at the hearing. If the person
does not give notification that the presence of the officer is desired, it is
not necessary for the officer to appear and the citation shall be prima facie
evidence of the matters specified in the citation.
   (e)   Sanction for failure to pay or state desire to stand trial. If within
30 days after the date the citation was issued, the person cited has neither
remitted full payment nor elected to stand trial, the person shall be sent a
delinquent notice and shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of $5. Failure
to pay within 30 days after a delinquent notice is sent shall result in an
additional delinquent penalty of $10.
   (f)   Sanction for failure to obey citation. Failure to obey a citation
shall result in the vehicle registration renewal being withheld until the
required payment is made.
   (g)   Notice. Notice of the provisions of this section shall be clearly
printed in a conspicuous place on citations issued for parking violations.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-301) (Bill No. 19-92; Bill No. 11-12)
State Code reference – Transportation Article, §§ 26-302 et seq.
§ 12-3-302. Failure to appear.
   A person who gives a written notice of intent to stand trial on a charge of
a violation of any of the provisions of this title may not willfully fail to
appear in court. A person who violates any provision of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge originally made
against the person. This section may be complied with by an appearance by
counsel.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-302) (Bill No. 11-12)
§ 12-3-303. Authority to issue citations.
   (a)   Who may issue. The provisions of this subtitle may be enforced by a
police officer or a person other than a police officer who is authorized by the
Chief of Police under this section. The Chief of Police may authorize and train
Police Department employees or volunteer personnel to issue citations for
violations of the parking provisions of this title and enforce the provisions
of this title regarding the towing and impounding of vehicles.
   (b)   Appointment and supervision. Persons authorized to enforce the
provisions of this title shall be appointed in writing by the Chief of Police,
be under the supervision of the Chief of Police and police officers designated
by the Chief of Police, and be subject to appointment, training, and service
requirements issued by the Chief of Police and all rules, regulations, orders,
and procedures of the County and the Police Department.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 4-303) (Bill No. 19-92)
TITLE 4. DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL SERVICES
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; General Provisions
   
12-4-101.   Definitions.
   
12-4-102.   Notices.
   
12-4-103.   Injunctive relief.
   
12-4-104.   Liability for subduing animal at large.
   
12-4-105.   Modification of fees in this title.
Subtitle 2. Animal Matters Commission
   
12-4-201.   Commission established.
   
12-4-202.   Composition; appointment; terms; compensation.
   
12-4-203.   Chair; Executive Secretary; Secretary; Counsel.
   
12-4-204.   Quorum.
   
12-4-205.   Meeting and duties of Commission.
   
12-4-206.   Hearings before Commission.
Subtitle 3.  Department of Animal Services
   
12-4-301.   Enforcement of title.
   
12-4-302.   Appointment and powers of Department officers.
   
12-4-303.   Recordkeeping by Department.
   
12-4-304.   Authority to charge; citation.
   
12-4-305.   Elections available to person who receives citation.
   
12-4-306.   Duties of individual issuing citation.
   
12-4-307.   Duties of Agency on receiving citation.
   
12-4-308.   Duties of Commission on receiving citation.
   
12-4-309.   Disposition of citation filed with District Court.
   
12-4-310.   Application for criminal summons or warrant.
   
12-4-311.   Interference with Department officer prohibited.
Subtitle 4. Public Safety
   
12-4-401.   Applicability.
   
12-4-402.   Public safety threats; potentially dangerous, dangerous, and
vicious animal criteria; defenses.
   
12-4-403.   Potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animals; orders.
   
12-4-404.   Authority to dispose of vicious animals.
   
12-4-405.   Keeping of vicious animals prohibited.
   
12-4-406.   Dangerous animal registry.
Subtitle 5. Impoundment of Animals
   
12-4-501.   Authority to impound.
   
12-4-502.   Right of entry.
   
12-4-503.   Notice; holding period.
   
12-4-504.   Redemption of impounded animals.
   
12-4-505.   Disposition of animals.
Subtitle 6. Rabies Control
   
12-4-601.   Vaccination of dogs, cats, and ferrets required.
   
12-4-602.   Required reports – In general.
   
12-4-603.   Required report by veterinarian.
   
12-4-604.   Confirmed or highly likely cases of rabies.
   
12-4-605.   Confinement of animals that bite humans.
   
12-4-606.   Destruction or isolation of animals exposed to rabies.
   
12-4-607.   Requirement for surrender of animal for destruction or quarantine.
   
12-4-608.   Quarantine – Animal suspected of being exposed to rabies.
   
12-4-609.   Quarantine – Animal diagnosed as having rabies.
   
12-4-610.   Restrictions on killing or removing certain animals.
   
12-4-611.   Surrender and disposal of dead animal exposed to rabies.
Subtitle 7. Animal Licenses
   
12-4-701.   Definitions.
   
12-4-702.   Application.
   
12-4-703.   Dog licenses.
   
12-4-704.   Fancier licenses.
   
12-4-705.   Commercial kennel license.
   
12-4-706.   Denial, nonrenewal, revocation, or suspension of license.
   
12-4-707.   Licenses not transferable.
   
12-4-708.   Burden and standard of proof with respect to licensing.
Subtitle 8. Standards for Care and Keeping of Animals
   
12-4-801.   Animals outdoors.
   
12-4-802.   Food, water, and veterinary care required.
   
12-4-803.   Animal fancier kennels.
   
12-4-804.   Commercial kennels.
   
12-4-805.   Pet shops; grooming parlors.
   
12-4-806.   Pet care businesses.
   
12-4-807.   Veterinary hospitals.
   
12-4-808.   Severe weather emergencies and alerts.
Subtitle 9. Miscellaneous Provisions
   
12-4-901.   Cruelty.
   
12-4-902.   Keeping of wild animals, exotic animals, and vicious animals
prohibited.
   
12-4-903.   Creating public nuisance or public nuisance condition prohibited.
   
12-4-904.   Animal disturbance prohibited.
   
12-4-905.   Animals running at large prohibited.
   
12-4-906.   Animals prohibited on school grounds and in public recreation
areas.
   
12-4-907.   Stray dogs and cats to be surrendered to County.
   
12-4-908.   Intact dog or cat.
   
12-4-909.   Removal of animal excreta.
   
12-4-910.   Disposal of animal carcasses and sick animals.
   
12-4-911.   Reporting of sale or disposition of animals.
   
12-4-912.   Adopted animals – spaying or neutering fees; waiver of fees.
   
12-4-913.   Reckless animal owner.
Subtitle 10. Civil Penalties
   
12-4-1001.   Civil penalties.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12-4-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   “Animal” means a vertebrate species of animal other than a human,
including a dog, a cat, livestock, and fowl.
      (2)   “Animal exposed to rabies” means an animal that has been bitten by
an animal that either has rabies or has been in proximity or contact with an
animal that has rabies or has been exposed to an animal that has rabies.
      (3)   “Animal fancier kennel” means a private kennel maintained by a cat
fancier or dog fancier on the fancier’s premises for the maintenance or
training of animals owned by the fancier.
      (4)   “Animal hospital” means an establishment maintained or operated by
a veterinarian for immunization, hospitalization, surgery, or diagnosis,
prevention, and treatment of disease and injuries of animals.
      (5)   “At large” means off the property of an animal’s owner and is not
restrained by a leash or under the control of the owner or a responsible
person.
      (6)   “Boarding” means keeping an animal overnight in a commercial
establishment used for the keeping of animals or keeping an animal overnight at
a pet care business as defined in this section.
      (7)   “Cage” means an enclosure of limited space in which animals are
placed that is enclosed on the bottom, top, and sides.
      (8)   “Cat fancier” means an individual who owns or keeps on the
individual’s premises 10 or more cats.
      (9)   “Commercial establishment” means an establishment the primary
function of which is the sale of a product or service.
      (10)   “Commercial kennel” means an animal boarding place or other
establishment for the commercial breeding of dogs or cats, or the boarding,
grooming, or sale of dogs or cats for which a fee is charged, but does not
include an animal fancier’s kennel or an animal hospital maintained by a
licensed veterinarian as part of the practice of veterinary medicine for the
treatment of animals.
      (11)   “Commission” means the Animal Matters Commission.
      (12)   “Community cat” means an unowned, free-roaming cat, 12 weeks of
age or older who is cared for by one or more persons residing or working in the
immediate area who are known or unknown. A community cat may or may not be
feral.
      (13)   “Community cat caregiver” means a person or group that, in
accordance with a good faith effort to conduct trap-neuter-return, provides
food, shelter, or medical care to a community cat. A community cat caregiver is
not the owner of a community cat.
      (14)   “Cruelty” means an act or omission by which unjustifiable physical
pain, suffering, or death is caused or permitted, including a failure to
provide proper drink, air, space, shelter, or protection from the elements,
veterinary care, or nutritious food in sufficient quantity, a failure to employ
the most reasonably humane method available with respect to an activity in
which physical pain is necessarily caused, such as food processing, hunting,
experimentation, or pest elimination, overdriving or overloading an animal,
inflicting unnecessary suffering or pain on an animal, or any act prohibited by
§§ 10-606, 10-607, or 10-608 of the Criminal Law Article of the State Code.
      (15)   “Dangerous animal” means an animal that has been designated as
dangerous by the Department.
      (16)   “Department” means to the Department of Animal Services.
      (17)   “Department facility” means a facility owned or operated in the
County by or under contract with the County for the care, confinement,
disposition, or detention of animals.
      (18)   “Director” means the Director of the Department of Animal
Services.
      (19)   “Disposition” means placement of a pet in an approved home,
placement of a pet with an approved animal shelter or rescue organization,
humane administration or performance of euthanasia, or, in the case of a wild
animal, release into a suitable habitat, but does not include selling or giving
up an animal for commercial or experimentation purposes.
      (20)   “Dog fancier” means an individual who on residential property owns
or keeps five or more dogs primarily as pets, but the keeping of the dogs
primarily as pets may include noncommercial hunting or practice tracking, the
breeding and sale of not more than two litters in a 12-month period, and the
exhibiting of a dog in dog shows in field or obedience trials.
      (21)   “Domesticated animal” means an animal that by long-continued
association with people has become thoroughly tame or domesticated, including a
dog, cat, horse, mule, goat, cow, bull, pig, domestic fowl, or other animal
that, by habit or training, lives in association with humans.
      (22)   “Eartipping” means the deliberate removal of no more than one-
quarter of an inch from the tip of a community cat’s left ear, performed by a
licensed veterinarian while the cat is under anesthesia. Eartips shall be used
to identify a community cat as being sterilized and vaccinated for rabies at
least once, but does not serve as proof of a current rabies vaccination.
      (23)   “Exotic animal” means an animal introduced from another country
and not indigenous to the State.
      (24)   “Facility” means a building or property other than a private
residence in which an animal is maintained.
      (25)   “Farm” means land of 20 acres or more, all or part of which is
used in commercial cultivation or for raising animals.
      (26)   “Feral cat” means a cat that shows no evidence of being owned,
such as wearing a collar or tag or appearing groomed and exhibits savage or
wild behavior or is living in the wild.
      (27)   “Grooming parlor” means a commercial operation for the bathing,
dipping, cutting, or grooming of animals.
      (28)   “Healthful” means being in a condition appropriate to the
particular species of animal involved that is hygienic and conducive to
maintenance of the animal’s well-being and to prevention of disease.
      (29)   “Keep” means to permit either feeding or sheltering an animal on
the premises of the occupant or owner who permits it.
      (30)   “Minor injury” means any physical injury that is not a severe
injury.
      (31)   “Obedience trained animal” means an animal demonstrably trained to
obey on command, including to heel on or off a leash, obey a command to come to
its owner, or sit, lie, and stand until further command.
      (32)   “Owner” means a person who keeps, has temporary or permanent
custody of, possesses, exercises control over, or has a property right in any
animal, livestock, or fowl, except that animal hospitals, commercial kennels,
community cat caregivers, and pet shops and their employees are not owners.
      (33)   “Pet care business” means the temporary keeping of pets owned by
others in a residence for a fee, including day care, boarding or training, but
not pet grooming.
      (34)   “Pet shop” means a separate commercial establishment that offers
to sell live animals with the intent that they be kept as pets.
      (35)   “Potentially dangerous animal” means an animal that has been
designated as potentially dangerous by the Department.
      (36)   “Public nuisance” means an act by an animal that substantially
interferes with the rights of citizens to enjoyment of life or property and
that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of other animals
or human beings, or offends human senses, including the molesting of
pedestrians, the chasing of vehicles, the damaging of property of someone other
than the owner of the animal, and continually and repeatedly howling, barking,
whining, or otherwise making noise that causes unreasonable annoyance,
disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the
premises where a person keeps an animal.
      (37)   “Public nuisance condition” means an unsanitary, dangerous, or
offensive condition caused by the extreme size or number of animals kept on any
premises or by the inadequacy of facilities or a continuing or periodically
recurring public nuisance.
      (38)   “Quarantine” means confinement in a secure house, garage, or other
escape- proof enclosure or structure.
      (39)   “Sanitary” means being in a condition of good order and
cleanliness that precludes the probability of transmission of disease.
      (40)   “Severe injury” means any physical injury requiring professional
medical treatment that is directly caused by an animal, and that results in
multiple skin punctures, one or more muscle tears, dislocated or broken bones
or disfiguring lacerations, significant impairment of an essential bodily
function; or that requires corrective or cosmetic surgery or hospitalization.
      (41)   “Stray” means a domesticated animal off the property of its owner
and not under the control of the owner or the authorized agent of the owner.
      (42)   “Supervised” means in direct observation of an owner.
      (43)   “Trap” means an animal-holding or animal-capturing device that is
used for apprehending live animals and is approved by the Department.
      (44)   “Trap-neuter-return” means the process of humanely trapping,
sterilizing, vaccinating for rabies, eartipping, and returning a community cat
to their original location, and includes a plan for revaccination of the
community cat in accordance with State law.
      (45)   “Vicious animal” means an animal that has been designated as
vicious by the Department.
      (46)   “Wild animal” means an animal that is not a domesticated animal.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 1-101) (Bill No. 29-91; Bill No. 83-94; Bill No. 67-98;
Bill No. 20-00; Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 11-07; Bill No. 44-14; Bill No. 59-17;
Bill No. 96-17; Bill No. 50-18; Bill No. 90-18; Bill No. 87-20; Bill No. 89-20;
Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-102. Notices.
   Any notice requirement established in this title may be satisfied by
personal delivery by certified mail, delivery restricted to the licensee at the
address shown on the license application on file with the Department, or by
posting the notice on the front door or in a conspicuous place on the property
of the person to be served. If the person to be served has a known address
outside of Anne Arundel County, the notice requirement may be satisfied in the
same way as service within the County or by the Department sending the notice
by regular mail to the person’s last known address and electronic mail to the
person’s electronic mail address. Service by electronic mail shall be complete
upon the notice being successfully sent and not returned as undeliverable.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 1-102) (Bill No. 90-18; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-103. Injunctive relief.
   The Director may request the Office of Law to seek a temporary restraining
order and other relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to correct a
condition by which the actions of an animal, or the actions or inactions of the
owner of the animal, cause a substantial and immediate danger to a human being
or to property.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 1-103) (Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 11-07; Bill No. 89-20;
Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-104. Liability for subduing animal at large.
   A person who subdues or destroys an animal may not be held liable for
damages if the animal is found to have been running at large and at the time of
destruction is in the act of pursuing, attacking, or wounding a human or an
animal.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 1-104)
§ 12-4-105. Modification of fees in this title.
   (a)   Modification generally. Except as provided in subsection (b), fees set
forth in this title may be modified by the Director with the approval of the
Chief Administrative Officer after the modification of the fee is advertised on
the County’s website for a period of at least 30 days with the opportunity for
public comment.
   (b)   Council approval; when required. Any fee increase in excess of the
greater of $1.00 or 5% of the then current charge shall be set by the County
Council by ordinance.
(Bill No. 25-25)
SUBTITLE 2. ANIMAL MATTERS COMMISSION
§ 12-4-201. Commission established.
   There is an Animal Matters Commission in the Department of Animal Services.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 2-101) (Bill No. 67-98; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-202. Composition; appointment; terms; compensation.
   (a)   Composition. The Commission consists of seven members. Of the seven
members, one shall be the Health Officer or the Health Officer’s
representative; one shall be the Chief of Police or the Chief of Police’s
designee; and five shall be citizen members appointed by the County Executive.
Of the five citizen members, one shall be a local veterinarian or an
alternative veterinarian representative; one shall be appointed from
Councilmanic District 1, 2, or 3; one shall be appointed from Councilmanic
District 4 or 5; one shall be appointed from Councilmanic District 6 or 7; and
one shall be appointed at large.
   (b)   Term. The term of a citizen member is two years. A citizen member
appointed to fill an unexpired term serves only until the term expires and
until a successor is appointed and qualifies. A citizen member may not serve
more than two full consecutive terms.
   (c)   Expenses. Members are not entitled to compensation for their services,
but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses as provided in the budget.(1985
Code, Art. 12, § 2-102) (Bill No. 11-07; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-203. Chair; Executive Secretary; Secretary; Counsel.
   (a)   Chair. The five citizen members shall elect the Chair of the
Commission. The Chair serves for one year or until the expiration of the
Chair’s term on the Commission, whichever occurs first. The Chair may be
reelected for consecutive terms.
   (b)   Executive Secretary.  The Director shall:
      (1)   designate an employee of the Department to be a nonvoting Secretary
to the Commission;
      (2)   be responsible for providing staff support, schedule and arrange
for meetings and hearings; and
      (3)   be the official custodian of the records of the Commission.
   (c)   Counsel. The Office of Law shall serve as counsel to the Commission.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 2-103) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 11-07; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-204. Quorum.
   Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business, except that, at the discretion of the Chair, the Commission may
convene a panel of three members to hear complaints or appeals as provided in
this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 2-104) (Bill No. 57-87)
§ 12-4-205. Meeting and duties of Commission.
   The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair to hear complaints or
appeals as prescribed and authorized in this title and shall make
recommendations to the Director concerning:
      (1)   the suspension or revocation of licenses issued under this title;
      (2)   the disposition of animals affected by violations of this title or
other law;
      (3)   criminal prosecution of violations of this title or other law; and
      (4)   other disposition of or an election of a legal remedy to correct
alleged violations of this title or offenses or conditions considered by the
Commission.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 2-105) (Bill No. 11-07; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-206. Hearings before Commission.
   (a)   Generally. Within 30 days after receiving an appeal, petition, or a
request for a hearing authorized under this article, the Commission shall
convene to hear the matter. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified
of the date, time, and place of the hearing.
   (b)   Hearing procedures.
      (1)   A person shall have right to counsel before the Commission.
      (2)   The hearing date may be postponed:
         (i)   by the Director on written request by either party at least five
days before the scheduled hearing date for good cause shown; or
         (ii)   by the Commission on the hearing date if the requesting party
appears and presents good cause for a postponement.
      (3)   The hearing shall be open to the public.
      (4)   The Commission may admit all relevant evidence without regard to
the formal rules of evidence.
      (5)   All witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation administered
by a designee of the Commission.
   (c)   Findings and recommendations. The Commission’s duties for citations
are governed by §
12-4-308. Within 15 days of a hearing on anything other than a citation, the
Commission shall submit written findings and recommendations to the Director.
Within 15 days of receipt of the recommendation, the Director shall issue a
final decision, and the final decision shall be served on the owner as provided
by §
12-4-102.
   (d)   Appeals. When appeals are considered by the Commission, the Director
may initiate corrective or enforcement action other than action relating to
suspension, denial, or revocation of licenses authorized by this title.
   (e)   De novo appeal. The Director’s decision under §§
12-4-403,
12-4-706,
12-4-901, or
12-4-913 is subject to de novo review by the County Board of Appeals. A person
who appeared at the hearing and was aggrieved by the Director’s decision may
file a written request for appeal with the Board of Appeals within 30 days of
the decision.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 2-106) (Bill No. 67-98; Bill No. 11-07; Bill No. 90-18;
Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
SUBTITLE 3. DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL SERVICES
§ 12-4-301. Enforcement of title.
   This title shall be enforced by the Department and Department officers, or
the authorized representatives of the Department under the supervision of the
Director.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 3-101) (Bill No. 67-98; Bill No. 11-07; Bill No. 89-20;
Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-302. Appointment and powers of Department officers.
   The Director may appoint Department officers. In enforcing this title,
Department officers shall have all powers necessary to enforce the provisions
of this title and §§ 10-601 et seq. of the Criminal Law Article of the State
Code, including the power to:
      (1)   issue and serve citations;
      (2)   seize, impound, or dispose of an animal;
      (3)   take action or order an owner to take any action necessary to
protect the health or safety of an animal, a person, or the public;
      (4)   search private property and seize evidence or animals by obtaining
a search warrant issued by a court;
      (5)   apply for a criminal summons or warrant; and
      (6)   conduct inspections of animal holding facilities, commercial
kennels, pet stores, and other facilities regulated by this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 3-102) (Bill No. 67-98; Bill No. 11-07; Bill No. 89-20;
Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-303. Recordkeeping by Department.
   The Department shall keep accurate and detailed records of animal licenses,
impoundments, dispositions, and other enforcement actions relating to animals
in the custody of the Department. The records shall be retained for three
years.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 3-103) (Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-304. Authority to charge; citation.
   (a)   Probable cause. A Department officer, an authorized representative of
the Department, or a law enforcement officer may charge a person with a
violation of this title if the individual issuing the charge has probable
cause, based on personal knowledge, observation, or a written affidavit of
complaint, that the person charged has committed or is committing the
violation.
   (b)   Issuance of citation. A written citation shall be issued to the person
charged under this Article. The citation shall be a sufficient charging
document for the prosecution of the offense for which it is issued.
   (c)   Contents. A citation issued to a person under this section shall be on
a form prescribed by the Department and shall include:
      (1)   the name and address of the alleged violator;
      (2)   the violation alleged;
      (3)   a statement with a line for signature by the alleged violator
acknowledging receipt of the citation;
      (4)   a statement setting forth the requirement of violator’s election of
a choice of action as specified in §
12-4-305; and
      (5)   a statement signed under penalty of perjury that the person issuing
the citation has probable cause to believe the fact of the violation is
correct.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 3-104) (Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-305. Elections available to person who receives citation.
   (a)   Generally. A person who receives a citation may elect to:
      (1)   pay the fine provided for in the citation to the Department before
the date of a hearing or trial;
      (2)   within 15 days after service of the citation, submit a written
request for a hearing before the Commission for dismissal of the citation;
      (3)   pay the fine if the Commission does not dismiss the citation after
the hearing; or
      (4)   request a trial in the District Court on the citation.
   (b)   Default procedure. Failure to pay the fine or to submit a written
request to the Commission within the required time period or to appear for the
hearing before the Commission so requested on the date specified for the
hearing shall be deemed to be an election of a trial in the District Court.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 3-105) (Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-306. Duties of individual issuing citation.
   Each person who issues a citation to an alleged violator shall:
      (1)   promptly file the original copy with the Department;
      (2)   maintain or file other copies of the citation as required by the
Department; and
      (3)   if there is a trial in the District Court, appear and subpoena
necessary witnesses.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 3-106) (Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-307. Duties of Department on receiving citation.
   On receiving the original copy of a citation issued to an alleged violator,
the Department shall:
      (1)   maintain a record of the alleged violation;
      (2)   hold the citation for 15 days from the date of service to allow the
alleged violator an opportunity to request dismissal of the citation by the
Commission, and, if the alleged violator requests a hearing, hold the citation
until the Commission issues a decision;
      (3)   if the alleged violator requests a hearing before the Commission,
promptly forward the original copy of the citation to the Commission; and
      (4)   if the alleged violator requests a trial in the District Court or
does not request a hearing before the Commission within 15 days of service of
the citation, forward the citation to District Court for trial.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 3-107) (Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-308. Duties of Commission on receiving citation.
   (a)   On receiving the original copy of a citation issued to an alleged
violator from the Department, the Commission shall promptly schedule a hearing
on the citation.
   (b)   If, after a hearing, the Commission finds a violation did not occur,
the Commission shall dismiss the citation.
   (c)   If, after a hearing, the Commission finds that it has probable cause
to believe that a violation did occur, or if the request for hearing is
withdrawn, the Commission shall forward the citation to District Court. The
Commission may amend the fine for the citation to an amount not to exceed the
face value of the citation.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 3-108) (Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-309. Disposition of citation filed with District Court.
   After the original copy of the citation is filed with the District Court,
the citation may be disposed of by trial, dismissal, or other official action
by a judge of the District Court or by payment of the fine.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 3-109) (Bill No. 89-20)
§ 12-4-310. Application for criminal summons or warrant.
   A Department officer, an authorized representative of the Department, or a
law enforcement officer shall make application for the issuance of a criminal
summons or warrant if:
      (1)   the person charged fails to acknowledge receipt of a citation
issued under this title; or
      (2)   the Department officer, the authorized representative of the
Department, or law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that the
person has violated §§
12-4-602,
12-4-603,
12-4-605,
12-4-607,
12-4-609,
12-4-610, or
12-4-611.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 3-110) (Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-311. Interference with Department officer prohibited.
   A person may not interfere with a Department officer or an authorized
representative of the Department engaged in the performance of duties under
this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 3-112) (Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
SUBTITLE 4. PUBLIC SAFETY
§ 12-4-401. Applicability.
   This subtitle does not apply to an animal owned by or working for a
governmental agency or law enforcement agency.
§ 12-4-402. Public safety threats; potentially dangerous, dangerous, and
vicious animal criteria; defenses.
   (a)   Public safety threat. An animal may not pose a threat to public
safety. The owner of an animal who poses a threat to public safety is in
violation of this section. An animal poses a threat to public safety if the
animal:
      (1)   inflicts severe injury to a person;
      (2)   bites a person;
      (3)   kills or inflicts injury to a domesticated animal;
      (4)   attacks a person;
      (5)   while at large, chases or approaches a lawfully restrained
domesticated animal in an aggressive manner;
      (6)   while at large, chases or approaches a person in an aggressive
manner; or
      (7)   engages in encouraged dogfighting activity or shows evidence of
having been engaged in encouraged dogfighting activity.
   (b)   Potentially dangerous. The Department may designate an animal as
potentially dangerous if, after consideration of the animal’s demeanor and
prior history and any evidence of mitigating circumstances, the Department
finds that the animal:
      (1)   engaged in conduct that caused a minor or severe injury to a person
or domesticated animal;
      (2)   has been determined to be potentially dangerous or dangerous by
another jurisdiction for an action that would subject the animal to a
potentially dangerous designation by the Department; or
      (3)   while at large, chases or approaches a person or lawfully
restrained domesticated animal in an aggressive manner and the Department has
received and verified information that the animal engaged in conduct that
constitutes a public safety threat within the preceding twelve months in this
or any other jurisdiction.
   (c)   Dangerous. The Department may designate an animal as dangerous if,
after consideration of the animal’s demeanor and prior history and any evidence
of mitigating circumstances, the Department finds that the animal:
      (1)   killed or inflicted severe injury on a person or domesticated
animal;
      (2)   has been determined to be potentially dangerous, dangerous, or
vicious by another jurisdiction for an action that would subject the animal to
a dangerous designation by the Department;
      (3)   has been documented as killing or inflicting severe injury on a
person or domesticated animal in another jurisdiction; or
      (4)   has been determined to be potentially dangerous by the Department
and engages in a second incident that constitutes a public safety threat as
described in subsection (a) of this section.
   (d)   Vicious. The Department may designate an animal as vicious if, after
consideration of the animal’s demeanor and prior history and any evidence of
mitigating circumstances, the Department finds that the animal cannot be safely
maintained without threatening members of the public or other animals and the
animal:
      (1)   killed or inflicted severe injury on a person or domesticated
animal;
      (2)   has been determined to be potentially dangerous or dangerous by the
Department and engages in a second incident that constitutes a public safety
threat as described in subsection (a) of this section;
      (3)   has been determined to be dangerous or vicious by another
jurisdiction for an action that would subject the animal to a vicious
designation by the Department; or
      (4)   has engaged in documented behavior involving killing or inflicting
severe injury on a person or domesticated animal in another jurisdiction.
   (e)    Determinative factors. The Department may decline to issue a citation
to an owner for an animal engaging in activity that constitutes a public safety
threat or to designate an animal as potentially dangerous, dangerous, or
vicious if the Department finds that it is more likely than not that:
      (1)   the animal was provoked;
      (2)    the animal was reacting to pain or injury;
      (3)   the animal was protecting or defending a person in the immediate
vicinity;
      (4)   the animal was defending itself, its litter, or another animal; or
      (5)   the animal was acting against a person or animal trespassing on the
property of the owner of the animal.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 4-101) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 59-17; Bill No. 90-18;
Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-403. Potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animals; orders.
   (a)   Issuance of order. Upon a determination that an animal is potentially
dangerous, dangerous, or vicious, the Department shall issue a written order to
the owner that explains the reasons for the Department’s determination. For
potentially dangerous and dangerous animals, the order shall direct the owner
to comply with conditions for maintaining the animal on the owner’s property.
Failure of the owner to comply with the conditions may result in temporary or
permanent impoundment of the animal. An impounded animal designated as
potentially dangerous or dangerous may only be redeemed after the owner
presents the Department with satisfactory proof of compliance with the issued
order.
   (b)   Conditions. When an animal is determined to be potentially dangerous
or dangerous by the Department, the Department may order the owner to abide by
some or all of the following conditions in addition to the owner complying with
all other relevant provisions of the County Code for the keeping and
maintenance of animals:
      (1)   manage the animal and its environment in a manner that will abate
the animal’s problem;
      (2)   spay or neuter the animal;
      (3)   implant the animal with a microchip containing owner identification
information;
      (4)   obtain an insurance policy providing for protection for bite
victims in a minimum amount of $300,000;
      (5)   remove the animal from the custody of an individual less than 21
years old;
      (6)   for a rental property, obtain the written permission of the
landlord to maintain the animal on the property;
      (7)   confine the animal to a structure of a size and type specified by
the Department;
      (8)   maintain the animal exclusively on the owner’s property except for
medical treatment or examination;
      (9)   muzzle or leash the animal as required by the Department;
      (10)   post on the premises where the animal is maintained a clearly
visible warning sign that there is a dangerous animal on the property;
      (11)   a behavioral assessment for the animal;
      (12)   specialized training for the animal; or
      (13)   such other conditions as the Department determines to be in the
public interest.
   (c)   Appeal of orders.
      (1)   An owner of an animal designated as potentially dangerous,
dangerous, or vicious may appeal that order to the Commission within 10 days of
receipt of the order by filing a written request for appeal with the
Department.
      (2)   Prior to the commencement of a hearing before the Commission, the
Department shall transmit to the Commission members all documentation
supporting the designation and order.
      (3)   The Department shall provide written notice to the owner of the
specific behavior of the animal at issue, and the date upon which a hearing
will be held on the appeal. The notice shall advise the owner of the
consequences of a determination of potentially dangerous, dangerous, or
vicious. The burden of proof on the appellant shall be by a preponderance of
the evidence.
      (4)   If the owner fails to appear at the hearing, the appeal shall be
dismissed.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 4-102) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 59-17; Bill No. 90-18;
Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-404. Authority to dispose of vicious animals.
   The Department shall order the humane euthanasia of an animal determined to
be vicious.
(Bill No. 59-17; Bill No. 90-18; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-405. Keeping of vicious animals prohibited.
   No person may keep an animal designated as vicious by the Department.
(Bill No. 59-17; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-406. Dangerous animal registry.
   (a)   Registry established. The Department shall establish and maintain a
dangerous animal registry for the County to include all animals determined to
be dangerous or potentially dangerous. The following information, if available,
shall be included on the registry: the name of the animal, picture, sex, age,
weight, primary breed, secondary breed, color and markings, whether spayed or
neutered, the address or map where the animal is maintained, name of the owner,
and address of the owner. The registry shall be made available to the public on
the County website.
   (b)   Annual registration. Prior to the expiration of an animal license each
year, and until the dangerous or potentially dangerous animal is deceased, the
owner shall submit to the County a license renewal that includes all
information contained in the original registration and any updates. The
Department shall post any updates to the registry within a reasonable period of
time. In the event contact information for the owner changes, the owner shall
update the Department within 10 days of the change. The owner shall comply with
notification requirements in the original order regarding the animal’s location
and disposition.
   (c)   Notice. The owner of an animal with a dangerous animal order shall
send a notice to all persons residing within 175 feet of a property where a
dangerous animal is maintained, and if applicable, the president of any
community or homeowners’ association of the subdivision in which the animal is
maintained.
(Bill No. 59-17; Bill No. 90-18; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
SUBTITLE 5. IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS
§ 12-4-501. Authority to impound.
   (a)   The Department may impound:
      (1)   a domesticated animal found at large, excluding an eartipped
community cat;
      (2)   a dog or a cat found without a license tag affixed to its collar,
excluding an eartipped community cat;
      (3)   an animal whose owner fails to respond to notice that the animal is
in violation of this article;
      (4)   an animal whose health constitutes an immediate and substantial
danger to persons or property or that poses a threat to public safety, as
provided in §
12-4-402;
      (5)   an animal determined to be potentially dangerous, dangerous, or
vicious;
      (6)   an animal placed at risk by its health or environment;
      (7)   an abandoned or unwanted animal, excluding an eartipped community
cat;
      (8)   an animal involved in an incident that constitutes a public safety
threat;
      (9)   an animal whose owner violates any condition of an administrative
order pertaining to that animal;
      (10)   a community cat, including an eartipped community cat, about which
repeated complaints to the Department from residents or business owners remain
unresolved;
      (11)   an animal designated as potentially dangerous or dangerous if at
any time the owner fails to comply with the conditions of the potentially
dangerous or dangerous order; or
      (12)   an animal that is kept outdoors if any of the requirements of §§
12-4-801(a) through (c) or
12-4-802 are not met.
   (b)   In determining appropriate daily care and shelter for an animal
impounded, seized, surrendered, or owned by the Department under Title 4, the
Department shall act in the best interest of the animal.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 5-101) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 59-17; Bill No. 96-17;
Bill No. 90-18; Bill No. 68-21; Bill No. 1-24; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-502. Right of entry.
   On determination that the health or actions of an animal constitute an
immediate and substantial danger to persons or property, or to protect an
animal from cruelty or neglect as authorized by §
12-4-901, a Department officer may enter onto public or private property and
impound the animal. This section may not be construed to permit entry into a
private building or residence without due process of law.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 5-102) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-503. Notice; holding period.
   When a domesticated animal is impounded, the Department shall make a
reasonable attempt to notify the owner or known community cat caregiver of the
animal. Unless extremely aggressive, seriously diseased or injured, suffering,
or under 3 months of age, an animal that is impounded or brought to the
Department for placement or humanely euthanize shall be held at the facility
for at least five days unless sooner redeemed.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 5-103) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 96-17; Bill No. 75-18;
Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-504. Redemption of impounded animals.
   (a)   How done. An owner may redeem an impounded animal by:
      (1)   complying with the rabies vaccination and licensing provisions of
this title;
      (2)   paying all redemption fees;
      (3)   paying any outstanding fines unless adjudication has been
requested;
      (4)   providing satisfactory proof of ownership; and
      (5)   complying with the requirements of this section and any other
conditions for return of the animal as ordered by the Department.
   (b)   Fees. Redemption fees include:
      (1)   for a spayed or neutered animal, an impoundment charge of $25 for
the first impoundment, $50 for the second impoundment, and $100 for the third
or any subsequent impoundment within a 12-month period;
      (2)   for an animal not spayed or neutered, an impoundment charge of $50
for the first impoundment, $100 for the second impoundment, and $200 for the
third or any subsequent impoundment within a 12-month period;
      (3)   a $5 shelter fee for each day that the animal is held at the
Department facility; and
      (4)   the cost of any required veterinary services.
   (c)   Waiver of shelter or redemption fees.
      (1)   Accrued shelter fees shall be waived by the Department when a delay
in adjudication at the Commission, Board of Appeals, or Circuit Court occurs
due to a contested request for postponement by the County. Fees shall be waived
for the time between the request and the next hearing date.
      (2)   At the request of an animal owner, and upon a showing of good
cause, the Department may waive some or all of the redemption fees.
   (d)   Community cats.
      (1)   Community cat caregivers may reclaim impounded eartipped community
cats without the proof of ownership or the payment of shelter fees and
impoundment charges required under this section if the community cat caregiver
agrees, in writing and on a form provided by the Department, to abide by the
trap-neuter-return standards described under this title and to return the
community cat to its original location or provide for rehoming.
      (2)   If an impounded community cat has not been sterilized, vaccinated
for rabies, and undergone eartipping, the community cat may only be redeemed by
a community cat caregiver after receiving a rabies vaccination administered by
the Department. Release from impoundment shall be conditioned on referral to a
trap-neuter-return program and a written agreement with the County.
Documentation of sterilization and eartipping shall be forwarded to the
Department within 60 days of release from impoundment.
   (e)   Active investigations. If an animal is impounded under this subtitle
as a danger to persons or property, the Department may deny redemption of the
animal for the lesser of 14 days or the duration of an active investigation
into the incident for which the animal was impounded.
   (f)   Spay or neuter conditions. If a dog or cat that is not spayed or
neutered is impounded two times within a 12-month period, the owner shall have
the animal spayed or neutered at the owner’s expense prior to redemption unless
the owner appeals to the Commission within five days after the date of the
condition being imposed and the Director, following a recommendation from the
Commission, waives this requirement or orders other action.
   (g)   Appeal. The owner of an animal may appeal redemption conditions
imposed by the Department under this section by filing a written appeal with
the Commission within five days of the conditions being imposed. At least five
days prior to the hearing, the owner of an animal shall be notified of the
date, time, and location of the hearing.
   (h)   Commission hearing. The hearing before the Commission shall be
governed by §
12-4-206. After a hearing on an appeal of redemption conditions, the Commission
shall submit a recommendation to the Director noting any conditions the
Commission recommends be upheld, amended, waived, or added.
   (i)   Redemption pending appeal. If the owner files a timely appeal to the
Commission, the Director may allow redemption of the animal by the owner while
the appeal is pending without the owner complying with the appealed condition.
If a redemption condition is upheld by the Director after the hearing, the
owner shall present satisfactory proof of compliance with all redemption
conditions to the Department within 30 days of the final decision being issued.
   (j)   Microchipping. An impounded animal shall be microchipped at the
owner’s expense prior to redemption if, within the 24 months prior to the
impoundment, the owner of the animal was found guilty, placed on probation
before judgment for, or paid a civil citation for a violation of §§
12-4-402,
12-4-903,
12-4-904,
12-4-905, or
12-4-906.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 5-104) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 59-16; Bill No. 96-17;
Bill No. 75-18; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 1-24; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-505. Disposition of animals.
   (a)   Property of County. Any impounded animal held subject to §
12-4-503 and not redeemed by its owner or community cat caregiver within five
days of the owner being notified or, if the owner cannot be notified, within
five days of the animal being impounded shall be deemed unwanted or unredeemed
and shall become the property of the County. Any animal that is impounded and
exempt from the holding period in §
12-4-503 shall be deemed unwanted or unredeemed and become property of the
County immediately on impoundment. An animal impounded and designated as
potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious may not be deemed unwanted or
unredeemed until the process for appealing the order is exhausted unless the
owner transfers or surrenders ownership of the animal to the Department.
   (b)   Methods of disposition. The Department may dispose of unwanted or
unredeemed domesticated animals by placement as a pet in an approved home,
rescue organization or shelter, or humanely administered euthanasia. The
Department may dispose of wild animals by release into a suitable habitat,
unless otherwise prohibited by law, placement with a facility or individual
permitted by law to keep wild animals, or humanely administered euthanasia. As
an alternative to euthanasia, a seriously injured or suffering animal may be
taken to a veterinarian for treatment. An animal that is impounded for being a
dangerous or vicious animal, and not redeemed by the owner, may not be adopted,
transferred, or placed with a rescue organization.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 5-105) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 59-17; Bill No. 75-18;
Bill No. 25-25)
SUBTITLE 6. RABIES CONTROL
§ 12-4-601. Vaccination of dogs, cats, and ferrets required.
   (a)   Requirement. A person may not own or keep a dog, cat, or ferret over
the age of four months unless the dog, cat, or ferret has been vaccinated so as
to provide the animal with continuous protection against rabies. The effective
period of the various vaccines shall be established by the Health Officer or
the authorized and trained representative of the Health Officer in accordance
with the current “Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines” prepared and
periodically revised by the National Association of State Public Health
Veterinarians, Inc.
   (b)   Certificate. On request of the Department, a person owning or keeping
a dog, cat, or ferret in the County shall promptly exhibit a currently valid
rabies vaccination certificate indicating that the dog, cat, or ferret has been
vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian or approved governmental agency.
   (c)   Sanction for violation. A person who fails to provide satisfactory
evidence of a current rabies vaccination shall be given a written citation and
an order requiring the vaccination within a seven-day period.
   (d)   Waiver. The Department may waive the requirements for vaccination if,
in the written opinion of a veterinarian, a vaccination is not advisable due to
the physical condition of the animal.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 6-101) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-602. Required reports – In general.
   If warm-blooded animal bites, scratches, or attacks a human being or exposes
a human being to a possible rabies infection, or if the animal is suspected of
having rabies, an individual having knowledge of the facts, including a
veterinarian, shall immediately report those facts to the County police or, in
the City of Annapolis, to the City police. The police officer who receives such
a report shall immediately notify the Health Officer, the authorized and
trained representative of the Health Officer, or the Department. The individual
or agency notified shall inform the animal owner in writing that it is the
responsibility of the animal owner to take the animal to a licensed
veterinarian to have the animal examined for rabies within 24 hours of the bite
or scratch.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 6-102) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-603. Required report by veterinarian.
   A veterinarian shall immediately report any animal the veterinarian
considers to be rabid or to be a rabies suspect, by telephone or in person, to
the County police or, in the City of Annapolis, to the City police.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 6-103) (Bill No. 41-01)
§ 12-4-604. Confirmed or highly likely cases of rabies.
   If rabies has been diagnosed in an animal confined for clinical observation
or if rabies is suspected by a veterinarian or Department officer and the
animal dies, the Department officer shall immediately have the head sent to a
laboratory recognized by the State Department of Health and Mental Hygiene for
rabies examination. Within 24 hours of the laboratory findings indicating a
presence of rabies, the laboratory shall notify the State Veterinarian and the
Health Officer or the authorized and trained representative of the Health
Officer of the finding and report human and animal contacts with the infected
animal.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 6-104) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-605. Confinement of animals that bite humans.
   (a)   Requirement for confinement. The Health Officer or the authorized
representative of the Health Officer assigned to the Department shall confine
an animal that has bitten a human being for clinical observation for a period
of 10 consecutive days from the date of the bite.
   (b)   Where confinement occurs. At the discretion of the Health Officer or
the authorized representative of the Health Officer, the confinement may occur:
      (1)   at an animal shelter, veterinary hospital, or humane shelter at the
animal owner’s option and expense; or
      (2)   on the premises of the animal owner if the owner signs an agreement
that the animal will be quarantined as specified in the animal bite report, the
animal will not leave the structure in which it is confined unless on a leash
and under the immediate control of an adult, and the animal will not be in
contact with other animals.
   (c)   Fenced yard. The animal may be secured in the owner’s fenced yard if
the fence has locking gates that are kept locked and the animal is chained
inside the fence at least 15 feet from the nearest fence line.
   (d)   Prohibition. A person may not allow an animal confined under this
section to escape or be sold or given away and may not euthanize the animal
before the expiration of the 10-day confinement and observation period.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 6-105) (Bill No. 29-91; Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-606. Destruction or isolation of animals exposed to rabies.
   An animal exposed to rabies shall be destroyed immediately under the
supervision of the Health Officer or the authorized and trained representative
of the County Health Department or, at the owner's request, shall be placed in
strict isolation for six months in a control shelter or a veterinary hospital
approved by the State Veterinarian. The cost of isolation shall be borne by the
owner.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 6-106) (Bill No. 41-01)
§ 12-4-607. Requirement for surrender of animal for destruction or quarantine.
   A person may not fail or refuse to surrender an animal for destruction or
quarantine as required in this title when demand is made by the order of the
Health Officer, the authorized and trained representative of the Health
Officer, or the State Veterinarian.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 6-107) (Bill No. 41-01)
§ 12-4-608. Quarantine – Animal suspected of being exposed to rabies.
   After confirmation by a licensed veterinarian, a warm-blooded animal
suspected of being an animal exposed to rabies shall be surrendered by the
owner to a veterinarian or the Department for supervised confinement completely
isolated from other animals in a manner approved by the Health Officer or the
Department. The animal may be humanely euthanized or confined in such a way and
for such period, at the expense of the owner of the animal, as the Health
Officer shall direct. Payment of boarding, hospital, and confinement fees and
compliance with the licensing and animal management provisions of this subtitle
shall be prerequisite to the release of a confined animal to the owner.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 6-108) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-609. Quarantine – Animal diagnosed as having rabies.
   (a)   Imposition of quarantine. Whenever a rabies examination report
indicates a positive diagnosis of rabies, the State Veterinarian, the Health
Officer, or the authorized and trained representative of the Health Officer may
impose a quarantine for as long a period as considered necessary.
   (b)   Requirements during quarantine. When a quarantine is effected under
this section, a person may not take a domesticated animal from confinement or
permit a domesticated animal in the streets or other public areas of the
quarantine area unless the animal is properly leashed and is accompanied by an
adult. During the quarantine, a farm animal suspected of having been exposed to
rabies may be quarantined by the State Veterinarian. An individual may not
remove a quarantined farm animal from the place where it is kept without the
written permission of the State Veterinarian. An unclaimed animal impounded by
reason of its being at large may not be placed by a Department facility during
the period of quarantine.
   (c)   Extension. If there are additional cases of rabies during the period
of quarantine, the quarantine period may be extended for additional periods as
established by the State Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 6-109) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-610. Restrictions on killing or removing certain animals.
   Except under the direction and supervision of the Health Officer or the
authorized and trained representative of the Health Officer, an individual may
not kill or cause to be killed a rabies animal, an animal that has bitten a
human being, or an animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies. A person
may not remove the animal from the jurisdiction of the County without having
first received written permission from the State Veterinarian or a
representative of the State Veterinarian. If there is a possibility of the
animal escaping or of further biting by the animal, the animal may be killed,
and the Health Officer or the authorized and trained representative of the
Health Officer shall be notified immediately.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 6-110) (Bill No. 41-01)
§ 12-4-611. Surrender and disposal of dead animal exposed to rabies.
   The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall be surrendered to a
Department officer, the County Health Officer, or the State Veterinarian on
demand. A Department officer or an authorized representative of the Department
shall supervise the disposition of the carcass of any animal in his or her
possession found to be infected with rabies or of any dead animal that the
Department officer or the authorized representative of the Department considers
to be a health menace or a hazard to the public health and welfare.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 6-111) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
SUBTITLE 7. ANIMAL LICENSES
§ 12-4-701. Definitions.
   Terms used in this title have the meanings stated in §
12-4-101.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-702. Application.
   An application for a license required by this title shall be made under oath
on the forms required by the Department.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-703. Dog licenses.
   (a)   Licenses generally. A County resident, including a commercial kennel
owner, shall have and maintain a license under this subsection for each dog for
which the resident is the owner.
      (1)   A dog owner shall apply for a license within 10 days after the dog
reaches the age of six months or within 30 days after bringing the dog into the
County, whichever is later.
      (2)   A dog owner shall maintain at all times a current rabies
vaccination certificate for each licensed dog and shall submit the current
certificate when applying for and renewing a license.
      (3)   (i)   A license for a dog shall be renewed annually on a schedule
determined by the Department.
         (ii)   An owner who is not a commercial kennel owner may obtain a
three-year license if there is a current three-year rabies vaccination
certificate for the dog.
         (iii)   An application for renewal shall be accompanied by the
required license fee.
         (iv)   Failure to make application for renewal within one month of the
license renewal due date shall result in a late fee of $10 per month.
      (4)   The fee for each license and the renewal of each required by this
subsection is as follows.
 
Dog License Fees – Other Than a Commercial Kennel - 1-Year License
                                                                                    County
                                                                                    residents
                                                                                    at least
                                                                                    60 years
                                                                                    old, or
                                                                          County    receiving
                                                                          residents disability
                                                                         under the benefits
                                                                          age of 60 as a
                                                                          years     result of
                                                                                    a finding
                                                                                    of
                                                                                    permanent
                                                                                    and total
                                                                                    disability
For each unspayed or unneutered dog                                       $15       $8
For each spayed or neutered dog or for a dog for which spaying or         $2        $0
neutering would pose a threat to the animal’s health
For a service animal as defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA), Title III, CFR § 36.104 or a dog trained and registered in the K- $0        $0
9 corps
 
 
Dog License Fees – Other Than a Commercial Kennel - 3-Year License
                                                                                    County
                                                                                    residents
                                                                                    at least
                                                                                    60 years
                                                                                    old, or
                                                                          County    receiving
                                                                          residents disability
                                                                         under the benefits
                                                                          age of 60 as a
                                                                          years     result of
                                                                                    a finding
                                                                                    of
                                                                                    permanent
                                                                                    and total
                                                                                    disability
For each unspayed or unneutered dog                                       $40       $20
For each spayed or neutered dog or for a dog for which spaying or         $5        $0
neutering would pose a threat to the animal’s health
For a service animal as defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA), Title III, CFR § 36.104 or a dog trained and registered in the K- $0        $0
9 corps
 
 
Dog License Fees – Commercial Kennel - 1-Year License - In Addition to Fees
Required Under This Title
                                                                                     A
                                                                                     commercial
                                                                                     kennel
                                                                                     owner, at
                                                                                     least 60
                                                                          A          years old,
                                                                          commercial or
                                                                          kennel     receiving
                                                                         owner      disability
                                                                          under the  benefits
                                                                          age of 60  as a
                                                                          years      result of
                                                                                     a finding
                                                                                     of
                                                                                     permanent
                                                                                     and total
                                                                                     disability
For each unspayed or unneutered dog                                       $10        $4
For each spayed or neutered dog or for a dog for which spaying or         $4         $2
neutering would pose a threat to the animal’s health
For a service animal as defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA), Title III, CFR § 36.104 or a dog trained and registered in the K- $0         $0
9 corps
 
      (5)   In the event a dog dies prior the expiration of the three-year
license, the owner of the deceased animal may apply for a refund from the
Department by submitting an affidavit of the animal’s death and a refund
request. A refund shall be based on a prorated amount based on the dog’s date
of death. All refunds shall be issued by the County in the form of a check.
   (b)   Dangerous and potentially dangerous animal licenses.
      (1)   An owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal shall apply
for and maintain a special license for each dangerous or potentially dangerous
animal within thirty days from the entry of a dangerous or potentially
dangerous animal order pursuant to Article 12, Title 4, Subtitle 4.
      (2)   (i)   An owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal shall
maintain a current rabies vaccination certificate for each dangerous and
potentially dangerous animal.
         (ii)   A owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal shall
submit a current rabies vaccination certificate for each animal owned and shall
comply with any other rabies vaccination requirements established in an order
issued pursuant to Article 12, Title 4, Subtitle 4.
      (3)   (i)   The special license fee for a dangerous animal is $125 for
the first year issued, and shall revert to the applicable rate set forth in
paragraph (a)(4) for each year thereafter on an annual basis.
         (ii)   The special license fee for an animal found to be potentially
dangerous is $100 for the first year issued, and shall revert to the applicable
rate set forth in paragraph (a)(4) for each year thereafter on an annual basis.
      (4)   All special licenses issued under this subsection shall expire one
year from the last day of the month in which the special license was issued.
      (5)   (i)   All special licenses issued under this subsection shall be
renewed annually for as long as the owner is the owner of a dangerous or
potentially dangerous animal.
         (ii)   An application for renewal of a special license shall be
accompanied by the required license fee.
         (iii)   Failure to make application within one month of the due date
shall result in a late fee of $10 per month.
      (6)   Potentially dangerous animal orders issued prior to October 1,
2017, shall remain in full force and effect, and special licenses issued for
potentially dangerous animals shall be renewed annually as provided herein.
   (c)   License and tags. Each owner of a licensed animal shall be issued a
license and numbered metal license identification tag. The license tag shall be
securely fastened to the animal at all times except when the animal is on the
premises of its owner or custodian or when a dog is engaged in supervised
hunting or other sport where a collar would endanger the dog’s safety or
adversely affect its hunting or sport purpose. A replacement license tag shall
be issued to the owner on application at a cost of $1.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-704. Fancier licenses.
   (a)   Dog fancier license. In addition to meeting the licensing requirements
imposed by §
12-4-703, a dog fancier shall annually obtain a dog fancier license from the
County. The application for a dog fancier license shall state the name and home
address of the dog fancier, the address of the establishment if it differs from
the home address of the dog fancier, and the maximum number of dogs to be
maintained. A dog fancier shall provide proof that each dog has a current
rabies vaccination. The annual fee to be paid to the County for a dog fancier
license is $100.
   (b)   Cat fancier license. A cat fancier shall annually obtain a cat fancier
license from the County. The application for a cat fancier license shall state
the name and home address of the cat fancier, the address of the establishment
if it differs from the home address of the cat fancier, and the maximum number
of cats to be maintained. A cat fancier shall provide proof that each cat has a
current rabies vaccination. The annual fee to be paid to the County for a cat
fancier license is $100.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-705. Commercial kennel license.
   (a)   When required.
      (1)   In addition to the licensing requirements under §
12-4-703, the operator of a commercial kennel shall obtain a commercial kennel
license.
      (2)   The following are not considered commercial kennels:
         (i)   veterinary hospitals or clinics; and
         (ii)   any research facility regulated by federal law.
   (b)   Application. The application for a commercial kennel license shall
state the name and address of the commercial kennel, the name and home address
of operator of the commercial kennel, and the maximum number of dogs or cats or
both to be housed in the commercial kennel.
   (c)   Fee. Tthe annual license fee for a commercial kennel is:
      (1)   $250 for a commercial kennel authorized to house a combined total
of 15 to not more than 50 dogs; and
      (2)   $500 for a commercial kennel authorized to house a total of more
than 50 dogs or cats or both.
   (d)   Expiration and renewal. A commercial kennel license shall be valid
from the date issued until the following June 30, and shall be renewed within
90 days after June 30 upon payment of the annual license fee. Failure to make
timely application for the initial license or for renewal shall result in a
late fee of $25 per month. The Department may refuse to issue or renew any
license required by this title if the applicant or licensee has failed to
comply with the provisions of this title, Title 4 of Article 12, or provisions
of Article 18 of this Code applicable to commercial kennels.
   (e)   Revocation. The Department, the Health Officer, or the authorized and
trained representative of the Health Officer may revoke or suspend a commercial
kennel license issued under this title on finding that the licensee has failed
to comply with this title, Title 4 of Article 12, provisions of Article 18 of
this Code applicable to commercial kennels, or any other applicable local,
State, or federal law governing the protection and keeping of animals. When a
license is revoked or suspended pursuant to this section, the licensee shall
immediately cease all operations and activities authorized by the license.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-706. Denial, nonrenewal, revocation, or suspension of license.
   (a)   Notice. Before denying issuance or renewal of, suspending, or revoking
any license, the Director shall give notice to the licensee which:
      (1)   specifies the violation or other basis for the action;
      (2)   states a time within which the licensee shall take corrective
action to abate the violation or cure other defects, if the violation or defect
is something that can be cured; and
      (3)   informs the licensee of the right to appear before the Department
to show cause why the license should be issued or renewed or should not be
suspended or revoked.
   (b)   Finality. A decision by the Department to not issue or renew, to
suspend, or to revoke a license shall be final except as provided in subsection
(c).
   (c)   Appeals. A person aggrieved by a decision of the Department relating
to issuance, suspension, revocation, denial, or nonrenewal of a license
required by this title may appeal the decision to the County Board of Appeals
within 30 days after the decision. A decision to revoke a license shall be
stayed pending a decision of the Board of Appeals.
   (d)   Effect of suspension or revocation. In the case of suspension or
revocation of a license, no part of the license fee may be refunded. A license
or license renewal that has been denied, suspended, or revoked may not be
issued or renewed until one year from the date of finality of the denial,
suspension, or revocation.
   (e)   Enforcement. If corrective action is not taken by the violator within
the time specified in a notice issued pursuant to this section and an appeal is
not taken, the Department may request the Office of Law to institute legal
enforcement proceedings.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-707. Licenses not transferable.
   Licenses required by this title are not transferable.
(Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-708. Burden and standard of proof with respect to licensing.
   The burden of proof for the fact that an animal or commercial kennel has
been licensed or is not required to be licensed shall be on the owner of the
animal or the owner or operator of the commercial kennel. The standard of proof
shall be by a preponderance of the evidence.
(Bill No. 25-25)
SUBTITLE 8. STANDARDS FOR CARE AND KEEPING OF ANIMALS
§ 12-4-801. Animals outdoors.
   (a)   Tethering of dogs prohibited; exceptions. A person may not tether,
fasten, chain, tie, or restrain a dog, to a shelter, tree, fence, or any other
stationary object, except a dog may be tethered, fastened, chained, or tied
with a chain, rope, line, or similar restraint that shall be at least 10 feet
long, to allow a person to complete a temporary task that requires the dog to
be restrained or to allow the dog to eliminate or exercise. Except for one 15
minute period per day, a dog may not be tethered, fastened, chained, or tied
outdoors by any means unless a person, thirteen years of age or older, is
outdoors, on the same property, with a direct line of sight to the dog at all
times while the dog is tethered, fastened, chained, or tied outdoors. A person
may not cause, procure, or authorize an act prohibited under this subsection. A
dog may not be tethered, fastened, chained, or tied outdoors by any means if
the outdoor temperature is 32 degrees Fahrenheit or lower or 90 degrees
Fahrenheit or higher. This subsection may not be construed to prohibit a person
from exercising or otherwise holding a dog with a leash. A person may not
tether or connect a dog to a chain, roped, line, or similar restraint in a
manner that endangers the health, safety or well being of the dog or allow the
restraint to wrap or tangle around a neck or limb of the dog.
   (b)   Shelter and separate shade required for dogs outdoors. In accordance
with the following provisions, for each dog confined outdoors, an owner shall
provide:
      (1)   a source of natural or artificial shade separate from the shelter
and of sufficient size to protect the animal from direct sunlight at all times;
and
      (2)   an accessible shelter that shall:
         (i)   protect the dog from the wind, snow, rain, heat, cold, and
sunlight;
         (ii)   have a solid and level floor;
         (iii)   be raised at least two inches off the ground;
         (iv)   have a waterproof roof and four solid walls, one of which shall
contain an entryway sized to allow the dog ease of entry;
         (v)   be constructed of weather resistant material, except that
interior surfaces may not be metal;
         (vi)   between December 1 and March 15, have an entryway covered to
protect the dog from cold temperatures and inclement weather and installed so
as to allow movement in and out of the shelter or be offset to act as a
windbreak;
         (vii)   contain no cracks or openings other than the entrance;
         (viii)   be of sufficient size to allow each dog to stand up, lie
down, and turn around without touching the sides or top;
         (ix)   be equipped with bedding made of non-absorbent material and
provided in sufficient quantity for insulation against cold and moisture; and
         (x)   along with surrounding areas, be kept clean, sanitary, and free
of garbage, junk, fecal matter, or similar matter at all times.
   (c)   Additional area required for dogs outdoors. This subsection does not
apply to any pen, run, or enclosure constructed under a potentially dangerous
order or dangerous order issued prior to August 4, 2018. In addition to the
shelter and separate shade requirements of this section, for each dog confined
outdoors within an outdoor enclosure, pen, or enclosed run, an owner shall
provide adequate space for exercise consistent with the following requirements.
      (1)   Dogs less than 80 pounds shall have a minimum of a 10 foot by 10
foot enclosure, or 100 square feet of space.
      (2)   Dogs 80 pounds or more shall have a minimum of a 10 foot by 15 foot
enclosure, or 150 square feet of space.
      (3)   An additional 50 square feet of space shall be added for each
additional dog less than 80 pounds to be kept in the enclosure or pen.
      (4)   An additional 75 square feet of space shall be added for each
additional dog 80 pounds or more to be kept in the enclosure or pen.
      (5)   The enclosure, run, or pen and the surrounding areas shall be kept
clean, sanitary, and free from any garbage, junk, fecal matter, or similar
matter.
   (d)   Enclosure for animals outdoors other than dogs. An enclosure shall be
provided for any animal other than a dog that is kept outdoors, and shall be
maintained in accordance with the following provisions.
      (1)   The enclosure shall contain a shelter that:
         (i)   is structurally sound and in good repair;
         (ii)   protects the animal from wind, snow, rain, heat, cold, and
sunlight;
         (iii)   except shelters for domesticated birds or fowl, is either
graded and drained so as to keep the surface reasonably dry and prevent any
fluids from running into the shelter or has a solid and level floor raised at
least two inches off the ground;
         (iv)   has a waterproof roof and at least three solid walls, with an
entryway to allow the animals ease of entry;
         (v)   is accessible by each animal in the enclosure;
         (vi)   provides sufficient space to allow all animals in the enclosure
to stand, turn, and stretch to full length and height within the shelter;
         (vii)   if it is a box stall for horses or mules that are 14 hands,
two inches high or larger, is at least ten feet wide;
         (viii)   is ventilated;
         (ix)   is free of any debris that could endanger the animal; and
         (x)   is kept clean and free of feces and urine.
      (2)   The enclosure shall contain adequate space that:
         (i)   provides sufficient space to allow each animal adequate freedom
of movement for exercise; space must be appropriate and sufficient for the age,
type, quantity, condition, and size of each animal;
         (ii)   is usable and safe, including being free from standing water,
accumulated waste, sharp objects, trash and debris;
         (iii)   is maintained in a safe and humane manner to minimize health
hazards and obnoxious odors;
         (iv)   contains a source of natural or artificial shade separate from
the shelter and of sufficient size to protect each animal from direct sunlight
at all times;
         (v)   is graded and drained so as to keep the surface reasonably dry
and prevent any fluids from running through the enclosure, except for the flow
of natural streams or stormwater conveyed by an approved stormwater management
system; and
         (vi)   is bounded by a fence or other appropriate barrier designed,
constructed, and maintained to keep the enclosed animals restrained within the
enclosure.
      (3)   Manure shall be removed from the buildings, sheds, and coops daily.
      (4)   An open drain may not be allowed to run through the enclosure.
      (5)   Flies shall be controlled in the enclosure.
      (6)    Coops for chickens, ducks, and other fowl and domesticated birds
kept outdoors shall have four walls and a roof, be ventilated, constructed to
be raised two feet from the ground, have a minimum of three square feet per
chicken, have secure door or gate closures, attached bottoms or anti-digging
devices to prevent escape, and be built in such a manner to prevent access from
predators and withstand weather.
      (7)   Outside enclosures for chickens or ducks shall have a minimum of
ten square feet per chicken.
      (8)   In the case of animals kept on farms, nothing in this section may
be construed as imposing standards more stringent than generally accepted
farming practices.
      (9)   Miniature pigs, as that term is defined in §
18-4-104, shall be provided shelter that:
         (i)   is at least 50 feet from the lot line of any residential zone
property;
         (ii)   is at least 100 feet from any occupied dwelling; and
         (iii)   meets the requirements of subsection (b).
   (e)   Manure. Other than on a farm, a manure pile may not be allowed to
stand for longer than one month between October 15 and April 30 or for longer
than seven days between May 1 and October 14. A manure pile on a lot less than
40,000 square feet may not be allowed to stand for more than seven days.
   (f)   Scope; applicability. The requirements of this section may not
supersede the requirements of commercial animal care and shelter set forth in
§§
12-4-803 through
12-4-805.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 8-101) (Bill No. 29-91; Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 81-06;
Bill No. 94-08; Bill No. 79-13; Bill No. 50-18; Bill No. 70-18; Bill No. 95-18;
Bill No. 68-21; Bill No. 6-25)
§ 12-4-802. Food, water, and veterinary care required.
   (a)   In general. Animals shall be provided with daily food and with water
at all times. Food and water shall be free of visible contamination. Food shall
be wholesome, palatable, and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet
the normal daily requirements to maintain the healthy weight and overall health
and well-being of the animal.
   (b)   Pets kept outdoors. In addition to the general requirements of this
section, for all pets that are kept outdoors, water shall be fit to drink and
may not be frozen. Food and water shall also be kept in containers secured to
prevent tipping.
   (c)   Veterinary care. An owner of an animal may not unnecessarily fail to
provide the animal with necessary veterinary care.
   (d)   Penalties. It is a Class D civil offense to violate this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 8-102) (Bill No. 29-91; Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 81-06;
Bill No. 88-15; Bill No. 8-18; Bill No. 89-20)
§ 12-4-803. Animal fancier kennels.
   (a)   Generally. Each animal fancier shall provide:
      (1)   an exercise area of sufficient size to allow running, with
sufficient fencing and a secure locking gate;
      (2)   enclosures, cages, and exercise areas kept clean, dry, and in a
sanitary condition, providing adequate ventilation, a healthful temperature,
and protection against weather extremes;
      (3)   daily food, free of visible contamination, that is palatable and of
sufficient quantity and quality to meet the normal nutrient requirements for
the type, condition, and size of the animal; and
      (4)   fresh water that is always available and that is kept in a
removable vessel secured to prevent tipping.
   (b)   Cages. A cage shall be of sufficient size to allow the occupant to
stand up, lie down, and turn around without touching the side or top, with
floors made of impervious material and, unless radiantly heated, equipped with
a resting board or other bedding.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 8-103) (Bill No. 29-91; Bill No. 41-01)
§ 12-4-804. Commercial kennels.
   The operator of a commercial kennel shall provide, for each dog or cat:
      (1)   an enclosure with four solid walls and a solid roof, with an
opening on at least one side;
      (2)   an exercise area of sufficient size to allow running, with
sufficient fencing and a secure locking gate;
      (3)   a cage of sufficient size to allow its occupant to stand up, lie
down, and turn around without touching the sides or top, floors made of
nonporous material and, unless radiantly heated, equipped with a resting board
or other bedding;
      (4)   enclosures, cages, and exercise areas, kept clean, dry, and in a
sanitary condition, providing adequate ventilation, a healthful temperature,
and protection against weather extremes;
      (5)   daily food, free of visible contamination, that is palatable and of
sufficient quantity and quality to meet the normal nutrient requirements of the
type, condition, and size of the animal; and
      (6)   fresh water that is always available and that is kept in a
removable vessel secure to prevent tipping.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 8-104) (Bill No. 41-01)
§ 12-4-805. Pet shops; grooming parlors.
   The operator of a pet shop or a grooming parlor shall provide:
      (1)   water at a minimum temperature of 180 degrees Fahrenheit for
washing and disinfecting cages, or another approved method of disinfecting;
      (2)   cages or enclosures, made of nonporous material, that are of
sufficient size to allow each animal to stand up, turn around, and stretch out
to its full length, and maintained in a sanitary condition with sufficient
clean, dry bedding for each animal;
      (3)   fresh water for each animal that is always available and that is
kept in a removable vessel secured to prevent tipping and cleaned and
disinfected daily;
      (4)   daily food for each animal free of visible contamination, that is
palatable and of sufficient quantity and quality to meet the normal nutrient
requirements for the type, condition, and size of the animal;
      (5)   adequate perching space for each bird; and
      (6)   adequate ventilation and a room temperature healthful for each
species of animal.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 8-105) (Bill No. 29-91; Bill No. 41-01)
§ 12-4-806. Pet care businesses.
   (a)   Generally. Each pet care business shall provide:
      (1)   an exercise area of sufficient size to allow running, with
sufficient fencing and a secure locking gate, kept clean, dry, and in a
sanitary condition with adequate protection against weather extremes;
      (2)   for overnight pet care, daily food, free of visible contamination,
that is palatable and of sufficient quantity and quality to meet the normal
nutrient requirements for the type, condition, and size of the animal; and
      (3)   fresh water that is always available and that is kept in a
removable vessel secured to prevent tipping.
   (b)   Cages. A cage shall be of sufficient size to allow the occupant to
stand up, lie down, and turn around without touching the side or top, with
floors made of impervious material.
(Bill No. 44-14; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-807. Veterinary hospitals.
   Veterinary hospitals that board animals shall meet the minimum standards
required in this title for commercial kennels. These kennels shall be a
separate area from those that are used to confine animals for treatment.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 8-107) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 44-14; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-808. Severe weather emergencies and alerts.
   (a)   Weather emergency. In the event of a severe weather emergency declared
by the County Executive, the Department may issue a severe weather animal alert
advising the public of certain animal safety precautions.
   (b)   Notice. The severe weather animal alert will be posted on the
Department’s website and social media pages, and a public press release will be
issued by the Department.
   (c)   Violation. Failure to comply with §
12-4-801 or §
12-4-802(b) during a severe weather emergency declared by the County Executive
is a Class C civil offense.
(Bill No. 19-16; Bill No. 8-18; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
SUBTITLE 9. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 12-4-901. Cruelty.
   (a)   Scope. On notification of a possible violation of §§ 10-601 et seq. of
the Criminal Law Article of the State Code, the Department shall:
      (1)   determine whether or not a probable violation has occurred;
      (2)   notify the appropriate authority of the alleged violation; and
      (3)   recommend or take action necessary to rectify the situation.
   (b)   Seizure. Subject to the limitations contained in § 10-615(f) of the
Criminal Law Article of the State Code, and as necessary for the health of the
animal or to protect the animal from cruelty, a Department officer, authorized
agent of the Department, police officer, or other public official required to
protect animals may seize, remove, or impound an animal that:
      (1)   does not have access to sufficient food or water;
      (2)   is subjected to cruelty; or
      (3)   is abused or neglected as defined in § 10-604 of the Criminal Law
Article of the State Code.
   (c)   Surrender of animals. Any person charged under §§ 10-604 through 10-
618 of the Criminal Law Article of the State Code shall immediately surrender
to the Department all animals in the person’s ownership or custody.
   (d)   Notice. If an animal is seized or surrendered under this section, the
owner of the animal shall be served with written notice that advises that a
written petition for return of the animal may be filed with the Commission
within 10 days of service of the notice, and the estimated costs of care for a
30-day period as required in subsection (i).
   (e)   Unidentified owner. If the owner of an animal seized or surrendered
under this section cannot be identified after reasonable efforts by the
Department, the animal shall be deemed unwanted or unredeemed, and final
disposition shall be made as provided in this title.
   (f)   Petition. The owner of an animal seized or surrendered pursuant to
this section may file a petition in writing for the return of the animal with
the Commission within 10 days of service or posting of the notice. At least 10
days prior to the hearing, the Department shall provide written notice to the
owner of the specific allegations, and the date, time, and location of the
hearing. If the owner fails to file a petition with the Commission within 10
days of being served with the notice, the animal shall be deemed unwanted or
unredeemed and final disposition shall be made as provided in this title.
   (g)   Commission hearing. The hearing before the Commission shall be
governed by §
12-4-206. The Department shall establish a violation of this section by a
preponderance of the evidence. If the petitioner fails to appear at the
hearing, the petition shall be dismissed and the animal shall be deemed
unwanted or unredeemed as provided in this title.
   (h)   Director’s determination. If the Director determines that prohibiting
the owner of the animal from redeeming the animal is necessary for the health
of the animal or is necessary to protect the animal from cruelty, the
Department shall deem the animal unwanted or unredeemed and may dispose of the
animal as permitted in §
12-4-505(b).
   (i)   Care for seized or surrendered animals. Any animal seized by or
surrendered to the Department under this section shall be maintained, or
humanely euthanized if unable to be maintained, by the Department at the
expense of the owner.
      (1)   If an owner files a petition under subsection (f), the owner shall
pay all costs of care beginning on the date the animal was seized or
surrendered.
      (2)   The costs of care shall be $15 per day per animal, plus the costs
of necessary medical care for the animal, including necessary humane
euthanasia, as determined by a licensed veterinarian and the Department, and
documented by invoices, up to a maximum of $50 per day per animal.
      (3)   The notice provided in accordance with subsection (d) shall advise
the owner of the estimated costs of care for a 30-day period, the deadline for
payment, and the provisions of this subsection.
      (4)   Within 45 days of the date of a notice issued under this section,
the owner shall pay the estimated costs of care for the animal for a 30-day
period.
      (5)   Within 14 days of the end of any 30-day period for which payment
was previously made, if the animal remains seized or surrendered, the owner
shall pay the estimated costs of care for an additional 30 days.
      (6)   The owner shall continue to make costs of care payments for 30-day
periods until the seizure or surrender is terminated, the animal is deemed
unwanted or unredeemed, or the animal dies. The payment due dates in paragraph
(4) or (5) may be extended by request of the owner if the Department determines
that extraordinary circumstances are demonstrated, such as serious injury or
death to the owner or an immediate family member, or fire or flood affecting
the owner’s residence.
      (7)   If the owner does not make payment within the time frames set forth
in this subsection, the animal shall be deemed unwanted or unredeemed and shall
become the property of the County as of the day after any missed payment.
      (8)   If the owner of the seized or surrendered animal is convicted of
any criminal charges brought under § 10-615 of the Criminal Law Article of the
State Code, any animals seized or surrendered shall be forfeited to the County.
      (9)   Any costs of care imposed under this subtitle that are not paid may
be collected in the same manner as any judgment or debt. Nothing in this
section shall preclude the County from seeking restitution for unpaid costs of
care as part of a criminal case under § 10-615 of the Criminal Law Article of
the State Code.
      (10)   The owner may request a review of the costs of care imposed under
this subsection as part of any petition filed under this section, and such
costs may be reduced, waived, or collected as part of a payment plan as deemed
appropriate.
      (11)   The County shall issue a refund to the owner within 30 days:
         (i)   after the end of the seizure or surrender, any payment from the
owner that exceeds the actual costs of care, including any payment for a day
that the County did not care for the animal; or
         (ii)   after any final judgment of the Commission, Board of Appeals,
or a court of competent jurisdiction ordering the County to return all or a
portion of the costs of care.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 9-101) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 1-24;
Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-902. Keeping of wild animals, exotic animals, and vicious animals
prohibited.
   (a)   Prohibition. A person may not keep or permit to be kept on the
person's premises any wild animal, exotic animal, or vicious animal as a pet or
for display or exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. Small
animals such as hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs, mice, rats, other small
rodents, rabbits, ferrets, birds, fish, and nonpoisonous amphibians and
reptiles are not considered wild animals or exotic animals. The keeping of
skunks, raccoons and opossums is illegal.
   (b)   Public contact. The collection of animals on any premises whereby the
public is permitted or encouraged to have physical contact with animals on
display, but not including pet shops, is prohibited. This section does not
apply to zoological parks, and performing animal exhibitions or circuses if the
animal exhibitions or circuses are licensed under the provisions of §
11-2-401 of this Code and does not apply to activities ancillary to farming and
other agricultural uses permitted under Article 18 of this Code.
    (c)   Exclusion. The prohibitions of this section do not apply to a wild
animal or exotic animal owned, maintained, or kept on premises before September
5, 1980 if a permit for the animal was issued by the Department not later than
November 4, 1980, but the prohibitions apply to the offspring of the animals.
The provisions of this section do not apply to any wild or exotic animal or its
owner if such animal or owner is specifically registered or licensed under
express provisions of a federal or State statue or regulation enacted or
adopted for the purpose of animal regulation and protection.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 9-102) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-903. Creating public nuisance or public nuisance condition prohibited.
   The owner of an animal may not permit the animal to be a public nuisance or
to cause a public nuisance condition.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 9-103) (Bill No. 41-01)
§ 12-4-904. Animal disturbance prohibited.
   A person who owns, keeps, or has possession of an animal may not permit the
animal to disturb the quiet of a person or the neighborhood.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 9-104) (Bill No. 41-01)
§ 12-4-905. Animals running at large prohibited.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to an eartipped community cat.
   (b)   Prohibition. A domesticated animal may not be at large. An owner of an
animal at large is in violation of this section.
   (c)   Reporting. A person who is aware of an animal running at large shall
report the condition to the Department by telephone.
   (d)   Pursuit. A Department officer or an authorized representative of the
Department may pursue an animal running at large on public property or on the
exterior premises of private property.
   (e)   Exceptions. An animal is not at large for the purposes of this section
if:
      (1)   the animal is actively engaged in search and rescue operation
training or the sport of hunting or other legal dog sport or competition in
authorized areas while supervised by a competent individual;
      (2)   the animal is undergoing supervised training as part of an
organized obedience class and the owner of the animal is in possession of
written permission to engage in the training on the property from the landowner
or the landowner’s agent or lessee;
      (3)   a dog is in a dog exercise area designated by the Anne Arundel
County Department of Recreation and Parks as an “off-leash dog park” and is
under the supervision of the dog’s owner; or
      (4)   a dog is in a secured dog exercise area designated by the property
owner, homeowner’s association, condominium, or cooperative as an “off-leash
dog park.”
   (f)   Exclusions. For the purposes of this section the common area of a
homeowner’s association, condominium, or cooperative is not the owner’s
property.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 9-105) (Bill No. 67-87; Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 96-17;
Bill No. 75-18; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-906. Animals prohibited on school grounds and in public recreation
areas.
   (a)   Prohibition. Without permission of the proper authorities, the owner
of an animal may not permit the animal to be on a school ground on a day when
school is in session or in a public recreation area where an organized activity
is being conducted unless the animal is controlled by a leash or similar
restraining device or the presence of the animal is associated with an
organized activity such as a dog show.
   (b)   Violation. A Department officer is authorized and directed upon
observing an unrestrained animal upon school grounds or in a public recreation
area or upon receiving the sworn affidavit of an individual having made such
observation to issue a written notice of violation of this section to the owner
of the animal. In the absence of a Department officer, a law enforcement
officer may issue the notice.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 9-106) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-907. Stray dogs and cats to be surrendered to County.
   An individual who finds a stray dog or cat shall deliver the dog or cat to a
Department facility or to a Department officer or an authorized representative
of the Department within 72 hours after finding the dog or cat. This section
does not apply to an individual who traps a community cat as part of a trap-
neuter-return.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 9-107) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 96-17; Bill No. 89-20;
Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-908. Intact dog or cat.
   Whenever a dog or cat is intact, the owner of the intact animal shall
prevent opportunity for reproductive contact with dogs or cats off the owner's
property.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 9-108) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 75-18)
§ 12-4-909. Removal of animal excreta.
   A person shall remove excreta deposited by an animal owned by that person on
public walks, recreation areas, or private property other than the owner's.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 9-109) (Bill No. 41-01)
§ 12-4-910. Disposal of animal carcasses and sick animals.
   The owner of a dead animal may not deposit or leave the animal on public
property or the property of another person. Dead animals shall be promptly
disposed of by cremation, burial, or other sanitary means. On request, the
Department shall pick up dead dogs, cats, and other small domestic animals for
disposal for a fee not to exceed the actual cost of the disposal. In addition
to other assigned duties, a Department officer or an authorized representative
of the Department shall collect dead animals found on public grounds or County
roads and dispose of the carcasses and humanely euthanize critically sick and
injured animals found on public property or on the request of the owner of the
animal.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 9-110) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-911. Reporting of sale or disposition of animals.
   The holder of a commercial kennel license shall notify the Department in
writing of the names and addresses of persons who buy or otherwise receive dogs
from the kennels within two weeks of the sale or disposition. The holder of a
pet shop license shall notify the Department in writing of the names and
addresses of persons who buy or otherwise receive dogs within two weeks of the
sale or disposition.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 9-111) (Bill No. 41-01; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-912. Adopted animals – spaying or neutering fees; waiver of fees.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to animals purchased from pet
shops, commercial kennels, or other commercial establishments.
   (b)   Conditions for adoption. An animal may not be adopted from a
Department facility except on:
      (1)   approval by the Director at the Director’s discretion;
      (2)   execution of any adoption contract established by the Director; and
      (3)   provision for spaying or neutering of the animal as provided in
subsection (c).
   (c)   Spaying and neutering. Each animal adopted from a Department facility
or a private, nonprofit animal shelter operated by a humane society or
association shall be spayed or neutered:
      (1)   by a licensed veterinarian at the expense of the adopter within 30
days of adoption or such other date as specified in the adoption agreement
under the authority of the Director or the shelter operator; or
      (2)   if the animal is adopted from a Department facility, as provided
for by the Director before the adoption.
   (d)   Expenses. If the adopter provides for the spaying or neutering of the
animal under subsection (c)(1), the adopter shall provide evidence of the
spaying or neutering as required by the Department or the shelter operator.
   (e)   Waiver. The Department may waive adoption fees or the cost of spaying
or neutering upon a showing of good cause or as deemed appropriate.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 9-112) (Bill No. 67-87; Bill No. 71-93; Bill No. 41-01;
Bill No. 11-07; Bill No. 72-12; Bill No. 49-14; Bill No. 11-16; Bill No. 89-20;
Bill No. 1-24; Bill No. 25-25)
§ 12-4-913. Reckless animal owner.
   (a)   Reckless animal owner designation.
      (1)   Any person who is found guilty of violating the provisions of this
Article three or more times from separate incidents within a 24 month period
may be designated by the Director as a reckless animal owner.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, a person is considered to be
found guilty of violating the provisions of this Article if the person is found
guilty, is placed on probation before judgment, or pays a civil fine for a
violation of this Article, or owns an animal designated by the Department as
potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious within the preceding 24 months.
   (b)   Notice. Upon designation by the Director, the Department shall issue a
written notice to the reckless animal owner that includes:
      (1)   the name and address of the reckless animal owner;
      (2)   a description of the circumstances that led to the designation;
      (3)   the name, description, and license number, if any, of any animals
owned or in the custody of the reckless animal owner; and
      (4)   notice of the right to appeal the designation.
   (c)   Appeal. A person designated as a reckless animal owner may appeal the
designation by filing a written notice of appeal with the Commission within 10
days of service of the reckless animal owner notice.
   (d)   Commission hearing. The hearing before the Commission shall be
governed by §
12-4-206. The Department shall establish a violation of this section by a
preponderance of the evidence. If the petitioner fails to appear at the
hearing, the appeal shall be dismissed.
   (e)   Prohibition. An owner designated as a reckless animal owner may not
own, keep, possess, or harbor any animal for four years from the date of the
designation, all licenses issued under Subtitle 7 of Title 4 of this Article to
the reckless animal owner shall be revoked, all animals owned or in the custody
of the reckless animal owner shall be impounded and seized by the Department
and shall be immediately considered unwanted or unredeemed.
(Bill No. 89-20; Bill No. 25-25)
SUBTITLE 10. CIVIL PENALTIES
§ 12-4-1001. Civil penalties.
   A person who violates an order issued under §§
12-4-401 et seq. is subject to a civil fine of $250 for the first offense and
$500 for each subsequent offense. Otherwise, a person who violates any
provision of this title is subject to civil fines as provided in §
9-2-101 of this Code. Each day that a violation continues constitutes a
separate offense. The Director may enforce the provisions of this title through
injunctive proceedings or any other appropriate actions.
(1985 Code, Art. 12, § 10-101) (Bill No. 6-77; Bill No. 38-88; Bill No. 41-01;
Bill No. 11-07; Bill No. 25-25)
State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-202.
TITLE 5. BURGLAR AND SECURITY ALARMS
Section
   
12-5-101.   Definitions.
   
12-5-102.   Alarm business registration.
   
12-5-103.   Alarm system registration.
   
12-5-104.   Alarm system standards.
   
12-5-105.   Alarm user standards.
   
12-5-106.   Alarm monitoring procedures.
   
12-5-107.   Alarm signals; records; false alarm reports.
   
12-5-108.   False alarms.
   
12-5-109.   Denial or suspension of alarm system registration.
   
12-5-110.   Civil fines.
§ 12-5-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Alarm Administrator" means a person designated by the Chief of
Police to administer the provisions of this title.
      (2)   "Alarm business" means a person who provides alarm services.
      (3)   "Alarm monitor" means an alarm business that provides the alarm
service of receiving alarm signals from alarm sites for the purpose of making
dispatch requests.
      (4)   (i)   "Alarm services" means the installation, maintenance,
inspection, sale, service, or repair of alarm systems.
         (ii)   "Alarm services" includes receiving and monitoring alarm
signals from alarm sites and making dispatch requests.
      (5)   "Alarm signal" means the activation, either manual or automatic, of
an alarm system.
      (6)   "Alarm site" means a single premises or location served by one or
more alarm systems that may be composed of multiple zones.
      (7)   (i)   "Alarm system" means a device or series of devices at an
alarm site, including those interconnected with radio frequency signals, that
is designed to discourage crime by emitting or transmitting a remote or local
audible, visual, or electronic signal indicating a criminal activity, and that
is intended to summon a response from the Police Department.
         (ii)   "Alarm system" does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle
unless the vehicle is permanently located at an alarm site, or an alarm that is
designed to alert only the inhabitants of an alarm site that does not have a
sounding device that can be heard on the exterior of the alarm site.
      (8)   (i)   "Alarm user" means a person who operates an alarm system or
causes an alarm system to be operated.
         (ii)   "Alarm user" includes a tenant who operates an alarm system or
causes an alarm system to be operated in the area leased by the tenant.
      (9)   "Cancellation" means the process by which a dispatch request is
rescinded when an alarm monitor notifies the Police Department that there is no
crime requiring response to an alarm site.
      (10)   "Computer aided dispatch (CAD)" means a computer system into which
police personnel enter dispatch request information, including the date, time,
and location of the alarm site, that is linked to police patrol cars, and into
which police personnel responding to the alarm site enter the time and the
outcome of the response.
      (11)   "Dispatch request" means a notification to the Police Department
that an alarm signal has been activated for the purpose of summoning a response
to the alarm site.
      (12)   (i)   "False alarm" means an alarm signal that results in a
dispatch request that is not canceled prior to the arrival of police personnel
at the alarm site, where police personnel find no evidence of criminal activity
or attempted criminal activity.
         (ii)   "False alarm" includes an alarm signal that is activated
negligently or accidentally, that is the result of faulty, malfunctioning, or
improperly installed or maintained equipment, or that is intentionally
activated to summon police personnel for a non-emergency situation.
         (iii)   "False alarm" includes an alarm signal that is activated as a
result of weather or power outage conditions, unless there is visible evidence
of severe conditions directly affecting the alarm site, such as a tree or
object striking a building or a window.
         (iv)   "False alarm" includes each separate false alarm occurring in
one calendar day at a single alarm site.
(Bill No. 41-09)
§ 12-5-102. Alarm business registration.
   (a)   Registration required. A person may not provide alarm services unless
the person obtains an alarm business registration.
   (b)   Application. An application for an alarm business registration shall
be in the form prescribed by the Alarm Administrator and shall include the
applicant's security systems services license number issued pursuant to the
Business Occupations and Professions Article, Title 18, of the State Code.
   (c)   Duration. An alarm business registration is effective for a period of
two years from the date of issuance.
   (d)   Renewal. At least 30 days prior to the expiration date, the Alarm
Administrator shall notify the alarm business of the expiration date and the
procedures for renewal of the registration. Prior to the registration
expiration date, the alarm business shall submit an application to renew the
registration.
   (e)   False statement. A false statement of a material matter made by an
applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm business registration is
sufficient cause for denial of registration.
   (f)   Registration not transferable. An alarm business registration is not
transferable.
   (g)   Changes in registration information. An alarm business shall inform
the Alarm Administrator within 10 business days of any change in any
information contained in the registration application.
   (h)   Information confidential. Information contained in the alarm business
registration application shall be kept confidential by all employees and
representatives of the County.
   (i)   Outstanding fines and penalties. All outstanding civil fines and civil
penalties owed by an alarm business under this title must be paid before an
alarm business registration is issued or renewed.
(Bill No. 41-09)
§ 12-5-103. Alarm system registration.
   (a)   Registration required. A person may not operate an alarm system or
cause an alarm system to be operated unless the person obtains an alarm system
registration. Each alarm user shall submit an application for an alarm system
registration within five days of an alarm system installation or after an alarm
user takes control of an existing alarm system.
   (b)   Alarm business to provide registration information. Each alarm
business shall provide each alarm user whose alarm system the business installs
or monitors, all information and forms required by this section.
   (c)   Alarm systems in multiple tenant buildings.
      (1)   In a building or complex occupied by multiple tenants, a tenant
shall register an alarm system if the alarm system is located in the area that
the tenant leases.
      (2)   If an alarm system is located in a nonresidential or common area of
a building or complex occupied by multiple tenants, the owner or manager of the
building or complex shall register the alarm system.
      (3)   If the owner or manager of a building or complex occupied by
multiple tenants installs or monitors an alarm system in an area leased by a
tenant, the owner or manager of the building shall provide a tenant all
information and forms required by this section.
   (d)   Application. An application for an alarm system registration shall be
in the form prescribed by the Alarm Administrator. An application for an alarm
system registration shall include:
      (1)   the name, address, and telephone number of the alarm user;
      (2)   specific details regarding the use and purpose of the alarm system;
and
      (3)   signed certification from the alarm user including:
         (i)   the date of installation of the alarm system;
         (ii)   the name, address, and telephone number of the alarm business
that performed the alarm system installation and that is responsible for
providing repair service to the system;
         (iii)   the name, address, and telephone number of the alarm monitor;
         (iv)   a statement that the alarm user has received a set of written
operating instructions for the alarm system, including guidelines on how to
avoid false alarms; and
         (v)   the name, address, and telephone number of at least one person
who is able to respond within 30 minutes to the alarm site to deactivate the
alarm.
   (e)   Duration. An alarm system registration is effective for a period of
two years.
   (f)   Renewal. At least 30 days prior to the registration expiration date,
the Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user of the expiration date and
of the procedure for renewal of the registration. Prior to the registration
expiration date, the alarm user shall submit an application to renew the
registration.
   (g)   False statement. A false statement of a material matter made by an
applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm system registration is
sufficient cause for denial of registration.
   (h)   Registration not transferable. An alarm system registration is not
transferable.
   (i)   Changes in registration information. An alarm user shall inform the
Alarm Administrator in writing within 10 business days of a change in any
information contained in the registration application.
   (j)   Information confidential. Information contained in the alarm system
registration application shall be kept confidential by all employees and
representatives of the County.
   (k)   Outstanding fines and penalties. All outstanding civil fines and civil
penalties owed by an alarm user under this title must be paid before an alarm
system registration is issued or renewed.
(Bill No. 41-09)
§ 12-5-104. Alarm system standards.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Automatic telephone dialing system" means any electronic,
mechanical, or other device capable of being programmed to send, when
activated, a prerecorded dispatch request over a telephone line, radio, or
other communication system directly to the Police Department.
      (2)   "One-plus duress alarm" means a silent alarm signal that is
triggered when the alarm user enters a code that adds one digit to the last
digit of the standard user code.
      (3)   "Single action hold-up alarm" means a silent alarm signal generated
by the manual activation of a single action, non-recessed button, designed to
signal a crime in progress.
   (b)   Installation. An alarm business that installs an alarm system shall
have at the alarm site at least one employee to supervise the installation who
has passed and maintained a minimum level-one certification by the National
Burglar and Fire Alarm Association, the Maryland Burglar and Fire Alarm
Association or equivalent training as determined by the Alarm Administrator.
   (c)   System standards and testing. The components of an alarm system shall
be included in a list published by the Underwriters Laboratories, Factory
Mutual, or other list approved by the Alarm Administrator, which states either
that the components meet appropriate designated standards or have been tested
and found suitable for use in a specified manner.
   (d)   Certain dialers prohibited. An alarm business may not install, and an
alarm user may not operate or cause to be operated, an alarm system that
utilizes an automatic telephone dialing system or a digital dialer.
   (e)   One-plus duress and single action hold-up alarms prohibited. An alarm
business or alarm user may not program an alarm system so that it is capable of
sending a one-plus duress alarm signal or a single action hold-up alarm signal,
except that an alarm may be activated by simultaneous depression of two
buttons, where if either button has multiple functions, the two buttons are
non-adjacent, or by depression of a single button after lifting a cover that
normally protects the button from alarm activation.
   (f)   Same – removal of capability.
      (1)   When an alarm user takes control of an alarm system, the alarm user
shall remove any one-plus duress or single action hold-up alarm capabilities
from the alarm system.
      (2)   When an alarm monitor begins monitoring an alarm system, the alarm
monitor shall remove any one-plus duress or single action hold-up alarm
capabilities from the alarm system.
(Bill No. 41-09)
§ 12-5-105. Alarm user standards.
   (a)   Duties of alarm user. An alarm user shall:
      (1)   maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that
minimizes or eliminates false alarms;
      (2)   take reasonable measures to ensure a response to the alarm site by
the alarm user or a designee within 30 minutes after notification by the Police
Department to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to
the alarm site, or to provide security for the alarm site;
      (3)   maintain at each alarm site a set of written operating instructions
for each alarm system that includes guidelines for avoidance of false alarms;
and
      (4)   adjust the components of the alarm system so that an alarm signal
audible on the exterior of an alarm site will not sound for longer than 15
minutes after being activated.
   (b)   Prohibition. An alarm user shall not manually activate an alarm system
for any reason other than the occurrence of an event that the alarm system was
intended to report.
(Bill No. 41-09)
§ 12-5-106. Alarm monitoring procedures.
   (a)   Duties of alarm monitor. An alarm monitor shall:
      (1)   report alarm signals to the Police Department in a manner and form
determined by the Alarm Administrator;
      (2)   except in the instance of a duress, ambush or robbery alarm
activation, make at least two attempts to contact a representative of the alarm
site by telephone or other electronic means and attempt to confirm a valid
alarm before making a dispatch request; and
      (3)   report verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests to the
Police Department in a manner and form designated by the Alarm Administrator.
   (b)   Procedures established by Alarm Administrator. The Alarm Administrator
shall:
      (1)   designate the manner, form, and method for the communication of
dispatch requests; and
      (2)   develop a procedure to accept verified cancellations of dispatch
requests.
(Bill No. 41-09)
§ 12-5-107. Alarm signals; records; false alarm reports.
   (a)   Dispatch records. For each alarm signal, the Alarm Administrator shall
keep a record of:
      (1)   the date and time of receipt of the dispatch request;
      (2)   the location of the alarm site;
      (3)   the area of the alarm site, if applicable;
      (4)   the alarm registration number for the alarm site;
      (5)   police personnel dispatch time and arrival time at the alarm site;
      (6)   identification of the responsible alarm monitor; and
      (7)   disposition of the response.
   (b)   False alarm reports. The police personnel responding to the alarm site
shall indicate to the computer aided dispatch (CAD) system when an alarm signal
is a false alarm.
   (c)   Records of alarm monitor. An alarm monitor shall maintain a record
relating to a dispatch request for a period of at least one year. The record
shall contain:
      (1)   the name, address, and telephone number of the alarm user;
      (2)   the alarm system zone or point activated;
      (3)   a statement whether or not the alarm monitor made two attempts to
verify the alarm signal as required under §
12-5-106(a)(2) prior to the dispatch request; and
      (4)   the time of the dispatch request.
   (d)   Records to be provided upon request. The Alarm Administrator may
request copies of a record maintained by an alarm monitor and the alarm monitor
shall provide the copies at no cost.
(Bill No. 41-09)
§ 12-5-108. False alarms.
   (a)   Notice. For each false alarm signal, the Alarm Administrator shall
send a notice to the alarm user by first class mail, postage prepaid. The
notice shall state:
      (1)   that police personnel responded to a false alarm;
      (2)   the date and time of police personnel response to the false alarm;
      (3)   the identification number of the responding police personnel;
      (4)   that the alarm user shall ensure that the alarm system is properly
operated, inspected and installed;
      (5)   if applicable, the amount of a civil penalty assessment as provided
in subsection (b); and
      (6)   the review procedures available to the alarm user.
   (b)   Civil penalty for false alarms.
      (1)   The alarm user is not subject to a civil penalty for the first and
second false alarms at a single alarm site within any 12-month period.
      (2)   The civil penalties for the third or more false alarms at a single
alarm site in a 12-month period are:
         (i)   $50 for the third and fourth false alarms;
         (ii)   $75 for the fifth false alarm;
         (iii)   $100 for the sixth false alarm;
         (iv)   $125 for the seventh false alarm;
         (v)   $150 for the eighth false alarm;
         (vi)   $175 for the ninth false alarm;
         (vii)   $200 for the tenth false alarm;
         (viii)   $225 for the eleventh false alarm; and
         (ix)   $250 for the twelfth and any subsequent false alarms.
      (3)   The alarm user is not subject to a civil penalty for the fourth or
more false alarms in one calendar day at a single alarm site.
      (4)   A penalty imposed under this subsection is a civil penalty
administratively imposed by the Alarm Administrator in accordance with Local
Government Code, § 16-108, of the State Code.
   (c)   Review.
      (1)   An alarm user may request review of the civil penalty to the Alarm
Administrator within 30 days of the date of the notice assessing the civil
penalty. The request for review must be in writing and set forth all reasons
for the request.
      (2)   The computer aided dispatch (CAD) record shall be prima facie
evidence that a false alarm occurred.
      (3)   The assessment of a civil penalty shall be stayed until a final
decision is reached.
      (4)   The Alarm Administrator shall issue a written decision within 60
days of the date of the request for review. The decision shall affirm or
reverse the assessment of the civil penalty.
   (d)   Payment. All civil penalties shall be paid by the alarm user within 30
days of the date of the notice from the Alarm Administrator. All civil
penalties unpaid after 30 days may be collected as provided in § 1-9-101 of
this Code.
(Bill No. 41-09)
§ 12-5-109. Denial or suspension of alarm system registration.
   (a)   Suspension or denial. The Alarm Administrator may suspend or deny an
alarm system registration if the Alarm Administrator finds that:
      (1)   installation, repairs, maintenance, or other work on the alarm
system does not meet the requirements of this title;
      (2)   the alarm user has not paid civil fines or civil penalties imposed
under this title;
      (3)   the alarm user has submitted false information of a material matter
in the application; or
      (4)   the alarm business has violated a provision of this title or of any
other applicable local, state, or federal law relating to the sale,
installation, monitoring, or maintenance of alarm systems.
   (b)   Notice. If the Alarm Administrator denies or suspends an alarm system
registration, the Alarm Administrator shall send written notice to the alarm
user and the alarm monitor by first class mail, postage prepaid, along with a
statement of the right to request review.
   (c)   Issuance of alarm system registration after denial or suspension. The
Alarm Administrator may issue an alarm system registration to an alarm user
after denial or suspension of an alarm system registration if the alarm user:
      (1)   submits an application;
      (2)   satisfies all outstanding civil fines and civil penalties; and
      (3)   submits a certification as required by the Alarm Administrator from
a registered alarm business stating that the alarm system complies with the
requirements of this title.
   (d)   Review of denial or suspension of alarm system registration. 
      (1)   An alarm user may request review of the denial or suspension of an
alarm system registration to the Alarm Administrator within 30 days of the date
of the notice of denial or suspension. The request for review must be in
writing and set forth all reasons for the request.
      (2)   The alarm system registration denial or suspension shall be stayed
until a final decision is reached.
      (3)   The Alarm Administrator shall issue a written decision within 60
days of the date of the request for review. The decision shall affirm or
reverse the denial or suspension of an alarm system registration.
(Bill No. 41-09)
§ 12-5-110. Civil fines.
   (a)   Unregistered alarm systems. It is a Class D civil offense for any
person to operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system that is not
registered under this title that results in Police Department response to an
alarm site, whether or not it is a false alarm. The civil fine imposed under
this section is in addition to any civil penalties imposed under §
12-5-108.
   (b)   Dispatch requests to unregistered alarm systems. It is a Class D civil
offense for an alarm monitor to make a dispatch request to an alarm site with
an alarm system that is not registered under this title, except when the alarm
monitor is not notified of a denial or suspension of an alarm system
registration.
   (c)   Providing alarm services without registration. It is a Class C civil
offense for a person to provide alarm services without an alarm business
registration issued under this title.
   (d)   Other violations. It is a Class E civil offense for a person to
violate a provision of this title for which a civil fine is not otherwise
specified.
(Bill No. 41-09)
TITLE 6. SECURITY MEASURES FOR THE SALE OF FIREARMS
Section
Subtitle 1. Effective Date Contingency
   
12-6-101.   Effective date contingency.
Subtitle 2. Dealers
   
12-6-201.   Definitions.
   
12-6-202.   Applicability.
   
12-6-203.   Police Department approval of security measures.
   
12-6-204.   Application for approval.
   
12-6-205.   Transfer prohibited; relocation.
   
12-6-206.   Security measures.
   
12-6-207.   Dealer’s inventory list.
Subtitle 3. Gun Shows
   
12-6-301.   Definitions.
   
12-6-302.   Police Department approval of security measures.
   
12-6-303.   Application for approval.
   
12-6-304.   Transfer prohibited; relocation.
   
12-6-305.   Security measures.
Subtitle 4. Enforcement
   
12-6-401.   Enforcement.
SUBTITLE 1. EFFECTIVE DATE CONTINGENCY
§ 12-6-101. Effective date contingency.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, this title shall become
effective 30 days following any final judicial or legislative action that voids
or repeals § 5-145.1 of the Public Safety Article of the Maryland Code, as
added by 2022 Maryland Laws Ch. 55 (H.B. 1021).
(Bill No. 70-22)
SUBTITLE 2. DEALERS
§ 12-6-201. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Dealer” means a person in the business of selling, renting, or
transferring firearms at wholesale or retail.
      (2)   “Firearm” has the meaning stated in § 5-101 of the Public Safety
Article of the State Code.
      (3)   “Place of public assembly” means a location used for a gathering of
50 or more persons for deliberation, worship, entertainment, eating, drinking,
amusement, shopping, awaiting transportation, or similar uses.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
§ 12-6-202. Applicability.
   This title applies to dealers within 100 yards of or in a park, house of
worship, school, public building, or other place of public assembly.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
§ 12-6-203. Police Department approval of security measures.
   A dealer may not conduct business without Police Department approval of the
security measures required by §
12-6-206. The dealer shall obtain approval before the opening of business and
by June 1 of each year thereafter.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
§ 12-6-204. Application for approval.
   (a)   Contents of an application. A dealer shall submit an application to
the Police Department for approval of the dealer’s security measures. The
application shall be on a form required by the Police Department and shall
include, at a minimum:
      (1)   a description of proposed or existing security measures; and
      (2)   an authorization for the Police Department to inspect the premises
and any off-site storage locations.
   (b)   Change of information. A dealer shall report any changes to the
information provided in the application to the Police Department within 30
days.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
§ 12-6-205. Transfer prohibited; relocation.
   (a)   Approval is nontransferable. The Police Department’s approval of
security measures may not be transferred.
   (b)   Notification of relocation. A dealer shall notify the Police
Department in writing before moving the location of an establishment or the
location of any off-site storage.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
§ 12-6-206. Security measures.
   (a)   Alarms. The business premises of a dealer shall be monitored at all
times by a burglar and security alarm system that includes video surveillance
and that complies with
Title 5 of this article.
   (b)   Additional security measures. The business premises of a dealer shall
be secured by the following physical security measures:
      (1)   exterior bollards, concrete barriers, steel barricades, planters,
landscape boulders, or other physical barriers that prevent vehicular or other
intrusion into the building; and
      (2)   interior or exterior security gates, screens, shutters, bars, or
grilles over windows and doors, or a secure vestibule for doors.
   (c)   Securing firearms when the business is closed. When the business is
closed to the public, all firearms shall be secured in a:
      (1)   rack equipped with a locking device, such as a metal bar or a steel
cable;
      (2)   heavy gauge metal cabinet equipped with an adequate locking device;
      (3)   heavy gauge mesh wire cage equipped with an adequate locking device
on the doors;
      (4)   safe or vault; or
      (5)   glass display case, provided the firearms are secured with a steel
cable or other adequate locking device that is anchored in a manner that
prevents the removal of the firearms from the premises.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
§ 12-6-207. Dealer’s inventory list.
   (a)   Possession of an inventory list. Dealers who transport firearms for
sale shall have in their possession at all times an inventory list for each
firearm being transported. The list shall include, at a minimum, the
manufacturer, model, and serial number of the firearms.
   (b)   Location of the inventory list. A copy of the inventory list shall at
all times:
      (1)   accompany the firearms;
      (2)   be available at the dealer’s business premises; and
      (3)   be provided to law enforcement upon request.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
SUBTITLE 3. GUN SHOWS
§ 12-6-301. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Firearm” has the meaning stated in § 5-101 of the Public Safety
Article of the State Code.
      (2)   “Gun show” means an organized gathering open to the public at which
firearms are displayed and may be sold, rented, or transferred at wholesale or
retail.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
§ 12-6-302. Police Department approval of security measures.
   A person promoting or sponsoring a gun show may not proceed with the show or
place firearms on the premises without Police Department approval of the
security measures required by §
12-6-305.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
§ 12-6-303. Application for approval.
   A person promoting or sponsoring a gun show shall submit an application to
the Police Department for approval, and report any changes to the information
provided in the application, in accordance with §
12-6-204.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
§ 12-6-304. Transfer prohibited; relocation.
   (a)   Approval is nontransferable. The Police Department’s approval of
security measures for a gun show may not be transferred.
   (b)   Notification of relocation. A person promoting or sponsoring a gun
show shall notify the Police Department in writing before moving the gun show
from one location to another.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
§ 12-6-305. Security measures.
   A person promoting or sponsoring a gun show shall have security measures
when the premises are not open to the public and firearms are onsite. the
security measures shall include, at a minimum:
      (1)   a burglar and security alarm system that includes video
surveillance and that complies with Title 5 of this article;
      (2)   securing firearms as provided in §
12-6-205(c); and
      (3)   live security guard coverage.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
SUBTITLE 4. ENFORCEMENT
§ 12-6-401. Enforcement.
   (a)   Posting police officers or security guards at the site. If the Police
Department determines that a violation of this title may bring the security of
firearms into question, the Department may post one or more officers or
security guards at the location at the expense of the dealer until:
      (1)   the violation has been abated to the satisfaction of the Police
Department; or
      (2)   the inventory has been removed to a secure location and the Police
Department has verified the move.
   (b)   Court proceedings. The Police Department may enforce the provisions of
this title through injunctive proceedings, an action for specific performance,
or any other appropriate proceedings.
   (c)   Civil offense. It is a Class C civil offense to violate the provisions
of this title.
   (d)   Remedies cumulative. The remedies available under this section are
cumulative and not exclusive.
(Bill No. 109-21; Bill No. 70-22)
TITLE 7. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section
   
12-7-101.   Display of address.
   
12-7-102.   Records of transfers of weapons.
   
12-7-103.   Hotels, motels, inns, and other transient lodging facilities –
Records.
   
12-7-104.   Emergency medical assistance.
   
12-7-105.   Electronic control devices.
   
12-7-106.   Boating on Weems Creek.
   
12-7-107.   Public nuisance.
   
12-7-108.   Distribution of literature to purchasers of guns or ammunition.
   
12-7-109.   Plastic bags prohibited.
§ 12-7-101. Display of address.
   (a)   Requirement. The owner of any improved property shall post on or about
the property numbers or letters designating the address assigned to the
property. The numbers or letters shall be in plain block style at least three
inches high, displayed on a contrasting background, and posted so as to be
unobstructed and clearly legible from the street named in the address of the
property. In addition:
      (1)   for a multifamily structure, the address shall be affixed to the
structure in numbers or letters at least six inches high so as to be clearly
legible from entrances to parking areas and the designation of each dwelling
unit shall be affixed to the exterior door of the unit in plain block numbers
or letters at least three inches high;
      (2)   for a mobile home park, the designation of each lot shall be posted
in numbers or letters at least three inches high in a conspicuous space on or
about the lot so as to be clearly legible from the interior street on which the
lot is located; and
      (3)   for commercial property, the address shall be displayed in numbers
or letters at least six inches high.
   (b)   Enforcement. The Anne Arundel County Fire Department shall enforce the
provisions of this section. An authorized representative of the County Fire
Department, Police Department, Health Department, Department of Inspections and
Permits, Department of Public Works, or Office of Planning and Zoning may cite
an owner for a violation of the provisions of this section.
   (c)   Fine. A person who violates the provisions of this section is subject
to a civil fine as provided in §
9-2-101 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 5-101) (Bill No. 1-88; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 109-21)
§ 12-7-102. Records of transfers of weapons.
   A person selling, bartering, or otherwise exchanging or disposing of
blackjacks, sandbags, sandclubs, metal knuckles or similar weapons shall keep a
record book in which shall be recorded the name of the purchaser, barterer, or
pledgor, after proper identification. The purchaser, barterer, or pledgor shall
sign in the book and give the purchaser’s, barterer’s or pledgor’s place of
residence and the date of the transaction. The record book shall be open for
inspection during regular business hours to the Sheriff and police and the
police of the City of Annapolis.
(1985 Code, Art. 17, § 1-102) (Bill No. 109-21)
§ 12-7-103. Hotels, motels, inns, and other transient lodging facilities –
Records.
   (a)   Requirement to create and maintain records. Any person who owns or
operates a hotel, motel, inn or other transient lodging facility shall maintain
records of the name and given address of the person renting sleeping facilities
in the establishment; the room number occupied; the date and time of
registration and checkout; and, where maintained by the establishment in the
ordinary course of business, the license plate number and state of registration
of any motor vehicle parked or kept by the person on the hotel premises. The
records shall be retained for three years after the date the last entry is
recorded.
   (b)   Prohibition. A person may not knowingly give or cause to be given an
incorrect name, address, or license plate number to the owner, manager, or
agent of any establishment required to maintain records under this section.
   (c)   Duty to produce to law enforcement officer. The records required to be
kept in accordance with subsection (a) and records and billing information
maintained by any hotel, motel, inn, or other transient lodging facility of
telephone calls made from the establishment or from individual rooms in the
establishment shall be made available for inspection by any County or State law
enforcement officer.
   (d)   Ability to require form. Before providing inspection of the records to
a law enforcement officer under this section, an establishment may require the
officer to present a form that states that inspection is pursuant to a criminal
investigation by a law enforcement agency; states that a subject involved in
the investigation is believed to be registered in the facility or has checked
out within the previous seven days; and is signed by the chief law enforcement
officer of the agency or that officer’s designee.
   (e)   Notice. Each establishment governed by the provisions of this section
shall post in its guest check-in area or inside each guest room or otherwise
distribute the following notice to each person renting sleeping facilities:
   In accordance with Anne Arundel law, certain guest records kept by this
establishment may be subject to inspection by State and local law enforcement
officers in the course of criminal investigations.
(1985 Code, Art. 17, § 1-104) (Bill No. 80-91; Bill No. 109-21)
§ 12-7-104. Emergency medical assistance.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated:
      (1)   “Bar” means a commercial establishment for the sale and service of
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption in which the service of food,
if served at all, is incidental to the consumption of such beverages.
      (2)   “Health club” means a commercial establishment offering
instruction, training, or assistance in or facilities for the development,
preservation, or maintenance of physical fitness or well being, including
health spas; sports, tennis, and racquetball clubs; figure salons; gymnasiums;
weight control studios; and martial arts and self-defense schools.
      (3)   “Owner or operator” means the owner, operator, manager, or other
person having control of an establishment.
      (4)   “Public place” means a County owned or leased building; bar, health
club, restaurant, or theatre; social hall or arena; meeting room when used for
public meetings; and public or community owned swimming pool.
      (5)   “Restaurant” means a commercial establishment for the sale of food
for on- premises consumption.
      (6)   “Resuscitation equipment” means an exhaled-air resuscitation mask
permitted to be marketed by the Food and Drug Administration, accompanied by a
pair of latex gloves.
      (7)   “Theatre” means a motion picture theatre, concert hall, auditorium,
or other building used for the primary purpose of exhibiting movies, stage
dramas, musical recitals, dance, or similar performances.
   (b)   Requirement. The owner, lessee, or operator of a public place shall
have readily accessible in the public place at all times resuscitation
equipment for use in medical emergencies; shall post with the resuscitation
equipment a sign describing its use and that the equipment is for single use
only and should be disposed of after being used; and shall provide notice to
patrons by signs or other printed material of the availability of resuscitation
equipment for emergency use and providing information on how to obtain
cardiopulmonary resuscitation training. The resuscitation equipment shall be
discarded after a single use. Resuscitation equipment shall be inspected as
scheduled by the Fire Department along with inspections of fire extinguishers
at the public place to ensure that the resuscitation equipment is readily
accessible and in operating condition.
   (c)   Effect. Nothing contained in this section imposes a duty or obligation
on any person to provide resuscitation assistance to the victim of a medical
emergency.
(1985 Code, Art. 17, § 1-105) (Bill No. 17-92; Bill No. 109-21)
§ 12-7-105. Electronic control devices.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “electronic control device” has the
meaning under § 4-109 of the Criminal Law Article of the State of Maryland.
   (b)   Permitted. A person who meets the State requirements for possession of
an electronic control device may possess an electronic control device.
   (c)   Violation. A person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
§
9-1-101 of this Code.
(Bill No. 18-13; Bill No. 109-21)
§ 12-7-106. Boating on Weems Creek.
   (a)   Agreement with the City of Annapolis. The County Executive may enter
into a memorandum of understanding with the City of Annapolis to allow the City
to extend the jurisdiction of the City to enforce Title 15, §§ 15.04.030
through 15.14.040 of the Code of the City of Annapolis over the waters of Weems
Creek that lie within the boundaries of the County.
   (b)   Scope of agreement. The scope of a memorandum of understanding
authorized under this section shall be limited to the City of Annapolis’s
enforcement of Title 15, §§ 15.04.030 through 15.14.040 of the Code of the City
of Annapolis and shall not authorize permitting of boats or improvements, the
collection of fees, or the regulation of any structures extending from land
within the County. Any enforcement actions undertaken by the City pursuant to a
memorandum of understanding under this section shall be at the sole cost of the
City of Annapolis.
   (c)   Liability. Subject to the appropriation of funds, the County shall
indemnify and hold harmless the City of Annapolis from any claims of liability
arising out of any act authorized by a memorandum of understanding under this
section.
(Bill No. 54-16; Bill No. 109-21)
§ 12-7-107. Public nuisance.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “public nuisance” means any property
where, on five or more separate occasions within any 30-day period, crimes were
committed on the property and arrests were made for:
      (1)   assignation, lewdness, or prostitution, as defined in §
9-1-705 of this Code, or human trafficking, as defined in § 3-1102 of the
Criminal Law Article of the State Code;
      (2)   illegally administering a controlled dangerous substance prohibited
under § 5-601 of the Criminal Law Article of the State Code;
      (3)   the distribution of a controlled dangerous substance prohibited
under § 5-602 of the Criminal Law Article of the State Code;
      (4)   the illegal storage or concealment of a controlled dangerous
substance or controlled paraphernalia in sufficient quantity to reasonably
indicate under the circumstances an intent to manufacture, distribute, or
dispense a controlled dangerous substance or controlled paraphernalia;
      (5)   illegal gambling;
      (6)   the storage or possession of stolen property valued at $1,500 or
more;
      (7)   wearing, carrying, or transporting a handgun prohibited under § 4-
203 of the Criminal Law Article of the State Code or the use of a handgun in
the commission of a violent crime as prohibited under § 4-204 of the Criminal
Law Article of the State Code;      
      (8)   a crime of violence, as defined in § 14-101 of the Criminal Law
Article of the State Code; or
      (9)   offenses prohibited under Article 9, Subtitle 8 of the Criminal Law
Article of the State Code.
   (b)   Prohibition. A property owner may not allow a property to be a public
nuisance. The owner of a property that is a public nuisance is subject to
enforcement and fines under this section.
   (c)   Enforcement; violations.
      (1)   The County may not enforce the provisions of this section if:
         (i)   the property owner attempts to remedy a public nuisance by
commencing proceedings under § 8-402.1 of the Real Property Article of the
State Code for a breach of the lease based on the crime or crimes committed
under this section; or
         (ii)   the property is under regulatory oversight by a State agency
that has staff on the property at all times and routinely reports on all crimes
committed on the property.
      (2)   Before a court proceeding is initiated under this subsection, the
Police Department shall:
         (i)   communicate with the property owner about the law and provide
suggestions on how to prevent criminal activity on the property; and
         (ii)   mail by certified mail a letter to the property owner that
describes the crimes committed on the property within a 30-day period and
requests cooperation to avoid the need for court proceedings.
      (3)   Subject to paragraphs (1) and (2), the County may enforce the
provisions of this section through any appropriate court proceedings and may
seek any appropriate forms of relief to restrain or correct a violation of this
section, including abatement and injunctive proceedings.
      (4)   A violation of this section is a Class A civil offense pursuant to
§
9-2-101 of this Code.
(Bill No. 94-20; Bill No. 109-21)
§ 12-7-108. Distribution of literature to purchasers of guns or ammunition.
   (a)   Duties of Health Department. The Anne Arundel County Health Department
shall prepare literature relating to gun safety, gun training, suicide
prevention, mental health, and conflict resolution and distribute the
literature to all establishments that sell guns or ammunition.
   (b)   Requirements. Establishments that sell guns or ammunition shall make
the literature distributed by the Health Department visible and available at
the point of sale. These establishments shall also distribute the literature to
all purchasers of guns or ammunition.
   (c)   Enforcement. An authorized representative of the Anne Arundel County
Health Department may issue a citation to an owner of an establishment that
sells guns or ammunition for a violation of subsection (b).
   (d)   Violations. A violation of this section is a Class C civil offense
pursuant to §
9-2-101 of this Code.
(Bill No. 108-21)
§ 12-7-109. Plastic bags prohibited.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   “Food service facility” means an establishment licensed under §
11-6-101 of this Code.
      (2)   (i)   “Plastic carryout bag” means a plastic bag that is provided
by a retail establishment to a customer at the point of sale and is not a
reusable carryout bag.
         (ii)    “Plastic carryout bag” includes a compostable plastic bag that
meets the specifications of the American Society of Testing and Materials
International Standard Specification for Compostable Plastics D6400.
         (iii)   “Plastic carryout bag” does not include a plastic bag used to
contain, package, or wrap:
            1.   bakery goods or unwrapped prepared foods;
            2.   bulk items, including fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candy,
or small hardware items;
            3.   raw meat or seafood, or other foods the state or consistency
of which is not conducive to the use of anything other than plastic carryout
bags;
            4.   newspapers;
            5.   fresh flowers, potted plants, or herbs;
            6.   hanging garments or dry-cleaned clothes;
            7.   live fish, insects, mollusks, or crustaceans; or
            8.   cigars or loose tobacco.
      (3)   “Point of sale” means the physical or virtual place where a
customer executes payment for goods or services or receives goods or services.
      (4)   “Retail establishment” means a store, food service facility, or any
other establishment that provides bags to its customers as a result of the sale
of goods or services.
      (5)   “Reusable carryout bag” means a bag with stitched handles that is
made of cloth or other washable fabric or a durable material suitable for
multiple reuse, is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse,
and is not made of plastic film.
   (b)   Applicability. This section does not apply to a food service facility
or cafeteria if the food service facility or cafeteria is operated by a school.
   (c)   Prohibition. A retail establishment may not provide a plastic carryout
bag to a customer.
   (d)   Duties.
      (1)   This subsection does not apply to a retail establishment that is a
full-service restaurant, limited-service restaurant, fast food restaurant,
café, delicatessen, coffee shop, vending truck or cart, food truck, business or
institutional cafeteria, or other businesses selling or providing food for
consumption on or off the premises provided that the business is not a
supermarket or grocery store or located in or part of a convenience store.
      (2)   Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), a retail
establishment shall charge, collect, and retain at least 10 cents for each
paper carryout bag and reusable carryout bag that it provides to a customer.
      (3)   A retail establishment may not charge for a paper carryout bag
provided by a pharmacist if the paper carryout bag contains prescription drugs.
      (4)   A retail establishment may provide free reusable carryout bags for
a nine-day period each year from April 22 through April 30 and during a
promotional period established by the retail establishment up to 10 days per
month.
      (5)   (i)   A retail establishment shall post notices that advise
customers to bring reusable carryout bags or to purchase reusable carryout bags
and that each paper carryout bag is subject to a charge of at least 10 cents.
         (ii)   The notices shall be posted at the public entrance to the
retail establishment or at each point of sale and shall be in English and
Spanish. The County shall post an example of the notice in English and Spanish
on the County website.
      (6)   A retail establishment may not advertise, hold out, or state to the
public, directly or indirectly, that reimbursement of any part of the money
collected under paragraph (2) will be assumed or absorbed by the store or
refunded to the customer.
      (7)   A retail establishment shall indicate on the consumer transaction
receipt the number of paper and reusable carryout bags provided by the store
and the total amount of money charged per type of bag.
   (e)   Violations; enforcement.
      (1)   A violation of this section is a Class C civil offense. The County
may enforce this section through injunctive proceedings or any other
appropriate proceedings.
      (2)   A retail establishment shall be given a warning for the first
offense.
      (3)   (i)   Except as provided in subparagraphs (ii) and (iii), multiple
violations during a consumer transaction at a single point of sale constitutes
a single offense.
         (ii)   The provision of one or more plastic carryout bags per consumer
transaction at a single point of sale is a single offense.
         (iii)   The failure to charge, collect, or retain at least 10 cents
per paper or reusable carryout bag that a retail establishment provides to a
customer is a single offense.
      (4)   A fine may not be imposed against a retail establishment more than
once in a seven-day period.
      (5)   (i)   The Department of Health shall enforce this section at all
food service facilities.
         (ii)   The Department of Inspections and Permits shall enforce this
section at all retail establishments that are not food service facilities.
         (iii)   The name and address of any retail establishment found to
violate this section, including the date of the violation, the nature of the
violation, and the amount of any fine imposed, shall be posted on the County’s
website.
(Bill No. 19-23)
ARTICLE 13. PUBLIC WORKS
   Title
      
1.   DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   ROADS
      
3.   PERMITS FOR USE OF COUNTY RIGHTS-OF-WAY
      
4.   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION
      
5.   UTILITIES
      
6.   WEEDS AND VEGETATION
      
7.   WATERSHED PROTECTION AND RESTORATION PROGRAM
Charter reference – §§
537 et seq.
TITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
13-1-101.   Definitions.
   
13-1-102.   Responsibilities of Department.
   
13-1-103.   Service; publication.
   
13-1-104.   Right of entry.
   
13-1-105.   County's prior rights in roads, easements, and rights-of-way.
   
13-1-106.   Disposal of personal property on County property.
   
13-1-107.   Yard waste and trash in County right-of-way.
   
13-1-108.   Civil enforcement.
§ 13-1-101. Definitions.
   In this article, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Department" means the Department of Public Works.
      (2)   "Director" means the Director of Public Works or the Director's
designee.
      (3)   "Private wastewater system" means a wastewater system that is not
owned by the County.
      (4)   "Private water system" means a water system that is not owned by
the County.
      (5)   "Public works" means projects, improvements, or facilities that
serve the public and that are owned and operated by the County, including
roads, utilities, storm water management facilities, and facilities for the
collection or disposition of solid waste.
      (6)   "Recyclable materials" has the meaning stated for "recyclable
materials" in the Environmental Article, § 9-1701, of the State Code.
      (7)   "Road" has the meaning stated in §
18-1-101 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-1-101) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 91-
10)
§ 13-1-102. Responsibilities of Department.
   The responsibilities of the Department include:
      (1)   the general management and implementation of projects included in
the County's annual capital budget, except for those under the administration
of the Board of Education or the Community College;
      (2)   the preparation of design standards, specifications, and details
for the County;
      (3)   the review of major water and sewer infrastructure, transmission
mains, pumping stations, and capital projects;
      (4)   the engineering, design, construction, maintenance, and repair of
County owned roads and the issuance of right-of-way permits;
      (5)   the installation, maintenance, and repair of traffic signals,
traffic signs, pavement markings, and street lighting;
      (6)   the management of the County's watershed and stormwater system as
set forth in §§
16-3-101 et seq. of this Code, including the design and construction of
watershed improvement structures and facilities for improved water quality
management;
      (7)   the collection, disposal, and recycling of residential solid waste
and the operation of facilities for handling solid waste;
      (8)   the operation and maintenance of public water and wastewater
utility systems in the County; and
      (9)   the construction, operation, maintenance, inspection, and repair of
water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants, water pumping stations,
wastewater pumping stations, water storage facilities, water meters, water and
wastewater mains and conduits, and fire hydrants, and the testing and analysis
of water and wastewater.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-2-103) (Bill No. 18-88; Bill No. 67-98; Bill No. 20-
00; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-1-103. Service; publication.
   (a)   Service. An order or notice required by this article to be served
shall be served on the person to whom the order or notice is directed by
certified mail, return receipt requested; by personal delivery to the person
named in the notice or order; or by personal delivery to a person of suitable
age and discretion who resides with the person named in the notice or order. If
two good faith efforts on separate days to serve the person in this fashion
fail, service shall be made by publication in accordance with subsection (b).
   (b)   Notice by publication. A notice required by this article to be given
by publication shall be published at least once a week for two consecutive
weeks in a newspaper circulated in the area affected by the notice or be posted
on the property or in conspicuous public places in the area affected.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-1-102) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-1-104. Right of entry.
   (a)   Generally. An employee of the Department who is engaged in official
duties, after presentation of proper credentials, may enter on private land in
the County at a reasonable hour for the purpose of making surveys,
investigations, engineering studies, reading a meter, or disconnecting,
connecting, turning on, or shutting off or repairing a water or wastewater
line.
   (b)   Prohibition. A person may not hinder, obstruct, or refuse entry to the
employee.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-1-103) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-1-105. County's prior rights in roads, easements, and rights-of-way.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "obstruction" means any object or
structure that blocks or impedes the construction or maintenance of public
works, including facilities that provide electricity, gas, information
services, sewer service, steam, telecommunications, traffic controls, transit
service, video, water, or other services to customers; shrubbery or plants of
any kind; and storage materials.
   (b)   Duty to remove obstruction to construction or maintenance of public
works. A person who places or maintains an obstruction in, on, over, under or
through a County road, easement, or right-of-way shall promptly shift, adjust,
accommodate, or remove the obstruction, in consultation with the County. If the
person fails to act promptly and diligently, as determined by the Department,
the County shall send a notice to the person by first class mail, postage
prepaid, and by email if an email address is available. The notice shall
require the person to shift, adjust, accommodate, or remove the obstruction
within 45 days of the date of the notice.
   (c)   Costs.
      (1)   If a person fails or refuses to shift, adjust, accommodate, or
remove an obstruction within 45 days of the date of notice from the County, the
Department may suspend any active permits or issuance of any permit until the
obstruction is shifted, adjusted, accommodated, or removed.
      (2)   If a person fails or refuses to shift, adjust, accommodate, or
remove an obstruction within 45 days of the date of notice from the County, the
Department may shift, adjust, accommodate, or remove the obstruction and the
Director may deduct the cost of performing the work from any security paid to
the County by the person refusing to do the work or may otherwise charge the
person having or maintaining the obstruction for the cost of performing the
work.
   (d)   Abandonment of facilities.
      (1)   If an owner discontinues use of an above-ground or underground
facility in a County road, easement, or right-of-way for one year or more, the
facility shall be considered abandoned, but shall remain the responsibility of
the owner. An appropriately secured service drop that does not conflict with
existing or new facilities may not be considered abandoned if, upon a customer
request, it can be put back into use.
      (2)   The owner shall immediately remove an abandoned above-ground
facility in a County road, easement, or right-of-way at the owner's expense.
      (3)   Removal of a facility includes removal of all items appurtenant to
the facility, such as man hole covers and pull boxes.
      (4)   (i)   Except as provided in (d)(4)(ii), an underground facility may
be abandoned in place if a permanent record of the existence and accurate
location of the abandoned facility is provided to the Department upon
abandonment.
         (ii)   If an abandoned underground facility prevents or makes
impracticable any improvement to or in a County road, easement, or right-of-
way, the owner shall remove the abandoned underground facility at the owner's
expense within 30 days of the Department's request.
      (5)   If an owner fails or refuses to remove an abandoned facility in a
County road, easement, or right-of-way, after 60 days from the date of a
request from the Department, the Department may remove the abandoned facility,
and the Director shall charge the person having or maintaining the abandoned
facility for the cost of performing the work.
   (e)   Sanction for violation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
article, failure to comply with this section shall be a Class B civil offense,
with each day constituting a separate violation. Civil fines may not exceed any
limits set forth in a franchise agreement.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-1-104) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 2-20)
§ 13-1-106. Disposal of personal property on County property.
   (a)   Prohibition. An owner of rental real property may not dispose of,
store, or abandon the personal property of an evicted tenant on County rights-
of-way, easements, or other County property for more than 48 hours after the
date of the eviction.
   (b)   Removal by County. The Department may remove and dispose of all
personal property that is on County property in violation of this section, and
the Department shall bill the owner of the rental real property for all costs
incurred by the County in connection with the removal and disposal of the
evicted tenant's personal property, including overhead and administrative
costs. The owner of the rental real property shall pay the bill within 30 days
of the date of the bill, and any amount unpaid 30 days after the date of the
bill shall be collected as provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code.
(Bill No. 38-05; Bill No. 23-17)
§ 13-1-107. Yard waste and trash in County right-of-way.
   (a)   Prohibition. A person may not rake, blow, or otherwise deposit leaves,
grass clippings or other yard waste, or litter, trash or rubbish on or into a
County right-of-way, storm drain, or waterway.
   (b)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Properly contained items listed in subsection (a) may be placed in
a County right-of-way for purposes of regularly or specially scheduled
collection by the County.
      (2)   Items in subsection (a) may be placed in a County right-of-way if
they are scheduled to be collected by a private contractor within 48 hours.
   (c)   Sanction for violation. A violation of this section is a Class D civil
offense and subject to a civil fine as provided in §
9-2-101.
(Bill No. 95-16)
§ 13-1-108. Civil enforcement.
   (a)   Generally. The County may enforce the provisions of this article
through injunctive proceedings, an action for specific performance, or any
other appropriate proceedings.
   (b)   Civil fines and damages. It is a Class B civil offense to violate the
provisions of this article relating to wastewater discharge. In addition, a
person who violates the wastewater discharge requirements of this article, who
discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or who
causes damage to or impairs the County system is liable to the County for any
expenses, loss, or damage caused by the violation, including court costs and
attorneys' fees. It is a Class C civil offense to violate the provisions of
this article relating to permits for the use of County rights-of-way. It is a
Class D civil offense to violate any other provision of this article.
   (c)   Remedies cumulative. The remedies available under this section are
cumulative and not exclusive.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-509) (Bill No. 68-88; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 95-
16)
TITLE 2. ROADS
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
13-2-101.   Functions of Director and Office of Planning and Zoning.
   
13-2-102.   Acquisition of property.
Subtitle 2. Roads, Bridges, and Sidewalks
   
13-2-201.   Location of County roads.
   
13-2-202.   Construction requirements.
   
13-2-203.   Acceptance of private roads.
   
13-2-204.   Returning roads to private persons.
   
13-2-205.   Improvement of sidewalks; sidewalk assessments.
   
13-2-206.   Discharging water into roads.
Subtitle 3. Traffic
   
13-2-301.   Authority of Director to regulate.
   
13-2-302.   Obedience to traffic regulations.
   
13-2-303.   Obstructions to vision and vertical clearance.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 13-2-101. Functions of Director and Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (a)   Public works. The Director shall have control over County roads,
sidewalks, storm drains, and bridges in matters pertaining to engineering
design, construction, improvement, and maintenance. Subject to the powers
conferred on the Office of Planning and Zoning, the Director shall construct,
maintain, repair, improve, protect, preserve, rebuild, and control the roads,
sidewalks, storm drains, bridges, and other appurtenances as the Director may
consider necessary or advisable.
   (b)   Joint functions. The Director and the Planning and Zoning Officer
shall act jointly in matters pertaining to the opening, altering, closing,
vacating, straightening, and widening of County roads in accordance with the
General Development Plan and matters pertaining to location, planning, and
functional classification (designating right-of-way widths) of new County
roads, sidewalks, storm drains, bridges, and other appurtenances based on the
General Development Plan.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-101) (Bill No. 67-98; Bill No. 20-00; Bill No. 63-
04)
§ 13-2-102. Acquisition of property.
   (a)   For public purpose.
      (1)   Subject to budget limitations, the Director may acquire property
for the County by purchase or exchange, or if by gift, devise or bequest, after
approval by ordinance of the County Council, for any necessary public purpose,
including in connection with the opening of a new road or sidewalk, for the
construction or repair of a bridge, for the relocation, straightening, or
widening of a road or sidewalk, for the proper drainage of a road or sidewalk,
or for the building of a public building or structure.
      (2)   Each agreement for purchase of real property utilizing funds from
the Advance Land Acquisition Capital Project, Project No. C106700, shall be
contingent upon approval of the purchase by resolution of the County Council.
Prior to approval of the purchase by resolution, the County Council shall
require an independent appraisal, an environmental study, and a feasibility
study for the real property to be purchased.
   (b)   Publication of notice. Before acquiring property as authorized in
subsection (a), the County shall publish notice as provided in §
13-1-103 of the contract price paid or agreed to be paid for the property, the
name of the vendor, a brief description of the property, the total amount of
the purchase price, and the purpose for which the property is to be acquired.
   (c)   Condemnation. If the Director is unable to reach agreement with a
property owner for the acquisition of property, the use of which is required
for any of the purposes specified in this title, the County may condemn the
property under the provisions of law.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, §§ 25-4-104, 25-4-105) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 31-08;
Bill No. 53-18)
State Code reference – Local Government Code, § 10-312; Real Property Article,
§§ 12-101 et seq.
SUBTITLE 2. ROADS, BRIDGES, AND SIDEWALKS
§ 13-2-201. Location of County roads.
   (a)   Generally. If doubt exists as to the proper location or width of a
County road, the County may cause the road to be surveyed and a description and
plat made of the road and recorded among the County's records. The description
shall be made by reference to the original description of the road when the
road was acquired by grant or condemnation. If the original description cannot
be found, the description and plat shall be made of the road as existing.
   (b)   Rebuttable presumption of correctness. The County and the courts shall
consider the description and plat as official and prima facie correct until the
contrary is proven.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-102) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-2-202. Construction requirements.
   A person may not construct, reconstruct, repair, grade, improve, or maintain
a public road, bridge, or sidewalk unless the construction, reconstruction,
repair, improvement, grading, or maintenance complies with all applicable law,
regulations, the Design Manual, and the County's Standard Specifications and
Details for Construction.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-103) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-2-203. Acceptance of private roads.
   (a)   Generally. Established private roads that are connected to existing
State or County roads may be proposed for acceptance into the County road
system under the conditions and procedures specified in this section.
   (b)   Petition. The owner or owners of a private road, including those with
an easement or other property interest in it, may request that the County
accept the road into the County road system. The petition shall be in the form
required by the Director and shall be signed by all owners of the road.
    (c)   Acceptance. The County may accept a private road if:
      (1)   the road will serve the convenience of the public because it
intersects with an existing State or County road and will serve a minimum of
five dwellings or commercial buildings for each mile petitioned;
      (2)   each owner is willing to dedicate the road to public use by deed;
and
      (3)   the road meets all applicable law, regulations, the Design Manual,
and the County's Standard Specifications and Details for Construction.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, §§ 25-4-106, 25-4-107) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-2-204. Returning roads to private persons.
   (a)   Petition. All owners of property abutting a public road that has been
improved or altered from its natural state may petition the County to return
the public road to private ownership for use as a private road. The petition
shall be in the form required by the Director and shall be signed by all owners
of property abutting the road.
   (b)   Review and notification. On receipt, the Director shall review the
petition for compliance with this section. A petition that does not comply with
this section shall be denied. Otherwise, the Director shall notify the
petitioners that the petition is valid.
   (c)   Publication and posting. On receipt of a notice of validity, the
petitioner shall give notice of the petition both by publication in a newspaper
and by posting, as set forth in §
13-1-103(b). The notice shall specify the length, location, and termini of the
petitioned road, the person to whom title will be given if approved, and the
deadline and address for filing an opposition with the Director. Posting shall
include signs at both ends of the petitioned road. The petitioners shall pay
all costs of publication and posting.
   (d)   Opposition. Any person claiming a right of use or other interest in
the petitioned road who opposes returning the road to private persons shall
file an opposition with the Director within 30 days after the first newspaper
publication or posting of the road, whichever is later. If no opposition is
timely filed, the Director may proceed to decide the petition in accordance
with subsection (f).
   (e)   Additional documentation. The Director may require additional
documentation from petitioners or any opponents, including a title examination
or survey. The Director also may obtain additional information from any source,
including a title examination or survey, and charge or apportion the costs
associated with obtaining the information to the petitioners or any opponents.
   (f)   Decision. Within six months after the date of the first publication,
the Director shall approve or deny the petition. A petition for abandonment
shall be denied if the Director determines that the road is needed for present
or future public use.
   (g)   Referral to the County Executive. If the petition is approved, the
Director shall send a recommendation to the County Executive for execution of a
deed or deeds, after advertisement of the disposition as required by Local
Government Code, § 10-312, of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-110) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 17-06)
§ 13-2-205. Improvement of sidewalks; sidewalk assessments.
   (a)   Scope. The Director may cause and direct the owner of real property
that abuts a road to grade, lay out, pave, repave, construct, reconstruct,
repair, extend, widen, straighten, or improve a sidewalk in accordance with the
plans and specifications prepared by the Department if the Director determines
that the work is required in the interest of public safety and welfare.
   (b)   Expenses; notice. Work required of a property owner under subsection
(a) shall be done at the expense of the property owner after receipt of a
notice from the Director to perform the work. The notice shall specify the work
to be done, the manner of doing the work, and the materials to be used. The
notice shall also state a time limit for compliance of not less than 30 days
from service of the notice.
   (c)   Hearing. A person aggrieved by the terms and conditions of the notice
may apply to the Director for a hearing and shall be given an opportunity to be
heard. At the hearing, the Director may revise, alter, affirm, or rescind the
notice.
   (d)   Failure to comply. If a property owner fails to comply with a final
notice within the time specified in the notice, the Director may procure the
performance of the work by the County work force or by contract. The cost and
expense of the work, including overhead and administrative costs, shall be
certified to the Controller, together with the names of the owners of the
property in front of which the work was done, and the amount shall be billed to
the property owners. The property owners shall pay the bill within 30 days fo
the date of the bill, and any amount unpaid 30 days after the date of the bill
shall be collected as provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code.
   (e)   Payment to County. On application, the County may provide for payment
of an assessment in not more than five annual installments if the property
owner and the County entered into an agreement for installment payments before
performance of the work..
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-112) (Bill No. 78-85; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 23-
17)
§ 13-2-206. Discharging water into roads.
   A person may not empty, discharge, or cause or allow to be emptied or
discharged from premises occupied by the person, directly or indirectly, to or
on any County road a liquid other than rainwater flowing in its natural course.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-113) (Bill No. 63-04)
SUBTITLE 3. TRAFFIC
§ 13-2-301. Authority of Director to regulate.
   (a)   To provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic and to
ensure the safety of citizens using the roads and highways, the Director may:
      (1)   conduct analyses of traffic accidents and engineering
investigations of traffic conditions;
      (2)   determine the timing, type, size, and location of signs, signals,
markings, pylons, channels, and other devices for directing or regulating
vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   designate intersections as stop intersections or through roads;
      (4)   approve or disapprove the location of bus stops and taxicab stands
or rescind or modify a prior approval;
      (5)   adopt rules, regulations, orders, and directives relating to the
movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (6)   make recommendations to the County Executive for the improvement of
traffic conditions that cannot be accomplished by the directives, orders,
rules, or regulations adopted by the Director;
      (7)   prohibit or restrict parking on roads;
      (8)   designate one-way roads for improvement of traffic conditions;
      (9)   adopt temporary rules and regulations governing parking, traffic,
and the movement of vehicles in the vicinity of roadwork or a polling site,
fair, game, parade, or other event where a large gathering of people or
vehicles is anticipated;
      (10)   regulate the movement, standing, or stopping of commercial
vehicles in residential areas; and
      (11)   place official signs that regulate the parking, stopping,
standing, or movement of traffic within or near a road or highway.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-301) (Bill No. 40-96; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 90-
05; Bill No. 72-14; Bill No. 78-19)
§ 13-2-302. Obedience to traffic regulations.
   A person may not violate a rule, regulation, order, or directive adopted by
the Director. A person may not fail or refuse to comply with the instructions
or direction on a post, sign, or other device erected by the authority of the
Director for the regulation of traffic or parking on roads or on property owned
or leased by the County or the Board of Education.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-302) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-2-303. Obstructions to vision and vertical clearance.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, "vertical clearance" means
clearance for vehicles traveling on roadways underneath and along side of
overhanging trees, bushes, vines, undergrowth or other types of vegetation,
which is measured up from each edge of and across the traveled portion of the
roadway.
   (b)   Notice and service. If the Director determines that trees, bushes,
vines, weeds, undergrowth, loose earth, or other obstructions other than
buildings or similar structures affixed to the ground exist on private property
that obstruct the vision of operators of vehicles traveling on a road or
obstruct vertical clearance of at least 14 feet, the Director shall serve the
owner, agent, lessee, or other person in control of the property with a written
notice containing a description of the premises on which the obstruction
exists, a statement of the particulars of the obstruction, a statement of the
steps necessary to correct the condition, and an order directing that
corrective steps be taken within a stated period of time. The notice shall be
served as provided in §
13-1-103.
   (c)   Hearing. A person aggrieved by a notice issued under this section may
petition the Director in writing for a hearing within 10 days after service.
Within 10 days after receipt of the petition, the Director may affirm, modify,
or rescind the notice. An official of the County may not remove an obstruction
or enforce the notice until after the hearing has been held and the notice
upheld, the time to petition for a hearing has expired without a petition
having been filed, or an appeal to the Board of Appeals becomes final.
   (d)   Failure to comply. If a person fails to comply with the provisions of
any notice issued under this section, the County shall enter the property on
which the obstruction is located and remove all or that part of the obstruction
necessary to eliminate the traffic hazard.
   (e)   Costs. If the Director provides for the elimination of an obstruction
under this section, the Director shall file with the Controller's office a
certified statement of the cost to the County of the elimination, together with
proof of service. The Office of Finance shall invoice the owner of the property
on which the obstruction was located for the cost of the removal, together with
the costs of service. The invoice shall be payable within 30 days of the date
of the invoice and any sums unpaid 30 days after the date of billing shall be
collected as provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-402) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 17-14)
TITLE 3. PERMITS FOR USE OF COUNTY RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
Subtitle 1. General Provisions
   
13-3-101.   Definitions.
   
13-3-102.   Scope.
   
13-3-103.   Compliance with other law and regulations.
   
13-3-104.   Review and automatic adjustment of fees.
   
13-3-105.   Conduit.
   
13-3-106.   Small cell systems.
Subtitle 2. Permits
   
13-3-201.   Permit.
   
13-3-202.   Applications.
   
13-3-203.   Approval or denial; contents; notification and diligent
prosecution.
   
13-3-204.   Duration and validity; non-transferability.
   
13-3-205.   Maintenance permits.
   
13-3-206.   Permit to excavate in recently paved right-of-way.
   
13-3-207.   Permit to be available at site.
   
13-3-208.   Warranty; liability.
   
13-3-209.   Indemnification.
Subtitle 3. Security and Fees
   
13-3-301.   Security for excavation.
   
13-3-302.   Permit fees.
   
13-3-303.   Inspection fees.
   
13-3-304.   Additional fees.
   
13-3-305.   Retention or refund of fees.
   
13-3-306.   Maintenance permit and inspection fee due dates; penalties.
Subtitle 4. Excavations
   
13-3-401.   Coordination of excavations.
   
13-3-402.   Joint excavation.
   
13-3-403.   Notice.
   
13-3-404.   Complaints.
Subtitle 5. Enforcement
   
13-3-501.   Cumulative enforcement measures.
   
13-3-502.   Stop work order; permit modification or revocation.
   
13-3-503.   Order to cure.
SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 13-3-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Excavation" means any work in the surface or subsurface of a
right-of-way.
      (2)   "Facility" means all appurtenances or tangible things owned,
leased, operated, or licensed by a utility that are or are proposed to be
located in a right-of-way.
      (3)   "Owner" means a person who owns a facility that is or is proposed
to be installed or maintained in a right-of-way.
      (4)   "Right-of-way" means the area across, along, beneath, in, on, over,
under, upon, or within the dedicated alleys, boulevards, lanes, roads,
sidewalks, and streets owned or maintained by the County.
      (5)   "Small cell system" has the meaning set forth in §
18-1-101 of this Code.
      (6)   "Utility" means an owner whose facilities in a right-of-way are
used to provide electricity, gas, information services, sewer service, steam,
telecommunications, traffic controls, transit service, video, water, or other
services to customers.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-101) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06; Bill No. 76-19)
§ 13-3-102. Scope.
   This title governs all occupancy, use, and activity in a right-of-way other
than occupancy, use, or activity:
      (1)   by the County unless expressly so stated;
      (2)   governed by a permit issued by the Department of Inspections and
Permits; or
      (3)   governed by a public works agreement.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-102) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-3-103. Compliance with other law and regulations.
   All excavations, construction, maintenance, and other work in a right-of-
way, including work by the County in its capacity as a utility, shall be
performed in accordance with all applicable law, regulations, the Design
Manual, and the County's Standard Specifications and Details for Construction.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-103) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-3-104. Review and automatic adjustment of fees.
   (a)   Requirement. Each fiscal year, the Controller shall adjust all fees
set forth in this title based on the methodology set forth in subsection (b).
   (b)   Method of adjustment. The base for computing an adjustment is the
January Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers for the United States,
published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The initial index to be referenced is January, 2002. Beginning in January,
2003, a percentage change shall be calculated between the current year index
and the base year index. All fees shall be adjusted by the percentage change in
the index rounded to the nearest dollar, and the adjustments automatically
shall be effective on the first day of July for each fiscal year.
   (c)   Index. If the index is changed so that the base year is different, the
index shall be converted in accordance with the conversion factor published by
the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. If the index
is discontinued or revised, the government index or computation with which it
is replaced shall be used to obtain substantially the same result as would have
been obtained if the index had not been discontinued or revised.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-104) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-3-105. Conduit.
   The County may require conduit for underground facilities in the paved
portion of the right-of-way.
(Bill No. 53-06)
§ 13-3-106. Small cell systems.
   In addition to the other requirements of this title, any small cell system,
as defined in §
18-1-101 of this Code, locating in County rights-of-way or attaching to County
assets shall enter into a lease or license agreement with the County in a form
provided by the County, the terms of which will include:
      (1)   compliance with all requirements of this title;
      (2)   compliance with all requirements of §
18-10-155 of this Code;
      (3)   requirements to remove a small cell system at the owner's expense
if the system is no longer needed;
      (4)   provisions relating to the County's rights and owner's obligations
if a small cell system is abandoned;
      (5)   the fees for the use of the County rights-of-way and attaching to
County assets;
      (6)   requirements for insurance related to the small cell system and
indemnification of the County; and
      (7)   bonding requirements, including bonding against the failure to
remove any abandoned or improperly placed small cell system and failure of the
owner of the small cell system to pay any outstanding amounts due to the
County.
(Bill No. 76-19)
SUBTITLE 2. PERMITS
§ 13-3-201. Permit.
   (a)   When required. Except as provided in subsection (b), a person may not
occupy, use, or engage in any activity in a right-of-way without first
obtaining a permit from the Department of Public Works. If other law limits the
County's ability to require a permit, this subsection shall be construed to
require a request and all other requirements of this title shall apply to the
request.
   (b)   When not required. No permit is required for a work activity that
makes no material change to the footprint of a facility or to the airspace,
surface, or subsurface of a right-of-way if the activity does not disrupt or
impede traffic in the traveled portion of a right-of-way.
   (c)   Other legal authority; compliance with agreements. The issuance of a
permit does not relieve the applicant from obtaining any other legal authority
that may be necessary to occupy or use the right-of-way or from complying with
a franchise, license, or other such agreement.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-201) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06; Bill No. 76-19)
§ 13-3-202. Applications.
   (a)   Generally. An application for a permit shall be submitted in the
format and manner specified by the Department of Public Works.
   (b)   County to maintain records. When the County in its capacity as a
utility engages in any activity that includes an excavation in the paved
portion of a right-of-way, the County shall keep a record of the date,
location, purpose, and size of the excavation.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-202) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-203. Approval or denial; contents; notification and diligent
prosecution.
   (a)   Generally. The Director may approve, conditionally approve, or deny an
application for a permit.
   (b)   Approval. If an application is approved, the Director shall issue a
permit to the applicant.
   (c)   Conditional approval. If an application is conditionally approved, the
Director may condition the permit with specified requirements that preserve and
maintain the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience.
   (d)   Denial. If an application is denied, the Director shall advise the
applicant by a written, electronic, or facsimile communication of the basis for
the denial.
   (e)   Notification and diligent prosecution. For activity authorized by a
permit, a permittee shall notify the Department each day that activity is
performed and shall prosecute the activity diligently to its conclusion.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-203) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-204. Duration and validity; non-transferability.
   (a)   Duration. A permit expires 90 days after issuance but the Department
may extend the expiration date for good cause.
   (b)   Non-transferable. A permit is not transferable.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-204) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-205. Maintenance permits.
   (a)   When allowed. The Director may issue a maintenance permit on an annual
basis to a utility instead of issuing individual permits for activities in the
right-of-way covered by the maintenance permit.
   (b)   Scope of permit. A maintenance permit covers:
      (1)   emergency activity in or under the paved or unpaved area of the
right-of-way that is necessary for the preservation of life, health, or
property or for the restoration of interrupted service; and
      (2)   those non-emergency activities, excluding excavations in or under
the paved rights-of-way, that are specified in the permit, including:
         (i)   an activity that makes no material change to the footprint of
the facility or to the airspace, surface, or subsurface of a right-of-way but
disturbs or impedes traffic on a local road;
         (ii)   abandoning facilities;
         (iii)   replacing overhead poles in kind;
         (iv)   new individual services to a residence or building from
existing facilities that are on the same side of the right-of-way, so long as
the activity related to the service does not exceed 300 feet; and
         (v)   directional boring under sidewalks and driveway aprons.
   (c)   Notification to Department. For emergency activity, the permittee
shall notify the Department during or within 24 hours after the activity. For
non-emergency activities, the permittee shall notify the Department at least 48
hours before the activity takes place. For emergency and non-emergency
activities, the utility shall provide information about the activity as
required by the Department.
   (d)   Survey. By September 1, 2006, a utility shall file with the Department
any existing plats or drawings that show the location of underground facilities
in the County's rights-of-way. Thereafter, on an annual basis, the utility
shall file in the form required by the Department a full and complete survey,
including descriptions and as-built maps, of the location of underground
facilities installed in the County's rights-of-way in the previous year.
   (e)   Fees. When a utility seeks the issuance of a maintenance permit, it
shall pay the permit and inspection fees required by §§
13-3-302 and
13-3-303 when billed in accordance with §
13-3-306.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-205) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06; Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 27-21)
§ 13-3-206. Permit to excavate in recently paved right-of-way.
   The Director may not issue a permit to excavate in a right-of-way that was
reconstructed, repaved, or resurfaced in the preceding two-year period unless
the excavation facilitates the deployment of new technology or the Director
finds other good cause for issuance.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-206) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-207. Permit to be available at site.
   A permit or a copy of the permit shall be available for review at the site
for the duration of the activity allowed by the permit.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-207) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-208. Warranty; liability.
   (a)   Warranty. For a period of two years after satisfactory completion of
work in a right-of-way, the owner and permittee warrant and guarantee the
quality of the work performed and are responsible for maintaining the site free
from any defects resulting from the quality of the work and, in the event of
such defects, for repairing or restoring the site to a condition that complies
with all applicable law, regulations, the Design Manual, and the County's
Standard Specifications and Details for Construction. Any repair or restoration
during the warranty period shall cause the warranty period to run for one
additional year beyond the original two-year period.
   (b)   Issuance of permit or other acts by County do not affect liability.
The issuance of a permit or any inspection, repair, suggestion, approval, or
acquiescence of any person affiliated with the County does not relieve the
owner or permittee from the warranty and liability provisions of this section,
the indemnification provisions of §
13-3-209, or any other term or condition of this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-208) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-209. Indemnification.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "claims" means all actions, costs,
damages, demands, expenses, fines, injuries, judgments, liabilities, losses,
penalties, suits, fees, attorneys' fees, and costs.
   (b)   Requirement. An owner and permittee and their successors and assigns
shall indemnify, defend, protect, and hold harmless the County, including its
officers, agents, and employees, from and against:
      (1)   all claims allegedly arising directly or indirectly from any act,
omission, or negligence of the owner, the permittee, their subcontractors, or
the officers, agents, or employees of any of them, relating to the permit or
the activity authorized by the permit; and
      (2)   all damage to County property, including damage to County roads,
rights-of-way, and public works, arising directly or indirectly from any act,
omission, or negligence of the owner, the permittee, their subcontractors, or
the officers, agents, or employees of any of them, relating to the permit or
the activity authorized by the permit, except that this subsection does not
apply to gradual degradation or ordinary wear and tear of roads or rights-of-
way.
   (c)   Duty to defend. Each owner and permittee has an immediate and
independent obligation to defend the County from any claims that actually or
potentially fall within the indemnity provision, even if the allegations are or
may be groundless, false, or fraudulent.
   (d)   County cause of action. The County has a cause of action for indemnity
against each owner and permittee for any costs the County may incur as a result
of defending or satisfying any claims that arise from or in connection with the
permit, except for claims resulting directly from the negligence or wilful
misconduct of the County.
   (e)   Obligations survive permit. The indemnification obligations assumed
under the permit survive expiration of the permit and completion of the
activity authorized by the permit.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-209) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
SUBTITLE 3. SECURITY AND FEES
§ 13-3-301. Security for excavation.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to persons who provide security for
the performance of their obligations in a right-of-way pursuant to other law or
agreement.
   (b)   Amount. A utility that applies for a permit to excavate in the right-
of-way shall submit and maintain with the Department security for the benefit
of Anne Arundel County in the amount of $20,000, which shall serve as security
for multiple permits so long as a constant balance of $20,000 is maintained.
   (c)   Form. Security shall be in the form of cash, an irrevocable letter of
credit, a bond, or other security acceptable to the Controller and the Director
to secure the faithful performance of the obligations of the owner and
applicant under the permit and compliance with all terms and conditions of this
title.
   (d)   Deductions. The Director may make deductions from the security to pay
fees, offset the costs for any excavations or other repairs made by the
Department, or pay any fines or costs associated with violations of this title.
   (e)   Retention. The County shall retain the security for the warranty
period set forth in §
13-3-208(a). Upon the expiration of the warranty period, on written request of
the permittee, the security, less any deductions, shall be returned to the
permittee, without interest.
   (f)   Person other than utility. The Department may require a person other
than a utility to provide security alone or to enter into an agreement with the
County that includes security to ensure the faithful performance of the
obligation of the owner and applicant under the permit and compliance with all
terms and conditions of this title. The agreement shall include provisions
relating to deductions from the security and to retention and return of the
security.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-301) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-302. Permit fees.
   (a)   Generally. An applicant shall pay a fee of $35 for each individual
permit except that a utility shall pay a fee of $10 for each activity conducted
under a maintenance permit.
   (b)   County transfer of funds. Whenever the County in its capacity as a
utility engages in activity for which a utility or other applicant would be
required to pay a permit fee under this section, the County shall transfer by
the end of each fiscal year from the utility fund to the general fund a fee of
$10 for each such activity, except that no fees shall be transferred in
connection with a County capital project or in connection with a work activity
that makes no material change to the footprint of a facility or to the surface
or subsurface of a right-of-way.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-302) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-303. Inspection fees.
   (a)   Generally. A permittee shall pay the inspection fees provided for in
this section.
   (b)   Fees under maintenance permit. Under a maintenance permit, the
inspection fee for activity other than an excavation in a paved area is $7 and
the inspection fee for an emergency excavation in a paved area is $120.
   (c)   All other permits. For all permits other than for activity under a
maintenance permit, the permittee shall pay a base inspection fee of $80. The
permittee also shall pay the following inspection fees:
Type of Work                        Inspection Fee
Boring:
   Grassy area                   $40 for every 750 linear ft.
   Road crossing                 $40 for every road crossing
   Longitudinal in paved area    $40 for every 500 linear ft.
Trenching:
   Grassy area                   $40 for every 500 linear ft.
   Paved area                    $40 for every 200 linear ft.
Excavation in paved area by County  $40 each
All other excavations in paved area $40 each
 
   (d)   County transfer of funds. Whenever the County in its capacity as a
utility engages in activity for which a utility or other applicant would be
required to pay inspection fees, the County shall transfer by the end of each
fiscal year from the utility fund to the general fund the inspection fees
required by this section, except that no fees shall be transferred in
connection with a County capital project or in connection with a work activity
that makes no material change to the footprint of a facility or to the surface
or subsurface of a right-of-way.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-303) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-304. Additional fees.
   (a)   Generally. When administration of this title for a particular activity
is or will be unusually costly to the Department, the Director may require an
applicant or permittee to pay any sum in excess of the amounts provided under
§§
13-3-302 and
13-3-303. This additional sum may not exceed actual costs incurred by the
Department and shall be charged on a time and materials basis.
   (b)   Basis. Whenever additional fees are charged, the Director shall
provide in writing the basis for the additional fees.
   (c)   Small cell systems.
      (1)   In addition to those amounts provided under §§
13-3-302,
13-3-303, and
13-3-304(a), an applicant for a permit to locate or maintain a small cell
system in the County right-of-way shall pay an application fee as follows:
         (i)   for installation of a structure and attachment of a small cell
system where no structure currently exists, $4,000;
         (ii)   for replacement of an existing structure and attachment of a
small cell system on the replacement structure, $2,100;
         (iii)   for placement of a small cell system on an existing structure
or modification of an existing small cell system that changes the size or
configuration of the structure or the small cell system, $2,000; and
         (iv)   for modification of an existing small cell system on an
existing structure that does not change the size or configuration of the
structure or the small cell system, $1,475.
      (2)   The fees set forth in paragraph (1) shall increase each July first
based on the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers ("CPI-U") for the
previous January.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-304) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06; Bill No. 76-19)
§ 13-3-305. Retention or refund of fees.
   If an applicant withdraws an application for a permit before the start of
any work or if the Director denies the permit, the permit fee under §
13-3-302 shall be retained and the inspection fees under §
13-3-303 shall be returned.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, §25-3-305) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-306. Maintenance permit and inspection fee due dates; penalties.
   A utility shall be billed quarterly for maintenance permit and inspection
fees, and payment shall be made within 30 days of the date of the invoice. The
Office of Finance shall assess a penalty charge of 10% on maintenance permit
and inspection fees that are not paid within 30 days of the date of the
invoice.
(Bill No. 27-21)
SUBTITLE 4. EXCAVATIONS
§ 13-3-401. Coordination of excavations.
   (a)   Three-year plan. On the first day of October, each utility shall
prepare and submit to the Department a plan, in a format specified by the
Department, that shows all foreseeable excavations in the paved portion of the
right-of-way anticipated to be done in the next three years or a statement that
no excavations are proposed. The utility shall report to the Department
promptly any changes in the plan as soon as those changes become reasonably
foreseeable.
   (b)   Disclosure of information in the plan. The Department may disclose
information contained in a three-year plan to another utility only on a need-
to-know basis in order to facilitate coordination and avoid unnecessary
excavation. If a utility clearly and appropriately identifies information
contained in the plan as proprietary, a trade secret, or otherwise protected
from disclosure, then to the maximum extent permissible under federal, state,
and local laws applicable to public records, the Department may not disclose
that information to the public. If the Department determines that information
is not clearly or appropriately identified, the Department shall notify the
utility that the Department intends to disclose the requested information
unless ordered otherwise by a court.
   (c)   County plan. The Department shall prepare a five-year repaving plan
showing all proposed repaving and reconstruction in the paved rights-of-way,
revise and update the plan on an annual basis after receipt of the three-year
plans from the utilities, and make the plan available for public inspection.
   (d)   Coordination. The Department shall review the three-year plans and
identify conflicts and opportunities for coordination of excavations in the
paved rights-of-way. Each applicant shall coordinate, to the extent
practicable, with each potentially affected owner and permittee to minimize
disruption in the right-of-way.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-401) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-402. Joint excavation.
   If utilities propose to do excavations in the same paved rights-of-way
within a three-year period, the Department shall issue permits for the work in
a manner that maximizes coordination and minimizes the total period of
construction.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-402) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-403. Notice.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to non-emergency activity in the County's
rights-of-way when the activity adjoins residentially zoned and developed
property and will not be completed and restored in a period of 30 days or less.
   (b)   Requirement. A permittee shall:
      (1)   at least 72 hours before commencement of the activity, post and
maintain a notice that is located at the beginning and end points of the
activity;
      (2)   at least 72 hours before commencement of the activity, deliver
notice to each address in the area of the activity and within 175 feet of its
boundaries; or
      (3)   at least 15 calendar days before commencement of the activity, mail
written notice to each address in the area of the activity and within 175 feet
of its boundaries.
   (c)   Additional notice. For good cause, the Director may require a
permittee to employ a combination of the notices required by subsection (b).
   (d)   Content. The notices required by subsection (b) shall include the
name, telephone number, and address of the owner and permittee, a description
of the work to be performed, the duration of the work, and the name, address,
and telephone number of a person who will provide information to and receive
complaints from any member of the public concerning the work. Posted notices
shall be in a format and size approved by the Department.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-403) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-404. Complaints.
   (a)   Definition. For purposes of this section, "complaint" means an
allegation by a resident that a utility is excavating, constructing, or
performing other work in a right-of-way in violation of this title. The term
does not include a service-related complaint handled by a utility in the
ordinary course of its business.
   (b)   Utility complaint procedure. A utility shall establish and file with
the Department written procedures for receiving, acting on, and resolving
complaints. The utility shall investigate a complaint and notify the resident
in writing within ten days after receipt of the complaint of the results of the
investigation and of any proposed action or resolution. The utility also shall
notify the resident of the right to file a complaint with the Department.
   (c)   County complaint procedures. A resident may initiate a review of a
complaint previously made to a utility by filing with the Department the
complaint and any associated correspondence or other papers. If the Department
determines after a review of the complaint and other papers that there is no
violation of this title, the Department shall notify the resident and the
utility. Otherwise, the Department may require the resident and the utility to
submit further statements in support of their respective positions. The utility
or the resident may request in their statements that the Department conduct an
informal discussion of the complaint. If requested, the Department shall
conduct an informal discussion, in person or by teleconference. Promptly
thereafter, the Department shall issue a written decision. If the Department
determines that the utility violated a provision of this title, the Department
may employ one or more of the enforcement measures allowed by this article.
(Bill No. 53-06)
SUBTITLE 5. ENFORCEMENT
§ 13-3-501. Cumulative enforcement measures.
   The Director may employ one or more of the enforcement measures set forth in
this title, and the use of one of the measures does not preclude use of others.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-501) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
§ 13-3-502. Stop work order; permit modification or revocation.
   (a)   Grounds for issuance. The Director may issue a stop work order, impose
conditions on a permit, suspend or revoke a permit, or suspend issuance of
future permits if the Director determines that:
      (1)   a person has violated applicable law, regulations, the Design
Manual, the County's Standard Specifications and Details for Construction, or
any term, condition, or limitation of a permit;
      (2)   activity in the right-of-way poses a hazardous situation or
constitutes a public nuisance, public emergency, or other threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare;
      (3)   obstructions in, on, over, under, or through County roads,
easements, or rights- of-way have not been removed or relocated as required by
the Department;
      (4)   fees, securities, and other costs are due and owning to the County;
or
      (5)   there is a paramount public purpose.
   (b)   Notice; compliance. The Director shall notify the permittee of action
taken under subsection (a) by a written, electronic, or facsimile
communication, and the permittee shall comply immediately after receipt of the
notice.
   (c)   Content. A stop work order shall state the conditions under which work
may be resumed and shall be posted at the site.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-502) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06; Bill No. 2-20)
§ 13-3-503. Order to cure.
   (a)   Generally. The Director may order an owner or permittee who has
violated applicable law, regulations, the Design Manual, the County's Standard
Specifications and Details for Construction, or any term, condition, or
limitation of a permit, to cure the violation within the time specified in the
order.
   (b)   Content. An order issued under this section shall warn the person that
a failure to comply within the time specified makes the person subject to the
imposition of a civil fine under §
13-1-108 and to liability for any costs incurred by the Department to
effectuate compliance.
   (c)   Noncompliance; completion of work by County. If the owner or permittee
fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with an order issued under this section,
the Director may complete the excavation or other work in the right-of-way in
any manner the Director deems appropriate, and the owner and permittee shall
compensate the Department for all costs incurred, including costs for
administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, notification,
remediation, repair, and restoration. The cost of the work may be deducted from
any security required by §
13-3-301. The Department's completion of an excavation or other work in the
right-of-way does not relieve the owner or permittee from the warranty and
liability provisions of §
13-3-208, the indemnification provisions of §
13-3-209, or any other term or condition of this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-3-503) (Bill No. 15-02; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 53-
06)
TITLE 4. SOLID WASTE COLLECTION
Section
   
13-4-101.   "Solid waste" defined.
   
13-4-102.   Powers and duties of Director.
   
13-4-103.   Collection service areas.
   
13-4-104.   Collection practices; containers.
   
13-4-105.   Solid waste service charge.
   
13-4-106.   Commercial recycling.
   
13-4-107.   County owned or operated landfills and solid waste disposal
facilities.
   
13-4-108.   Unauthorized removal of recyclable materials.
   
13-4-109.   Solid Waste Financial Assurance Fund.
§ 13-4-101. "Solid waste" defined.
   In this title, "solid waste" means trash, recyclables, yard waste, and other
waste matter, but the term does not include explosives, poisons, acids and
caustics, hot ashes, coals, hazardous waste, or medical waste.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-6-101) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-4-102. Powers and duties of Director.
   (a)   Powers. For a sanitary landfill or other solid waste facility owned
and operated by the County, the Director may:
      (1)   adopt rules and regulations and issue orders and directives
relating to administration and operation;
      (2)   establish operating hours and schedules for use;
      (3)   prohibit the acceptance of solid waste that may prove detrimental
to the operation and projected life of the landfill or other facility; and
      (4)   prohibit the acceptance of solid waste that originates or is
generated outside the County if acceptance of the waste would be detrimental to
the best interests of the County.
   (b)   Public record. The Director shall keep a record of the rules,
regulations, orders, and directives adopted or issued by the Director. The
record shall be open to public inspection at reasonable times.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-6-201) (Bill No. 34-03; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-4-103. Collection service areas.
   The Director may establish solid waste collection service areas in the
County, except in the City of Annapolis. The Director may have solid waste
collected by County employees or by independent contractors.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-6-102) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-4-104. Collection practices; containers.
   (a)   Container. Each person whose property is supplied with collection
service by the County shall collect the solid waste accumulating on the
premises into a suitable container.
   (b)   Number. No more than four containers of solid waste other than
recyclables may be placed for removal on any one day. There is no restriction
on the number of containers of recyclables, including yard waste, that may be
placed for removal.
   (c)   Placement and removal. Solid waste shall be placed for collection at
the curb line of the road so as to provide easy and safe access for the
collectors. Containers shall be placed curbside no earlier than 5:00 p.m. on
the day preceding collection. Each empty container shall be taken in and stored
by midnight on the day of collection.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, §§ 25-6-104, 25-6-105) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-4-105. Solid waste service charge.
   (a)   Generally. There is a service charge for each property supplied with
County curbside collection service. The service charges in the aggregate for
County curbside collection service shall be sufficient to defray the cost of
solid waste services provided by the County.
   (b)   Amount. There is a service charge in the amount of $426.00 per fiscal
year. For the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2026, and for each fiscal year
thereafter, the County Executive shall set the service charge for County
curbside collection service and may increase the charge in an amount not to
exceed 5.00% of the then current charge. Any increase greater than 5.00% shall
be set by the County Council by ordinance. The service charge shall be
collected as provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code.
   (c)   Unoccupied property due to military service. At a property owner’s
request, if residential property will be unoccupied for three months or more
because an owner of the property is activated to military service pursuant to
an Executive Order issued by the President of the United States, the Director
may prorate the service charge based on the amount of time the property is
unoccupied. The property owner shall provide the Department with a copy of the
military orders calling the owner to active duty.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5A-102; Art. 25, § 25-6-106) (Bill No. 29-95; Bill No.
47-96; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 7-05; Bill No. 38-11; Bill No. 43-12; Bill No.
5-13; Bill No. 43-21; Bill No. 36-23; Bill No. 46-24; Bill No. 44-25)
§ 13-4-106. Commercial recycling.
   (a)   Generally. The Director shall establish a voluntary curbside
collection service for recyclables from persons whose property is not supplied
with curbside collection service under §
13-4-105, and may set reasonable criteria for determining eligibility for
participation in the service.
   (b)   Service charge. There is a service charge, to be determined by the
Director on a property-by-property basis based on the cost of collection from
that property, to be charged to each person that participates in the voluntary
curbside collection program. This service charge will be billed annually by the
Office of Finance.
(Bill No. 4-08)
§ 13-4-107. County owned or operated landfills and solid waste disposal
facilities.
   (a)   Scope. This section establishes charges, requirements, and
prohibitions for the disposal of solid waste at sanitary landfills or other
facilities owned or operated by the County. The charges established in this
section do not apply to solid waste that the County is obligated to accept
pursuant to a contract.
   (b)   City of Annapolis. The County may contract with the Mayor and Aldermen
of the City of Annapolis to accept solid waste generated within the
jurisdiction of the City at rates and under conditions provided for in the
agreement so long as the rate charged for solid waste disposal to the City of
Annapolis is not lower than the rate charged for solid waste disposal in the
County.
   (c)   Requirements and prohibitions. All solid waste shall be contained or
covered so as to avoid the loss of waste from the vehicle during transportation
and the creation of litter. A person may not dispose of solid waste that
originates or is generated outside of the County and may not dispose of off-
the-road equipment tires or combustion ash.
   (d)   Charges. Each person delivering solid waste shall pay the charges set
forth in the chart in this subsection:
 
Solid waste delivered by a commercial   $100 per ton
business
Solid waste delivered in a dump truck,
flatbed truck, stake body truck, box    $100 per ton
truck, rental truck/trailer, or double
axle trailer
For large, unusually difficult to
handle items or bulky compact items,
such as house trailers, boats in excess $200 per ton
of 20 feet in length, stumps, and
concrete
On-the-road vehicle tires from a        125% of the cost to the County to
vehicle other than a vehicle owned by   dispose of the tires, plus $ 7.00 for
the person delivering the tires         each tire mixed with other solid waste
On-the-road vehicle tires from a        No charge for four or fewer tires, but
vehicle owned by the person delivering  for each tire in excess of four tires $
the tires                               7.00
Residential solid waste not covered by  No charge
a listing above
 
   (e)   Charges based on weight. All charges based on weight shall be computed
proportionally, with a 60-pound minimum. When a weighing scale is unavailable
or inoperative and the solid waste is delivered in an open vehicle, the
Department shall estimate the weight of the solid waste and the charge is$100
per ton in accordance with the estimate. When a weighing scale is unavailable
or inoperative and the solid waste is delivered in a closed vehicle, the charge
is $44.20 per cubic yard of rated capacity.
   (f)   Refunds. The Controller shall refund the charges under subsections (d)
and (e) to a housing development organization that proves to the satisfaction
of the Controller that it has non-profit charitable status under § 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code and that it paid, or a contractor paid on its behalf,
the charges in connection with the construction or rehabilitation of housing
for low and moderate income households that earn up to 80% of the median income
for the Baltimore Statistical area, adjusted for household size, as determined
annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   (g)   Charge for violations. If Department discovers that a person has
delivered solid waste in violation of this section, the person improperly
delivering the solid waste shall pay a charge of $260 per ton.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5A-103) (Bill No. 81-85; Bill No. 33-86; Bill No. 22-87;
Bill No. 38-87; Bill No. 35-88; Bill No. 35-91; Bill No. 64-92; Bill No. 38-93;
Bill No. 50-94; Bill No. 29-95; Bill No. 60-95; Bill No. 47-96; Bill No. 40-97;
Bill No. 34-03; Bill No. 15-05; Bill No. 64-07; Bill No. 31-09; Bill No. 43-21;
Bill No. 46-24)
§ 13-4-108. Unauthorized removal of recyclable materials.
   (a)   County property. Recyclable materials at sanitary landfills or other
facilities owned by the County are County property.
   (b)   Prohibition. Unless authorized by the County, a person may not remove
or cause to be removed recyclable materials from sanitary landfills or other
facilities owned by the County.
   (c)   Authority of law enforcement to search and seize. Law enforcement
officials are authorized to search and seize recyclable materials that become
County property under subsection (a) of this section.
(Bill No. 91-10)
§ 13-4-109. Solid Waste Financial Assurance Fund.
   (a)   Establishment. There is a Solid Waste Financial Assurance Fund.
   (b)   Purpose. The Solid Waste Financial Assurance Fund shall be used to:
      (1)   constitute the financial assurance required by federal regulation
for closure and post- closure care of each municipal solid waste landfill owned
or operated by the County, if necessary; or
      (2)   finance closure and post-closure care of each municipal solid waste
landfill owned or operated by the County that is subject to the financial
assurance requirements for closure and post-closure care under applicable
federal regulations.
   (c)   Administration.
      (1)   If the Solid Waste Financial Assurance Fund is used for the purpose
set forth in subsection (b)(1), Trustees designated by the County Executive
shall administer the Fund, and the Fund shall be administered pursuant to a
trust agreement meeting the requirements of federal regulation; and
      (2)   If the Solid Waste Financial Assurance Fund is used to finance
closure and post-closure care under subsection (b)(2) and the funds accumulated
in the Fund are insufficient to fully fund the estimated liability for closure
and post-closure care recorded in the County's audited annual financial
statements for the previous fiscal year, the budget submitted to the County
Council for the next three fiscal years shall include an amount sufficient to
fully fund the estimated liability by the end of the third fiscal year.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5A-101) (Bill No. 39-93; Bill No. 91-10; Bill No. 76-12)
TITLE 5. UTILITIES
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
13-5-101.   Sanitary district; subdistricts.
   
13-5-102.   Mayo Water Reclamation Subdistrict.
   
13-5-103.   Department to control facilities; rules and regulations.
   
13-5-104.   Purchase and sale of water and wastewater services.
   
13-5-105.   Acquisition of private water and wastewater systems.
   
13-5-106.   Conservation of water during shortage.
   
13-5-107.   Fire hydrants.
   
13-5-108.   Backflow preventers.
   
13-5-109.   Changes in grade affecting installation.
   
13-5-110.   Agreements with developers.
   
13-5-111.   Installation of public water and wastewater facilities by
developers.
   
13-5-112.   Odenton Town Center Sanitary Subdistrict.
   
13-5-113.   Annual security for licensed utility contractors.
Subtitle 2. Private Water and Wastewater Systems
   
13-5-201.   Connection to private wastewater system required.
   
13-5-202.   Construction of private water and wastewater systems.
Subtitle 3. Extension of Public Water and Wastewater Systems
   
13-5-301.   Definitions.
   
13-5-302.   Extension on initiation by Department.
   
13-5-303.   Extension on initiation by property owners.
   
13-5-304.   Service access connection.
   
13-5-305.   Connections to public water and wastewater mains required.
   
13-5-306.   Unlawful connection.
   
13-5-307.   Properties permitted to connect; required connection.
Subtitle 4. Allocation and Allotment of Water and Wastewater Capacity
   
13-5-401.   Definitions.
   
13-5-402.   Allocation.
   
13-5-403.   Charges and fees for property subject to adequate public
facilities.
   
13-5-404.   Fees and charges for property otherwise connecting.
   
13-5-405.   Lapse.
   
13-5-406.   Private financing for additional capacity.
   
13-5-407.   Assignment or conveyance of allocation.
   
13-5-408.   Allotment.
Subtitle 5. Wastewater Discharge Requirements
   
13-5-501.   Definitions.
   
13-5-502.   Abbreviations.
   
13-5-503.   Conformity to subtitle.
   
13-5-504.   Prohibited discharges in general.
   
13-5-505.   Limitations on wastewater strength.
   
13-5-506.   Accidental discharges – Protection against.
   
13-5-507.   Discharge of hauled wastes.
   
13-5-508.   Fees.
   
13-5-509.   Wastewater discharge permits – Nonresidential users.
   
13-5-510.   Hauled waste discharge permits.
   
13-5-511.   Standards; modification.
   
13-5-512.   Reporting requirements.
   
13-5-513.   Monitoring facilities.
   
13-5-514.   Inspections.
   
13-5-515.   Confidential information.
   
13-5-516.   Records retention.
   
13-5-517.   Bypasses.
   
13-5-518.   Upsets.
   
13-5-519.   Administrative enforcement; injunctive relief.
Subtitle 6. Assessments
   
13-5-601.   Definitions.
   
13-5-602.   Authority to impose; liability; lien.
   
13-5-603.   Determination of assessment.
   
13-5-604.   Notice and hearing; finality; adjustments.
   
13-5-605.   Properties permitted to connect.
Subtitle 7. Special Benefit Charges
   
13-5-701.   Definition.
   
13-5-702.   Liability.
   
13-5-703.   Assessment and rate.
Subtitle 8. Charges and Assessments for Water and Wastewater
   
13-5-801.   Liability.
   
13-5-802.   Scope.
   
13-5-803.   Definitions.
   
13-5-804.   Determination of equivalent dwelling units.
   
13-5-805.   Metered water and wastewater charges.
   
13-5-806.   Wastewater charges for properties with water meters on private
water sources and for properties without water service.
   
13-5-807.   Annual report on water and wastewater service charges.
   
13-5-808.   Environmental protection fee.
   
13-5-809.   Penalties, back-billing, adjustments, and payments.
   
13-5-810.   Procedure when charges not paid.
   
13-5-811.   Charge for restoration of water service.
   
13-5-812.   Charge for meter reading, special billing, and meter test.
   
13-5-813.   Water and wastewater system connection charges and assessments.
   
13-5-814.   Exemption for elderly or disabled.
   
13-5-815.   Partial deferral of residential wastewater system connection
charges and assessments.
   
13-5-816.   Subsidies for wastewater extension projects.
   
13-5-817.   Water and wastewater revolving fund.
Subtitle 9. Other Charges and Fees
   
13-5-901.   Rates for disposal of septic tank sludge, chemical waste, and
holding tank waste.
   
13-5-902.   Rates for private fire protection systems.
   
13-5-903.   Private fire hydrant charge.
   
13-5-904.   Fees for fire hydrant permits.
   
13-5-905.   Fees for County fire hydrant meters.
   
13-5-906.   Fire flow test charge.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 13-5-101. Sanitary district; subdistricts.
   (a)   Sanitary district. The whole of the County, except for those portions
of the County that lie within the corporate limits of the City of Annapolis,
constitutes the sanitary district of the County. The sanitary district of the
County includes those federal government installations within the County that
elect to utilize the water and wastewater services of the County.
   (b)   Subdistricts. The Director may establish sanitary subdistricts within
the County when necessary to facilitate administration of this title.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-101) (Bill No. 99-01; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-102. Mayo Water Reclamation Subdistrict.
   There is a Mayo Water Reclamation Subdistrict, the boundaries of which are
as set forth in the master plan for water and sewer.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-102) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 98-20)
§ 13-5-103. Department to control facilities; rules and regulations.
   The Department shall exercise control of publicly owned water and wastewater
facilities in the County. On recommendation of the Director and approval by the
County Council, the Department may adopt rules and regulations governing the
use and conservation of publicly owned water and wastewater facilities.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-103) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-104. Purchase and sale of water and wastewater services.
   The County Executive may enter into agreements with the Mayor and City
Council of Baltimore City, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Annapolis,
the federal government, or the appropriate officials of adjoining counties or
political subdivisions for the purchase or sale of water or wastewater
services.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-104) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 100-15)
§ 13-5-105. Acquisition of private water and wastewater systems.
   When the Department has extended its water supply or wastewater system up to
and is ready to connect with a private water supply or wastewater system or is
otherwise preparing to provide water or wastewater service to an area within
the County and the Department considers it advisable and proper for the
adequate operation of the system under its jurisdiction to take over the water
or wastewater system, it may acquire the system by gift, exchange, purchase, or
negotiated agreement, except that the Department may not acquire an existing
water or wastewater system that is not in conformity with the County's Standard
Specifications and Details for Construction or that was constructed in
violation of requirements of the Maryland Department of the Environment as to
construction specifications or standards or capacity.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-105) (Bill No. 93-97; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-106. Conservation of water during shortage.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "public water shortage" means a situation
in which the Department is unable to provide public water of sufficient
pressure and quality to residents of the County or a part of the County to
accommodate normal domestic inside uses of public water exclusive of outside
uses, such as sprinkling of lawns, washing of cars, and filling of swimming
pools.
   (b)   Declaration. If the Director determines that a public water shortage
exists or is anticipated in the County or in a part of the County, the Director
may declare a state of public water shortage.
   (c)   Rules and regulations. The Director may adopt rules and regulations
designed to conserve the public water supply in the County or parts of the
County affected by the water shortage by restricting the use of the public
water supply in the area affected. The rules and regulations shall be
advertised for two successive days in at least one newspaper having a general
circulation in the County. The advertisement shall specify the parts of the
County affected by the declared state of public water shortage; the terms of
the rules and regulations adopted; the manner in which the use of the public
water supply is restricted; and the penalties enumerated in subsection (e) for
violation of the rules and regulations and water use restrictions.
   (d)   Effective date of rules and regulations. The rules and regulations
shall take effect at the time of the declaration of the state of public water
shortage, but liability under subsection (e) may not attach until the rules and
regulations have been advertised.
   (e)   Water service termination. The Director may turn off the water service
to a user of public water violating any of the provisions of the rules and
regulations restricting the use of public water during a declared state of
public water shortage if the Director has advised the user of the violation and
has requested the user to cease the activity constituting the violation and the
user does not cease the activity within a period of time reasonable under the
circumstances. If water service to a non-complying user is turned off in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection, the Director may charge the
user a turn-off and turn-on charge to be levied and assessed against the non-
complying user in a like manner as other charges and assessments for utility
services.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-106) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-107. Fire hydrants.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Backflow preventer" means a device or means used to prevent the
flow of gas, liquids, solids, or other substances into the public water supply.
      (2)   "Permit holder" means a person or a duly authorized representative
of a person who is issued a fire hydrant connection permit under this section.
      (3)   "Privately-owned meter" means a water meter that is not owned by
the County.
   (b)   Scope. This section does not apply to the Fire Department or to an
established Volunteer Fire Department.
   (c)   Permit for connection to public fire hydrants. A person may not
operate, use, or make a connection to a public fire hydrant without a fire
hydrant connection permit issued by the Department. To obtain a fire hydrant
connection permit, a person shall submit an application on a form provided by
the Department and shall pay the permit fee set forth in §
13-5-904. A separate permit application and fee is required for each water
meter. A permit may not be issued to a person who has any outstanding
violations of this section or who owes any past due fees or charges under this
section. Upon approval of an application for a fire hydrant connection permit,
the Department shall issue a permit and a Department representative shall place
a tag containing the permit number on the water meter approved for use under
the permit.
   (d)   Water meters. If a fire hydrant connection permit is issued, the
permit holder shall use only the water meter and backflow preventer approved by
the Department in the permit. A permit holder may rent a water meter from the
County upon payment of the rental and deposit rates set forth in §§
13-5-904 and
13-5-905, or may use a privately-owned meter if the meter is inspected and
approved by the Department. If the Director determines it is in the best
interest of the County, the Department may prohibit the use of privately-owned
meters for connection to fire hydrants and may establish a policy under which
the County may purchase privately-owned meters to rent to permit holders.
   (e)   Permit terms. A fire hydrant connection permit shall be valid through
December 31 of the calendar year during which it is issued, unless otherwise
indicated in the permit. The permit shall contain the terms of connection and
shall indicate the fire hydrants to which connection is authorized. A permit
holder may not connect to or draw water from a fire hydrant not authorized for
connection in the permit. A permit holder shall comply with the terms of this
section and the fire hydrant connection permit.
   (f)   Permit display; backflow prevention device. A person may not make a
connection to or draw water from a fire hydrant unless that person possesses a
copy of a valid fire hydrant permit and uses a water meter with a tag matching
the permit. A person may not make a connection to or draw water from a fire
hydrant without using a properly functioning backflow preventer approved by the
Department.
   (g)   Permit for special water agreements. A written agreement between the
County and a person applying for a fire hydrant connection permit shall be
executed by both parties before a permit is issued for the purpose of providing
an ongoing supply of water that the Director determines to be necessary to
mitigate an urgent condition caused by the unavailability or inadequacy of the
permit applicant's water supply. The agreement shall set forth the reasons for
the connection, the location of the hydrant to which connection is to be made,
the applicable time frames for connection, the applicable rates and fees, and
any terms and conditions as determined by the Director to be necessary to
ensure proper use of water from a fire hydrant.
   (h)   Water usage and billing. Permit holders shall be billed semi-annually
or upon return of a rented meter for all water obtained from public fire
hydrants at the rate set forth in §
13-5-805(d). A person who obtains water from a public fire hydrant without a
fire hydrant connection permit shall be charged for the amount of water
estimated by the Department to have been obtained at the rate set forth in §
13-5-805(d).
   (i)   Mid-year meter reading. By June 30 of each year, a permit holder shall
provide the Department with a meter reading for each meter for which a permit
is issued. The permit holder shall thereafter be billed for all water usage
indicated by the meter reading.
   (j)   Annual meter reading; meter return and inspection.
      (1)   By December 31 of each year, a permit holder shall return a water
meter rented from the County to the Department for inspection, calibration, and
meter reading. The permit holder shall be responsible for the annual inspection
fee if the meter was rented for more than one month, any water meter repair
fees, and for any water usage not previously billed to the permit holder. The
water meter deposit paid by the permit holder shall be applied towards payment
of the charges and if a deposit balance remains it shall be returned to the
permit holder. If the water meter deposit is less than the charges, the permit
holder shall be billed the amount that exceeds the deposit.
      (2)   By December 31 of each year, a permit holder shall bring all
privately-owned meters for which a permit was issued during the year to the
Department for inspection, calibration, and meter reading. The permit holder
shall be billed the annual inspection fee, any water meter repair fees, and for
any water usage not previously billed.
   (k)   Sanctions; penalties.
      (1)   If a permit holder fails to use a backflow preventer on a water
meter connected to a fire hydrant or if the Department determines a backflow
preventer is in disrepair or malfunctioning, all fire hydrant connection
permits issued to that permit holder shall be suspended until a backflow
preventer is repaired or installed on the water meter and approved by the
Department.
      (2)   If a permit holder fails to provide a meter reading in accordance
with subsection (i), or fails to bring a privately-owned meter to the
Department or return a rented meter to the Department in accordance with
subsection (j):
         (i)   all fire hydrant connection permits issued to that permit holder
shall be revoked and further fire hydrant connection permits may not be issued
until the permit holder complies with this section;
         (ii)   the permit holder shall be charged a penalty of $10 per water
meter beginning 30 days after failing to comply with subsection (i) or (j) and
for each subsequent 30 day period for which the permit holder fails to comply
with subsection (i) or (j), the permit holder shall be charged an additional
$10 penalty until the permit holder complies with subsection (i) or (j); and
         (iii)   the permit holder shall be charged a semi-annual water usage
charge beginning 60 days after failing to comply with subsection (i) or (j), in
an amount that is the greater of the average of the permit holder's prior semi-
annual water usage charges, or $100, for each semi-annual period until the
permit holder complies with subsection (i) or (j).
      (3)   If a permit holder fails to return a rented meter to the County at
the end of the permit term in accordance with subsection (j), the full amount
of the deposit fee for the water meter shall be forfeited to the County.
   (l)   Civil fines. It is a Class D civil offense, punishable by a civil fine
as provided by §
9-2-101 of this Code, to:
      (1)   fail to provide a meter reading to the Department by June 30;
      (2)   fail to provide a meter reading to the Department by December 31;
      (3)   fail to return a meter rented from the County to the Department by
December 31;
      (4)   fail to bring any privately-owned meter for which a permit was
issued during the year to the Department by December 31; or
      (5)   violate any other provision of this section or the terms of a fire
hydrant connection permit.
   (m)   Private and County fire hydrants. A three foot clear space shall be
maintained around a private fire hydrant and a County fire hydrant, measured
from the center of the operating nut on the top of the hydrant. Private fire
hydrants shall be painted red with black below the bottom flange in accordance
with the paint specifications contained in the County's Standard Specifications
and Details for Construction.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-107) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 58-12; Bill No. 61-
20)
§ 13-5-108. Backflow preventers.
   If a property connected to public water does not have a properly functioning
backflow preventer as required by
Article 15 of this Code, the Department shall issue the owner a notice to
install, test, repair, or replace the backflow preventer within 90 days of the
date of the notice. If the owner fails to comply, the Department shall issue a
second notice to install, test, repair, or replace the backflow preventer
within 30 days of the date of the notice. If the owner fails to comply with the
second notice, the Department may turn off public water service to the
property. Public water service to the property may only be restored after the
backflow preventer has been installed, repaired, or replaced; has been
certified by a licensed plumber to be functioning properly in accordance with
Article 15 of this Code; and upon placement of the service charge set forth in
§
13-5-811.
(Bill No. 61-20)
§ 13-5-109. Changes in grade affecting installation.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "person" has the meaning stated in §
1-1-101 of this Code and, in addition, includes any city or state, any
subdivision of a city or state, and a department of County government other
than the Department.
   (b)   Requirement. Whenever a person changes a road grade or surface or
makes an excavation or fill that requires a change in the elevation of a
manhole, valve box, meter vault, wastewater or water mains or lines, or
appurtenances, the person shall make the necessary change in the elevation of
the manhole, valve box, meter vault, water or wastewater main or line, or
appurtenance at the person's own expense.
   (c)   Costs. If a person fails or refuses to make the necessary change in
the elevation of the manhole, valve box, meter vault, water or wastewater main
or line, or appurtenance , the Department may make the necessary change and
charge the person for the actual time and materials involved and a
proportionate share of the current overhead.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-108) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-110. Agreements with developers.
   (a)   Generally. The County may enter into agreements that:
      (1)   permit a developer to recoup from a subsequent user, directly or
through the County, the actual cost of any improvements to the County's water
or wastewater system constructed or paid for by the developer that are over and
above those improvements otherwise required by this Code;
      (2)   provide credits against water and wastewater special benefit
charges and capital connection charges for the actual cost of any improvements
to the County's water and wastewater system constructed or paid for by the
developer that are over and above those improvements otherwise required by this
Code; and
      (3)   waive front foot benefit charges when lateral lines are installed
by a developer within or abutting properties that are being improved by the
developer.
   (b)   Contents. Each agreement shall provide that any construction
undertaken shall be by a licensed utility contractor and be under the control
and supervision of the Director of the Department of Inspections and Permits;
each developer shall pay the County a reasonable inspection fee for any work
not undertaken by the County; and each developer shall pay a special water or
special wastewater benefit charge if adopted in accordance with §
13-5-703.
   (c)   Other terms and conditions. The Director may negotiate and prescribe
the terms and conditions of each agreement in order to carry out the intent of
this section and protect the interests of the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-109) (Bill No. 64-85; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 85-
20)
§ 13-5-111. Installation of public water and wastewater facilities by
developers.
   (a)   Requirements relating to fees or assessments by developer to owner. If
a developer or a developer's successor or assignee enters into an agreement
pursuant to §
13-5-110 and charges a fee or assessment that purports to cover or defray all
or part of the cost of installing or maintaining all or any part of the public
water or wastewater facilities installed in a subdivision, the developer, the
developer's successor, or any subsequent assignee shall:
      (1)   ensure that the terms and conditions of the fee or assessment are
set forth in any contract of sale for the first residential dwelling unit to be
built on each lot in the subdivision;
      (2)   annually bill each property owner subject to payment of the fee or
assessment and notify the property owner, in writing, of the amount due, the
remaining term, and the total balance;
      (3)   permit the prepayment without penalty of all or part of the fee or
assessment by discounting the annualized payments at an interest rate of six
percent to determine their equivalent present worth; and
      (4)   notify the property owner, in writing, if the right to collect the
fee or assessment is assigned, and the notice shall include the full name and
address of the assignee, the date of the assignment, and the outstanding
balance owed on the fee or assessment.
   (b)   Failure to comply with subsection (a). The failure of a developer, a
developer's successor, or any subsequent assignee to comply with the provisions
of subsection (a) shall render void any obligation of the property owner to pay
the fee or assessment. The requirements established by subsection (a) shall be
binding on the original developer, the developer's successor, and any
subsequent assignees throughout the life of the fee or assessment.
   (c)   Notice to purchasers. Each contract for the sale of real property in
the County served by public water or wastewater facilities constructed as a
result of an agreement permitted by §
13-5-110 shall contain a notice to the purchaser in substantially the following
form:
Notice to purchasers of real estate in Anne Arundel County
This property is subject to a fee or assessment which purports to cover or
defray the cost of installing or maintaining all or part of the public water or
wastewater facilities constructed by the developer of the subdivision. This fee
or assessment is (amount) payable annually in (month) to (name and address)
(hereinafter called ‘lienholder') until (date). There may be a right of
prepayment or discount for early payment which may be ascertained by contacting
the lienholder. This fee or assessment is a contractual obligation between the
lienholder and each owner of this property and is not in any way a fee or
assessment by Anne Arundel County.
   (d)   Failure to comply with subsection (c). If a seller subject to this
section fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (c):
      (1)   prior to settlement, the purchaser shall have the right to rescind
the contract and to receive a full refund of all deposits paid on account of
the contract, but the right of rescission shall terminate five days after the
seller provides to the purchaser written notice in compliance with subsection
(c); and
      (2)   following settlement, the seller shall be liable to the purchaser
for the full amount of any open lien or assessment.
(1985 Code, Art. 17, § 1-103) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 51-05)
§ 13-5-112. Odenton Town Center Sanitary Subdistrict.
   (a)   Establishment. There is an Odenton Town Center Sanitary Subdistrict,
the boundaries of which are set forth on a map entitled "Map of Odenton Town
Center Sanitary Subdistrict" dated July 12, 2010. A certified copy of that map
shall be permanently kept on file by the Administrative Officer to the County
Council and the Office of Planning and Zoning, and a copy shall be included in
the Anne Arundel County Master Plan for Water Supply & Sewerage Systems.
   (b)   Purpose. The primary purpose of the Odenton Town Center Sanitary
Subdistrict is to provide a means for the County to finance one or more capital
projects in order to make improvements to the County’s wastewater system
required to provide 9,000 equivalent dwelling units of additional wastewater
conveyance capacity estimated to be necessary to support development of the
Odenton Town Center in accordance with the Odenton Town Center Master Plan.
   (c)   Means of financing; imposition of sewer service surcharge. The County
shall recover the costs of capital projects financed by the means described in
this section, including the costs of interest paid on County bonds, by imposing
a sewer service surcharge on all properties within the Odenton Town Center
Sanitary Subdistrict newly connecting to the County's wastewater system, and on
each residential, commercial or industrial property within the Odenton Town
Center Sanitary Subdistrict that has an existing connection and undergoes an
expansion or addition to the improvements on the property, or a change in use,
that the Director determines will require an increase in wastewater flow.
   (d)   Basis of surcharge. The sewer service surcharge imposed on a property
shall be based on the number of equivalent dwelling units required by the
connection or by the expansion or addition or change in use as described in
subsection (c).
   (e)   Calculation of rate of surcharge. Except as provided in subsection
(k), the initial rate of the sewer service surcharge shall be calculated by
dividing the final costs of the capital projects necessary to provide the 9,000
equivalent dwelling units of additional wastewater capacity by 9,000, with the
resulting quotient constituting the sewer service surcharge imposed for each
equivalent dwelling unit of capacity required by a property in accordance with
subsection (d). The calculation of the initial rate shall be based on the final
costs of the capital projects as determined by the Director and approved by the
County Budget Officer.
   (f)   Periodic increase in rate of surcharge. The rate in effect before
January 1, 2016 shall increase on January 1, 2016 by 6% or such other
percentage determined by the County Council, and on each subsequent January 1st
the rate then in effect shall increase by 6% or such other percentage
determined by the County Council.
   (g)   Time for payment. The sewer service surcharge shall be paid in full at
the time and as a condition of building permit issuance or eight years from the
date of allocation, whichever is earlier.
   (h)   Other fees and charges. A property subject to sewer service surcharge
under this section shall be subject to all other assessments, fees, and charges
imposed under this title, and to all other provisions of this title, except as
expressly stated otherwise in this section.
   (i)   Development Rights and Responsibilities Agreement. A Development
Rights and Responsibilities Agreement approved in accordance with §
17-7-805 of this Code may include provisions modifying the manner in which
capacity is reserved for development and the manner in which the date of
allocation is determined for the purpose of establishing when fees and charges
become due and payable.
   (j)   Surcharge rate prior to availability of final costs. Until the final
costs of the capital projects are available for purposes of the calculation
required by subsection (e), the rate of the sewer service surcharge shall be
$1,411 per equivalent dwelling unit.
(Bill No. 71-10; Bill No. 24-11; Bill No. 111-15; Bill No. 84-23)
§ 13-5-113. Annual security for licensed utility contractors.
   A licensed utility contractor engaging in the installation of water or sewer
services by performing a tap connection to a water or wastewater mainline shall
submit and maintain with the Department a security in the amount of $50,000,
which may serve as security for multiple permits as long as a constant balance
of $50,000 is maintained. The work performed under a tap connection permit
shall be subject to the same warranty period and warranty terms that exist for
work in a County right-of-way as set forth in §
13-3-208 and the same requirements for a security that exists for work in a
County right-of-way as set forth in §
13-3-301(c) through (e).
(Bill No. 85-20)
SUBTITLE 2. PRIVATE WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
§ 13-5-201. Connection to private wastewater system required.
   (a)   Evaluation of sewerage conditions. In each community that does not
have adequate facilities for the disposal of wastewater in which the Director
has determined not to construct a wastewater system and in which there is or
may be constructed or maintained by private enterprise a wastewater system or
disposal plant for public use, the Health Officer shall determine whether the
sewerage conditions in the community are reasonably dangerous to public health
or to the health of the residents of the community.
   (b)   Notice and opportunity to be heard. Before making a determination
under subsection (a), the Health Officer shall give due notice to each person
who may be directly affected and shall give them an opportunity to be heard.
   (c)   Results of investigation. After an investigation of a community
conducted in accordance with subsections (a) and (b), the Health Officer shall
inform the Director on finding that the sewerage conditions in the community
are reasonably dangerous to public health or to the health of the residents of
the community.
   (d)   Order to connect. After being informed in accordance with subsection
(c), the Director shall issue an order adopting the findings of the Health
Officer and ordering the owners or occupants of the community within a
reasonable time and in a reasonable manner prescribed in the order to connect
their respective premises with the private wastewater system.
   (e)   Public Service Commission approval. An owner or occupant of property
in the County is not required to connect the premises with a private wastewater
system under the provisions of this section unless the rates and terms for the
connection have been approved by the State Public Service Commission and the
connection is permitted at the rates and on the terms approved by the State
Public Service Commission.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-201) (Bill No. 63-04)
Charter reference – §§
601 et seq.
§ 13-5-202. Construction of private water and wastewater systems.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to a water supply or wastewater
collection or treatment system constructed for the sole purpose of serving a
single building or to a wastewater treatment system involving subsurface
seepage.
   (b)   Permit required. A person may not construct, alter, or extend a water
supply system or a wastewater collection and treatment system within the County
without a permit from the Department of Inspections and Permits.
   (c)   Plans and specifications. A permit required by the provisions of
subsection (b) may not be issued until complete plans and specifications for
the construction, alteration, or extension, together with the information
required by the Department of Public Works, have been submitted to and approved
by the Department of Public Works and the Health Department.
   (d)   Compliance with plans and specifications; as builts. The construction,
alteration, or extension of water supply or wastewater collection and treatment
systems shall comply with the filed plans and specifications and with the terms
of the permit. Variances from the plans submitted may not be allowed until
approved by the Director of Public Works. On completion of the work, the
permittee shall file with the Department of Public Works a plan of the system
as built.
   (e)   Denial of petition. If a person or a group of property owners or
residents has petitioned the Director for water or wastewater service and the
petition has been denied, the person or group of property owners or residents
may construct or establish the water or wastewater system upon obtaining a
permit as required by
Article 11 of this Code and operate the same at its or their own expense. The
system shall be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications
prepared in agreement with criteria established by the Department, and the
system shall be constructed under the supervision and control of the
Department. Construction and operating costs records shall be maintained and
shall be filed with the Department, and the actual costs incurred by the
Department in the approval of the plans, supervision, or inspection of the
systems shall be paid to the County by the owners of the system.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-202) (Bill No. 63-04)
SUBTITLE 3. EXTENSION OF PUBLIC WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
§ 13-5-301. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Defined area" means the boundaries of all real property proposed
to be provided with public water or wastewater facilities specifically
described in a petition submitted to the Department and shown on a map or
drawing.
      (2)   "Owner" has the meaning stated in §
1-1-101 of this Code and, in addition, means each person in whose name an
account with respect to a parcel of real property stands in the records of the
Supervisor of Assessments for the County when a petition is submitted under
this title.
      (3)   "Petition area" means the defined area, revised defined area, or
area encompassing all properties to be served by private water or wastewater
facilities for which a petition is submitted to the Department under §
13-5-303(a)(2).
      (4)   "Project cost" means all costs or expenses required to complete a
water or wastewater extension or upgrade, including the combined cost of
design, engineering, surveying, construction, right-of-way or property
acquisition, and connections.
      (5)   "Revised defined area" means a defined area that is revised by the
Department after receiving a petition, which is specifically shown on a map or
drawing prepared by the Department.
(Bill No. 79-20)
§ 13-5-302. Extension on initiation by Department.
   (a)   Generally. The Director may make or have made surveys, plans,
specifications, and estimates for the extension of water or wastewater systems.
   (b)   Notice. If extension of a water or wastewater system is contemplated,
the Director shall give notice by publication as provided in §
13-1-103. The notice shall state the extent of the improvements; the proposed
area to be served; the probable cost of the improvements; that plans and cost
and revenue estimates of the improvements are available for public inspection
during regular business hours; and a time and place for a public hearing before
the Director when persons interested in the improvements may appear and present
their views.
   (c)   Decision. Within 30 days after the hearing specified in the notice by
publication, the Director shall make a decision on whether to proceed with the
improvements. The decision shall be published as provided in §
13-1-103.
   (d)   Private system unfit. The Director may order the extension of the
County's water and wastewater systems into an area in which a private water
supply or wastewater system is unfit, as determined by the Health Department.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-302) (Bill No. 63-87; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 62-
11)
§ 13-5-303. Extension on initiation by property owners.
   (a)   Petition.
      (1)   The owners of a majority of the properties in a defined area that
is not served by public water or wastewater facilities may petition the
Department for the establishment of public water or wastewater facilities
within the defined area.
      (2)   A majority of the owners of private water or wastewater facilities
or the owners of a majority of the properties served by private water or
wastewater facilities may petition the Department to bring the private water or
wastewater facilities up to County standards such that the private facilities
can become owned by the County.
   (b)   Revised defined area.
      (1)   After receipt of a petition submitted in accordance with subsection
(a)(1), the Department may establish a revised defined area to add or remove
properties as necessary for engineering purposes. If the Department establishes
a revised defined area, the petition shall thereafter be considered a petition
for establishment of public water or wastewater facilities within the revised
defined area.
      (2)   The Department shall notify the owners of the properties added to
or removed from the defined area. An owner of a property added to the revised
defined area shall be given 60 days to vote on the petition for the revised
defined area. If a property owner does not respond within 60 days of the date
of the notice from the Department, it shall be considered a vote against the
petition.
      (3)   The Department shall notify the owners of the properties within the
original defined area who remain in the revised defined area of the revised
defined area, and the owners shall be given 60 days to change the position on
their vote on the original petition. If a property owner does not respond
within 60 days of the date of the notice from the Department, the vote on the
original petition shall remain unchanged.
      (4)   After the expiration of the times to vote provided in paragraphs
(2) and (3), the Department shall determine whether the owners of a majority of
the properties in the revised defined area have voted in favor of the petition.
The Department may follow the procedures in this section only after it is
determined that the owners of a majority of the properties in the revised
defined area have voted in favor of the petition.
   (c)   Treatment of petition for one facility as petition for both
facilities. At the discretion of the Director, a petition for either water or
wastewater facilities may be treated as a petition for both facilities. If the
Director decides to do so, the Director shall combine the estimated costs and
the estimated revenues for both facilities for the purpose of determining the
project cost.
   (d)   Preliminary estimate. On receipt of a petition by the majority
required in subsection (a) or (b), the Department shall prepare a preliminary
engineering study and preliminary project cost estimate.
   (e)   Publication. When the preliminary estimate is completed, the
Department shall give notice by publication as provided in §
13-1-103. The notice shall specify the extent of the improvements; the proposed
area to be served; and a time and place for a public hearing before the
Director at which persons interested in the improvements may appear and present
their views.
   (f)   Public hearing. At the time and place specified in the notice, the
Director shall hold a public hearing. Persons interested in the improvements
may appear at the hearing and present their views. In addition, the following
information shall be presented at the public hearing: an overview of the
engineering evaluation, the preliminary estimate of the project cost, the
estimated cost for the preparation of the final design documents, and an
estimate of the revenue required from the petitioners to make the project self-
sustaining.
   (g)   Self-sustaining requirement. In order for the Department to proceed
with final engineering, design, and construction, a project shall be self-
sustaining, except to the extent the County provides a subsidy under §
13-5-816. A project is self-sustaining if the Director determines that the
County will recover the net assessable amount of a project from the estimated
revenues of the project within 30 years after its completion, or for projects
that qualify for a partial deferral under §
13-5-815, within 40 years after its completion.
   (h)   Net assessable amount. After the public hearing, the Director shall
determine the net assessable amount of a project by:
      (1)   establishing the project cost;
      (2)   subtracting any costs associated with making service available
beyond the petition area, and any State aid, Federal aid, or any other
contributions towards the project; and
      (3)   adding the amount necessary to reimburse the County for the
estimated interest expense of the County money invested in the project, as
determined by the Controller.
   (i)   Estimated revenues. The Director shall determine the estimated
revenues of a project by dividing the net assessable amount by 30, or, for
projects that qualify for a partial deferral under §
13-5-815, by 40.
   (j)   Assessment rate ballot. The Director shall determine the rate at which
the assessments authorized by §§
13-5-601 et seq. are required to make the project self-sustaining, and the
Department shall provide an assessment rate ballot to the owners of the
properties within the petition area. If the owners of a majority of the
properties within the petition area vote in favor of the rate of assessment
sufficient to make the project self-sustaining, the project may move forward to
final engineering, design, and construction. If a property owner does not
respond within the time set forth in the ballot, it shall be considered a vote
against the rate of assessment.
   (k)   Preparation of detailed plans. If the owners of a majority of the
properties within the petition area vote in favor of the rate of the assessment
sufficient to make the project self-sustaining, the Director shall cause
detailed surveys, plans, specifications, engineers' reports, and estimates to
be prepared, and the project may proceed to final engineering, design, and
construction.
   (l)   Abandonment by petitioners. A project shall be considered abandoned if
the owners of a majority of the properties within the petition area file a
counter-petition against the project any time after the Director proceeds in
accordance with subsection (k) and before a construction contract is awarded
for the project. A counter-petition may not be considered if received after the
award of the construction contract for the project or after materials to
construct the project are ordered.
   (m)   Costs upon abandonment. Except when the project costs increase more
than 15% above the amount set forth in the assessment ballot signed in
accordance with subsection (j), when a project is abandoned in accordance with
subsection (l), the project costs incurred by the County, from the preliminary
estimate to the time the project is abandoned, shall be certified by the
Director to the County Council. Beginning with the next annual tax ordinance,
the County Council shall levy, for a period of time not to exceed five fiscal
years, a special assessment on real property in the petition area, at a rate
sufficient to pay the project costs incurred by the County up to the time of
the abandonment. If the special assessment is levied for more than one year,
the rate shall include the amount necessary to reimburse the County for the
estimated interest expense, as determined by the Controller. The assessment
shall be collected as provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code.
   (n)   Decision not to proceed. The Director may decide not to proceed in
accordance with this section at any stage if the service sought in a petition
is not in compliance with State law, this Code, or the master plan for water
supply and sewerage systems; the County is unable to acquire property required
for the project; or for any other reason.
(Bill No. 79-20)
§ 13-5-304. Service access connection.
   The Department shall provide for each property abutting on a road or right-
of-way in which a water main or wastewater main is laid a water or wastewater
service access connection. The access connection shall be constructed by and at
the sole expense of the Department. If a connection is made, the owner of the
property connected shall pay to the County all charges required by this article
before connection to the system.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-313) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 79-20)
§ 13-5-305. Connections to public water and wastewater mains required.
   (a)   Definition. "Property required to connect" means all improved
properties abutting a road or right-of-way in which a water main or wastewater
main is laid for a project initiated in accordance with §§
13-5-302 or
13-5-303.
   (b)   Authority. This section is supplemental to other authority vested in
the Health Department and the Maryland Department of the Environment to
regulate public or private water or wastewater supply or usage.
   (c)   Election by County not to connect. The provisions of this section or
other provisions of law do not prohibit the Department from electing not to
connect otherwise eligible improved property for reasons of practical and
efficient engineering, excessive cost, or other cause.
   (d)   Notice. A notice of permit application, connection, and other
requirements to the owner of a property required to connect shall be sent by
first class mail to the owner's address as shown on the current tax assessment
records, and a notice as to the availability of a public water main or
wastewater main for service shall be published as required by §
13-1-103. Failure to receive notices required by this section or under
authority of former law does not excuse failure to comply with this section.
   (e)   Application for permits deadline. Within six months after the date of
a written notice from the County to an owner of record of a property required
to connect, the owner shall make appropriate applications for permits required
by this Code for connection to the abutting water main or wastewater main and
shall pay the applicable permit fees and connection charges or apply, if
eligible, for a deferral allowed under §
13-5-815, a subsidy allowed under §
13-5-816, installment payment for the charges under §
13-5-813, or any combination of these.
   (f)   Completion of connection. Except as provided in subsection (g), the
owner of a property required to connect shall arrange to complete the necessary
work for the connection of the water supply facilities or wastewater facilities
on the property to the abutting public main within nine months from the date of
the issuance of the notice and, within this period unless excused for reasons
of partial connection or non-connection under subsection (c), the owner shall
disconnect and terminate the use of a cesspool, septic tank, dry well, privy,
vault, or well used for household water purposes on the property.
   (g)   Extension of completion of connection date. If an owner of property
required to connect has complied with the provisions of subsection (f) and has
encountered conditions beyond the owner's control that render impracticable
completion of a connection within the required time period, the Director may
grant a temporary waiver or extension of the time for the connection on timely
submission of proof of the condition. The decision to grant a temporary waiver
or extension is in the discretion of the Director.
   (h)   Failure to comply. An owner of property required to connect who has
not complied with the provisions of this section is liable for the connection
charges and forfeits the privilege of deferring payment or continuing deferred
payments of any pending or further charges permitted under §
13-5-813 and §
13-5-815 and forfeits the right to any subsidy granted by the County under §
13-5-816. The previously subsidized and deferred amounts, and the amounts due
under an executed installment agreement shall constitute a lien and be
immediately due and payable. Until the property that is not in compliance is
connected, the owner is also subject during the period not connected to the
quarterly minimum usage charges established under §
13-5-805 for the type of service applied for, or for which the connection is
required.
   (i)   Lien. The lien provided for in subsection (h) is subordinate only to
the lien of State and County taxes and special benefit assessments. Payment
shall be collected as provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-314) (Bill No. 80-03; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 79-
20)
§ 13-5-306. Unlawful connection.
   (a)   Requirements. A person may not make a direct or indirect connection to
a County water line or wastewater line without permission from the Director and
without having complied with connection permit and other connection application
requirements of this Code. A person may not turn on a water valve or restore
water service that has been disconnected or turned off without permission from
the Director. A person may not use County water other than through a water
meter with a required backflow preventer.
   (b)   Notice and charges for unlawful connection; disconnection. On
discovery of an unlawful connection, the Department shall issue a notice
requiring the property owner to make appropriate applications and pay
appropriate charges, including connection charges imposed under §
13-5-813, assessments imposed under §§
13-5-601 et seq., and past service charges, within 30 days after the date of
the notice. The charges shall be determined as of the date of the permit
application. If the property owner fails to submit proper applications and pay
appropriate charges, the Department may disconnect the premises until proper
applications are submitted. The property shall be subject to all other
connection requirements and procedures of this Code.
   (c)   Past service charges; penalties. It is a Class C civil offense to
connect to a County water line or wastewater line without a connection permit.
The owner of a property served by an unlawful connection who causes damage to
or impairs the County water or wastewater system is liable to the County for
any expenses, loss, or damage caused by the illegal connection, including court
costs and attorney's fees. The owner of any property served by an unlawful
connection shall pay the past water and wastewater service charges for use of
public water or wastewater since the actual connection. If the time of
connection cannot be determined or if the property has been transferred since
the connection, the period of violation subject to past service charges shall
end at the time of disconnection and shall begin on the last to occur of the
following: one year after the system was released for service; on the date
legal title was conveyed to the owner; or on the date service was previously
disconnected or discontinued for any reason. In calculating past service
charges, the average periodic service charge for properties similarly used
shall be applied for the period of the violation.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-315) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 62-11; Bill No. 61-
20; Bill No. 79-20)
§ 13-5-307. Properties permitted to connect; required connections.
   (a)   Connection permitted. Except as provided in subsection (b), the owner
of improved property abutting a public water or wastewater main is permitted to
connect to a public water main or wastewater main constructed: (i) at the cost
of a developer or other individual in order to provide service to property
being developed; or (ii) by the County solely at County expense except for a
project initiated under §
13-5-302 or §
13-5-303. Before an owner makes a connection to a water main or wastewater main
in accordance with this subsection, the owner shall make appropriate
applications for permits required by this Code for connection to a water main
or wastewater main and shall pay the applicable permit fees, connection charges
imposed under §
13-5-813, and assessments imposed under §§
13-5-601 et seq.
   (b)   Connection required. The Director may require connection to a water
main or wastewater main for property that is permitted to connect under
subsection (a) when necessary to protect the public health or welfare. Within
six months after the date of a written notice of the requirement to connect
under this subsection, the owner of the property shall comply with and be
subject to the requirements in §
13-5-305(e) through (i).
(Bill No. 79-20)
SUBTITLE 4. ALLOCATION AND ALLOTMENT OF WATER AND WASTEWATER CAPACITY
§ 13-5-401. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Allocation" means a reservation, for use by a particular property,
of available capacity.
      (2)   "Allotment" means the apportionment by the allotment committee of
available capacity among categories of capacity need.
      (3)   "Available capacity" means the positive difference between the
capacity of the components of the County water or wastewater system and the
existing flow through the system, less allocations granted and outstanding.
      (4)   "Equivalent dwelling unit" means a unit of 250 gallons of water,
except that for property in the Mayo Water Reclamation Subdistrict, "equivalent
dwelling unit" means a unit of 225 gallons of water.
      (5)   "Prime rate" means the prime interest rate that is published by the
Wall Street Journal as of the first business day in June each year, to be
applied under this subtitle beginning on July 1 of each year.
(Bill No. 5-05; Bill No. 111-15)
§ 13-5-402. Allocation.
   (a)   When allocation required. A property shall have an allocation if:
      (1)   due to development activity on the property, the property is
required under
Article 17 of this Code to pass the test for adequate public water supply
facilities or adequate public sewerage facilities; or
      (2)   the property is otherwise connecting to the County water or
wastewater system.
   (b)   Property required to pass tests for adequacy of public facilities. For
a property that is required to pass the test for adequate public water supply
facilities or adequate public sewerage facilities, the Department shall make an
allocation on the date of approval by the Office of Planning and Zoning for
adequacy of public water supply facilities or adequacy of public sewerage
facilities as provided in §
17-5-202 of this Code.
   (c)   Property otherwise connecting. For a property that is otherwise
connecting to the County water or wastewater system, the Department shall make
an allocation on the date of issuance of a connection permit or, in the case of
an extension of water or wastewater service by the County under §§
13-5-301 et seq., at the appropriate time as determined by the Director.
(Bill No. 5-05; Bill No. 111-15)
§ 13-5-403. Charges and fees for property subject to adequate public
facilities.
   (a)   Fees and charges. For property receiving an allocation in conjunction
with approval by the Office of Planning and Zoning for adequacy of public water
supply facilities or adequacy of public sewerage facilities, the owner of the
property shall pay, for each equivalent dwelling unit:
      (1)   an allocation reservation charge equal to 40% of the average cost
of water and wastewater, as computed by the Department of Public Works, that
would be used if the development on the property were complete and the property
was receiving water or wastewater service from the County; and
      (2)   the capital facility connection charge established in §
13-5-813 subject to any exemption contained in that section.
   (b)   Properties not on the waiting list. For a property that is not on the
waiting list provided for in §
17-5-503 of this Code:
      (1)   the allocation reservation charge shall be paid as follows:
         (i)   quarterly from the date of allocation until the lot is connected
to the County's water or wastewater system; or
         (ii)   at the option of the property owner:
            1.   one-half of the 40% paid per quarter and one-half of the 40%
deferred per quarter until the eighth anniversary of allocation or connection,
whichever occurs first;
            2.   on the eighth anniversary of allocation or connection,
whichever occurs first, a lump sum consisting of the one-half of the 40%
deferred per quarter plus interest at an annual rate equal to the applicable
prime rate plus an additional 2% on the deferred amounts; and
            3.   after the eighth anniversary of the allocation, if the
property is not connected, 40% per quarter; and
      (2)   the capital facility connection charge and the accumulated interest
calculated in accordance with subsection (f) shall be paid in full within the
earlier of eight years after the date of allocation, or prior to or in
conjunction with the issuance of a building permit.
   (c)   Properties on the waiting list. For a property that is on the waiting
list provided for in §
17-5-503 of this Code:
      (1)   the allocation reservation charge shall be paid as follows:
         (i)   quarterly from the date the property is removed from the waiting
list until the lot is connected to the County's water or wastewater system; or
         (ii)   at the option of the property owner:
            1.   one-half of the 40% paid per quarter and one-half of the 40%
deferred per quarter until the eighth anniversary of removal from the waiting
list or connection, whichever occurs first;
            2.   on the eighth anniversary of removal from the waiting list or
connection, whichever occurs first, a lump sum consisting of the one-half of
the 40% deferred per quarter plus interest at an annual rate equal to the
applicable prime rate plus an additional 2% on the deferred amounts; and
            3.   after the eighth anniversary of removal from the waiting list,
if the property is not connected, 40% per quarter; and
      (2)   the capital facility connection charge and the accumulated interest
calculated in accordance with subsection (f) shall be paid in full within the
earlier of eight years after the date the property is removed from the waiting
list, or prior to or in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit.
   (d)   Allocations prior to November 13, 2015; prior payments.
      (1)   For any property that received an allocation prior to November 13,
2015, the allocation reservation charge shall be paid as set forth in
subsection (b)(1) or (c)(1).
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (d)(3), for any property that
received an allocation prior to November 13, 2015, the capital facility
connection charge shall be paid when due as set forth in subsection (b)(2) or
(c)(2) at the rates for the capital facility connection charge in effect at the
time payment is made, plus the accumulated interest calculated in accordance
with subsection (f) and late interest in accordance with subsection (h)(2), if
any.
      (3)   For any property that received an allocation prior to November 13,
2015, and for which one or more annual installment payments of the capital
facility connection deferral fee and capital facility connection charge have
been paid, the remainder of the capital facility connection charge shall be due
as set forth in subsection (b)(2) or (c)(2) at the rates for the capital
facility connection charge in effect at the time that payment is made, less the
capital facility connection deferral fees and capital facility connection
charges previously paid, plus the accumulated interest calculated in accordance
with subsection (f) and late interest in accordance with subsection (h)(2), if
any.
   (e)   Additional charges and refunds.
       (1)   If payment of the capital facility connection charge is made
before application for a building permit, an additional capital facility
connection charge shall be paid in conjunction with a building permit only if
the number of equivalent dwelling units determined during building permit
review exceeds the number of equivalent dwelling units determined at the time
of the prior payment.
      (2)   If an allocation is reduced after payment of the capital facility
connection charge because of a recalculation of the allocation required to
serve the property, the owner may obtain a refund of the capital facility
connection charge paid for each equivalent dwelling unit by which the
allocation is reduced, less any accumulated interest and penalties calculated
in accordance with subsections (f) and (h). Additionally, for each equivalent
dwelling unit by which the allocation is reduced, the owner shall pay any
unpaid allocation reservation charges, including any interest and penalties
accumulated in accordance with subsection (h), deferred allocation reservation
charges and any interest on deferred allocation reservation charges.
      (3)   If an allocation is reduced before payment of the capital facility
connection charge because of a recalculation of the allocation required to
serve the property, for each equivalent dwelling unit by which the allocation
is reduced, the owner shall pay:
         (i)   all unpaid allocation reservation charges, including any
interest and penalties accumulated in accordance with subsection (h), deferred
allocation reservation charges and any interest on deferred allocation
reservation charges; and
         (ii)   any accumulated interest or penalties on the capital facility
connection charges calculated in accordance with subsections (f) and (h).
      (4)   (i)   The owner may obtain a refund of the difference between the
capital facility connection charge and capital facility connection deferral fee
paid and the amount of the capital facility connection charge set forth in §
13-5-813(c) or (d) in effect as of March 6, 2016 if:
            1.   payment of all or a portion of the capital facility connection
charge and capital facility connection deferral fee was made prior to March 6,
2016; and
            2.   payment was made prior to the fifth anniversary of the date of
allocation or in conjunction with a building permit prior to issuance; and
            3.   the fifth anniversary of the date of allocation is after March
6, 2016; and
            4.   the building permit has not been issued as of March 6, 2016.
         (ii)   The owner may obtain a refund of the difference between the
capital facility connection charge paid in accordance with §
13-5-404 and the amount of the capital facility connection charge set forth in
§
13-5-813(c) or (d) in effect as of March 6, 2016 if the capital facility
connection charge was paid in conjunction with a building permit not yet issued
as of March 6, 2016.
   (f)   Capital facility connection charge; interest rate.  The outstanding
principal balance of the capital facility connection charge shall be subject to
an annual interest rate equal to the applicable prime rate plus an additional
2%, calculated and accumulated annually on the first of the month of the sixth,
seventh, and eighth anniversary of the date of allocation. The accumulated
interest charges, and late interest in accordance with subsection (h)(2), if
any, shall be due within the earlier of eight years after the date of
allocation, or prior to or in conjunction with the issuance of a building
permit.
   (g)   Payment in conjunction with a building permit. When the capital
facility connection charge becomes due in conjunction with a building permit,
the amount due for each equivalent dwelling unit shall be the total unpaid
principal balance of the capital facility connection charge, plus the interest
accumulated in accordance with subsections (f) and (h)(2), if any, divided by
the number of equivalent dwelling units remaining.
   (h)   Penalty; interest.
      (1)   If an allocation reservation charge is not paid within 30 days
after the date of billing, a penalty charge equal to 10% of the amount due is
owed. The Controller may waive the penalty charged under this subsection no
more than once during a calendar year if a bill for an allocation reservation
charge is not received due to incorrect owner or address information, or for
other reasons as approved by the Controller in consultation with the Director.
      (2)   An overdue capital facility connection charge shall accrue interest
and penalties in accordance with §
4-1-103 of this Code. The Controller may waive the interest and penalties
accrued in accordance with §
4-1-103 of this Code on a capital facility connection charge no more than once
during a calendar year if a bill for the capital facility connection charge is
not received due to incorrect owner or address information, or for other
reasons as approved by the Controller in consultation with the Director.
   (i)   Default.
      (1)   A default occurs if any fee or charge set forth in this section in
an amount of $250 or more is not paid when required and remains unpaid 90 days
after a notice of default and lapse of allocation is sent to the property
owner.
      (2)   Upon default, the allocation lapses and the amount set forth in §
13-5-405(b) becomes due. A record of the default and lapse of allocation shall
be sent to the property owner and to the Department of Inspections and Permits
and the Office of Planning and Zoning, where the record shall be maintained and
available to the public.
(Bill No. 5-05; Bill No. 4-09; Bill No. 5-11; Bill No. 57-11; Bill No. 3-13;
Bill No. 66-14; Bill No. 78-15; Bill No. 111-15; Bill No. 69-16 ; Bill No. 17-
19 ; Bill No. 98-20 )
§ 13-5-404. Fees and charges for property otherwise connecting.
   For property receiving an allocation otherwise than in conjunction with
approval of adequacy of public facilities by the Office of Planning and Zoning,
the owner of the property shall pay, for each equivalent dwelling unit, the
capital facility connection charge as provided in §
13-5-813.
(Bill No. 5-05; Bill No. 85-20; Bill No. 98-20)
§ 13-5-405. Lapse.
   (a)   Lapse by operation of law. An allocation lapses by operation of law
if:
      (1)   any development application for which the County has granted an
allocation becomes void, expires, or is revoked;
      (2)   there is a default on the requirement to pay fees and charges as
described in §
13-5-403(i)(1); or
      (3)   the property is sold at tax sale.
   (b)   Amount due upon lapse; collection. If an allocation lapses by
operation of law, all allocation reservation charges that have been paid are
forfeited and the following fees and charges, along with any interest and
penalties that have accumulated on the fees and charges, immediately becomes
due and payable and shall be collected as provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code:
      (1)   any unpaid allocation reservation charges, including deferred
allocation reservation charges and any interest on deferred allocation
reservation charges;
      (2)   any accumulated interest and penalties on the capital facility
connection charges calculated in accordance with §
13-5-403(f) and (h); and
      (3)   a lapsing fee in the amount of the sum of the applicable prime rate
plus 5% multiplied by the capital facility connection charge in effect as of
the date of the lapse, except that if an allocation lapses by operation of law
under subsection (a)(2) because of unpaid allocation reservation charges and an
allocation may be restored in accordance with subsection (d), a lapsing fee in
the amount of the applicable prime rate plus an additional 5% of the unpaid
allocation reservation charges that caused the lapse, if paid in accordance
with subsection (d)(3).
   (c)   No lapse to extent fees and charges paid. No part of an allocation for
which all fees and charges have been paid and which has been used for
connection to the County's water or wastewater system shall lapse.
   (d)   Restoration of allocation. An allocation that lapses by operation of
law under subsection (a)(2) because of a default on the requirement to pay fees
and charges may be restored if:
      (1)   the water or wastewater capacity has not been reallocated; and
      (2)   a written request to restore an allocation is received by the
Office of Finance no later than thirty days before the date that the property
is to be sold at tax sale; and
      (3)   all fees and charges set forth in §
13-5-403 along with any interest and penalties that have accrued on the fees
and charges and the fees and charges set forth in subsection (b) are paid no
later than 4:30 p.m. on the day preceding the day the property is to be sold at
tax sale, with all fees and charges calculated to and based on the rates in
effect on the date of payment as if no lapse in allocation had occurred.
(Bill No. 5-05; Bill No. 5-11; Bill No. 18-12; Bill No. 3-13; Bill No. 111-15 ;
Bill No. 17-19)
§ 13-5-406. Private financing for additional capacity.
   (a)   Generally. If a developer agrees to provide or finance, at no cost to
the County, the cost of all or part of the construction of or addition to a
capital facility that the County will not immediately provide, the County may
grant an allocation for the development in an amount up to the capacity
provided or financed.
   (b)   Agreement. Any allocation granted under this section shall be
incorporated as part of a written agreement between the developer and the
County that sets forth the terms and conditions under which the allocation is
granted. In negotiating the terms and conditions of each agreement, the
director shall consider the capacity requirements as set forth in the Master
Plan For Water Supply And Sewerage Systems, service requirements for existing
communities and properties not yet served, and service requirements for any
developments awaiting allocation.
(Bill No. 5-05)
§ 13-5-407. Assignment or conveyance of allocation.
   An allocation may not be assigned or conveyed separately from the property
to which the allocation applies, but it may be transferred for use within the
development for which the allocation was originally granted.
(Bill No. 5-05)
§ 13-5-408. Allotment.
   (a)   Committee. An allotment committee consisting of the Planning and
Zoning Officer, the Director of Public Works, and the Director of Inspections
and Permits, or their designees, shall establish allotments on a service-area
basis as set forth in the Master Plan for Water Supply and Sewerage Systems.
   (b)   Capacity need. The allotment committee may distribute and redistribute
allotments to reflect changes in market demands, development activity, and the
needs of the community and County. Allotments shall be based on the following
categories of capacity need:
      (1)   public health, including failing wells and septic systems;
      (2)   public service, including County capital projects;
      (3)   assisted housing;
      (4)   infill lots;
      (5)   community development projects;
      (6)   residential;
      (7)   commercial;
      (8)   industrial;
      (9)   reserve capacity; and
      (10)   other categories as determined by the allotment committee.
   (c)   Reports. The committee shall prepare reports on the allotments
available to categories of capacity need and the availability of unallotted
capacity.
(Bill No. 5-05; Bill No. 62-11)
SUBTITLE 5. WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS
§ 13-5-501. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Accidental discharge" means an exceptional incident in which a
user unintentionally and temporarily does not comply with the standards
established in this subtitle due to factors beyond the reasonable control of
the user, but the term does not include improperly designed treatment
facilities; inadequate treatment facilities; lack of preventive maintenance; or
careless or improper operation.
      (2)   "Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or the Clean
Water Act, as amended.
      (3)   "Administrator" means the Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or the Administrator's designee.
      (4)   "Authorized representative" means an officer of a corporation, a
general partner of a partnership, a sole proprietor, or the authorized agent of
each that is responsible for the operation of a facility that is an industrial
user.
      (5)   "Biochemical oxygen demand" means the quantity of oxygen, expressed
in mg/l, used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter during incubation
at 20°C for a period of five days, in accordance with procedures given in
Standard Methods.
      (6)   "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
      (7)   "Categorical user" means a user subject to federal categorical
pretreatment standards.
      (8)   "Chemical oxygen demand" means the quantity of oxygen, expressed in
mg/l, used in the chemical oxidation of organic matter in accordance with
procedures given in Standard Methods.
      (9)   "County system" means any and all devices, appurtenances, and
equipment, whether owned by the County or under a license, lease, or contract
to provide service to the County, including devices, equipment, methods, and
systems used or designed to recycle or reuse wastewater; devices, equipment,
methods, and systems used or designed to prevent, abate, reduce, store, treat,
separate, or dispose of wastewater and stormwater, and waste in combined
stormwater and sanitary sewer systems; and any device, equipment, or system
that conveys wastewater to the County system from outside the County that by
contract or agreement with the County becomes a user of the County system.
      (10)   "Discharge" means the direct or indirect introduction of
pollutants into the County system from any source, by any means.
      (11)   "Domestic waste" means water-carried wastes discharged into the
County system from the sanitary conveniences of all types of dwellings, office
buildings, factories, institutions, and commercial establishments, and that are
free from surface stormwater and non-domestic wastes.
      (12)   "Engineer" means a registered professional engineer licensed to
practice in the State.
      (13)   "Existing source" means any building, structure, or installation
connected to the County system prior to the effective date of this subtitle.
      (14)   "Garbage" means solid waste and residue from the preparation,
cooking, dispensing, handling, storage, and sale of food.
      (15)   "Hauled wastes" means any combination of domestic or nondomestic
waste that together with any treated or untreated groundwater, surface water,
and stormwater comes from any source and is transported from its point of
generation for discharge into the County system.
      (16)   "Hexane extractable materials" means fats, greases, or oils
extractable from wastes in accordance with Standard Methods.
      (17)   "Interference" means a discharge that alone or in conjunction with
one or more discharges from other sources:
         (i)   inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use, or disposal; and
         (ii)   causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES
permit or the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with
the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder
or more stringent State or local regulations: §405 of the Clean Water Act; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) including Title II, more commonly referred to
as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State
regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act;
and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
      (18)   "Local limits" means wastewater discharge standards developed by
the County to protect the treatment plant against interference, pass-through,
sludge contamination, and worker health and safety.
      (19)   "Manhole" means a structure designed to provide access to a sewer
in order to permit examination, cleaning, sampling, or flow measurement.
      (20)   "National categorical pretreatment standards" means any
pretreatment regulation that contains pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
the EPA in accordance with §307(b) and (c) of the Act and that applies to
specific categories of users.
      (21)   "New source" has the meaning stated in 40 CFR Part 403.
      (22)   "Non-domestic waste" means solid, liquid, or gaseous waste
resulting from an industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business process or
commercial or institutional operation or from the development, recovery, or
processing of natural resources, including all substances except domestic
sewage.
      (23)   "Nonresidential user" means any user other than a residential
user.
      (24)   "Nonsignificant commercial user" means a nonresidential user that
discharges only domestic waste.
      (25)   "Nonsignificant industrial user" means a user that is not a
significant user and has a discharge consisting of domestic and non-domestic
waste; manufactures or produces a product which involves the use and storage of
chemicals in varying quantities; or has the potential through an accidental or
normal discharge to impact the collection system or a treatment plant.
      (26)   "Oil and grease user" means a nonresidential user who has a grease
interceptor or oil separator onsite or whose business purchases, generates, or
discharges food-related oils, grease, or petroleum-based oils or grease.
      (27)   "Pass-through" means a discharge that exits a POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources and that causes a violation of any requirement of
the POTW's NPDES permit.
      (28)   "Person" has the meaning stated in §
1-1-101 of this Code and, in addition, includes a governmental body.
      (29)   "pH" means the base 10 logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen
ion concentration, expressed in moles per liter, determined in accordance with
Standard Methods.
      (30)   "Pollutant" means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, septage, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt, industrial, municipal, or agricultural waste discharged into water, or
any other substance the Director determines and can demonstrate to be
unacceptable or harmful for discharge into the County system.
      (31)   "Pretreatment" means the reduction in the amount of pollutants,
the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or instead of
discharging or otherwise introducing pollutants into the County system.
      (32)   "Pretreatment standards" means any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with §307(b) or (c) of
the Act that applies to a specific category of industrial users or any federal,
State, or local discharge limitation that applies to users of the County
system.
      (33)   "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities that causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources that may
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass, but the term does
not include economic loss caused by delays in production.
      (34)   "Significant commercial user" means a user that has a discharge
that consists of predominantly domestic waste.
      (35)   "Significant industrial user" means any nonresidential user of the
County system that:
         (i)   is or may be subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards;
         (ii)   has a discharge flow that contains more than 25,000 gallons of
wastewater per day;
         (iii)   contributes a waste stream that makes up 5% or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or
         (iv)   except for a user who discharges hauled waste into the County
system in accordance with §
13-5-507, is determined by the Director to have a significant impact or
potential for significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing factors, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of
sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system
in accordance with this subtitle.
      (36)   "Slugload" means any discharge of significant quantities of water,
sewage, or industrial waste that in concentration of any constituent or
quantity of flow could cause interference of the treatment works, pass through
the POTW, endanger employee and public safety and health, contaminate the
sludge, or cause a violation of any permit issued to the POTW.
      (37)   "Standard Methods" means the procedures outlined at the time of
analysis in the latest EPA-approved edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water
Pollution Control Federation.
      (38)   "Suspended solids" means solids that either float on the surface
of or are in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids and that are
removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with Standard Methods.
      (39)   "Toxic substances" means any substance, whether gaseous, liquid,
or solid, discharged into the County system that may interfere with a waste
treatment process, constitute or create a hazard to human beings or animals,
inhibit aquatic life, or create a hazard to recreation in the water receiving
the effluent from the wastewater treatment process.
      (40)   "Upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is
unintentional and temporary noncompliance with industrial pretreatment
standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial
user, but the term does not include noncompliance caused by operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack
of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
      (41)   "User" means a person who contributes or causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the County system.
      (42)   "Wastewater" means any combination of domestic and nondomestic
water-carried wastes that discharges into the County system from dwellings,
business structures, institutions, and commercial and industrial
establishments, together with groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that
may be present.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-501) (Bill No. 72-88; Bill No. 40-90; Bill No. 55-
91; Bill No. 97-96; Bill No. 80-03; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-502. Abbreviations.
   In this subtitle, the following abbreviations are used as indicated.
      (1)   BOD - biochemical oxygen demand.
      (2)   °C - degrees Celsius.
      (3)   CFR - Code of Federal Regulations.
      (4)   COD - chemical oxygen demand.
      (5)   EPA - United States Environmental Protection Agency.
      (6)   °F - degrees Fahrenheit.
      (7)   FOG – fats, oils, and greases.
      (8)   mg/l - milligrams per liter.
      (9)   NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
      (10)   POTW - publicly-owned treatment works.
      (11)   SIC - Standard Industrial Classification.
      (12)   U.S.C. - United States Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-501) (Bill No. 72-88; Bill No. 40-90; Bill No. 55-
91; Bill No. 97-96; Bill No. 80-03; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-503. Conformity to subtitle.
   A person may not discharge wastewater into the County system except in
conformance with this subtitle.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-503) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-504. Prohibited discharges in general.
   A user may not discharge into the County system:
      (1)   waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140°F or
60°C using the test methods specified in 40 CFR Part 261.21, and pollutants
that by their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient alone or by
interaction to cause a fire or explosion hazard in the County system;
      (2)   solids or viscous substances in quantities capable of obstructing
the flow in sanitary sewers or otherwise interfering with the proper operation
of the County system;
      (3)   garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension
that has not been shredded to the degree that all particles will be carried
freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in sanitary sewers and
from any garbage grinder equipped with a motor that is greater than one and
one- half horsepower;
      (4)   free or emulsified hexane extractable materials that are not
readily biodegradable:
         (i)   when FOG wastes are such that they could solidify at normal
wastewater temperatures and contribute to sewer line clogging, skimming and
grease-handling equipment overload, or treatment process interference in
accordance with the following: grease interceptors and oil separators shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with the County Plumbing Code and grease
and oil wastes may not be discharged into the County system; and
         (ii)   discharges of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin in amounts that may cause interference or pass-
through.
      (5)   wastewater having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 10.0 or having
any other corrosive property that may be hazardous to the County system or
County personnel;
      (6)   substances either singly or by interaction with other substances
that injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process; constitute a
hazard to humans or animals; exceed the limitations set forth in applicable
national categorical pretreatment standards or in the local limits; or result
in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity
that may cause acute worker health or safety problems.
      (7)   noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids that singly or by
interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a nuisance or hazard to
life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the County system for its
maintenance and repair;
      (8)   substances that may cause the County system's treatment residues,
sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and rescue or may interfere
with the reclamation process;
      (9)   substances that if discharged into the County system will cause the
County to be out of compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines, or regulations developed under § 405 of the Act or with criteria,
guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use and disposal developed in
accordance with the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, or any State standards applicable to the sludge
management method employed;
      (10)   substances that will cause the County to violate its NPDES permit,
State discharge permit, or any applicable receiving water quality standards;
      (11)   substances, including dye wastes and vegetable farming solutions
with objectionable color, that cannot be removed in the County system so as to
cause the wastewater treatment plant effluent to fail to meet State or federal
requirements;
      (12)   wastewater or vapor that has a temperature greater than 60°C
(140°F), will inhibit biological activity in the County system's treatment
works resulting in interference, or has a temperature that causes the influent
at the treatment plant to exceed 40°C (104°F);
      (13)   a slugload;
      (14)   noncontact cooling water, stormwater, surface water, groundwater,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water from air conditioning units
with three tons of refrigeration or larger, or unpolluted water as determined
by the Director;
      (15)   radioactive wastes or isotopes with a half-life or concentration
that exceeds the limits established by the Director in order to comply with
applicable State or federal regulations;
      (16)   substances alone or in combination with other substances that are
not amenable to biological treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment
processes employed or that are amenable to treatment only if the wastewater
treatment plant effluent is not able to meet the requirements of other State or
federal agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to receiving waters;
      (17)   wastewater that exceeds the County's local limits for permissible
pollutants;
      (18)   wastewater that can be demonstrated to cause or may cause a hazard
to human life, to create a public nuisance, or to harm the County system; or
      (19)   any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points
designated by the Director.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-504) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 66-85; Bill No. 94-
92; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-505. Limitations on wastewater strength.
   (a)   Requirements. Except as provided in subsection (b), each user shall
meet each of the following standards: the pretreatment standards set forth in
this subtitle and in regulations promulgated by the Director and the State's
pretreatment regulations set forth in COMAR, Title 26. In addition, each
categorical user shall also meet the national categorical pretreatment
standards set forth in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 - 471.
   (b)   Conflict. In the event of an irreconcilable conflict between any of
the standards set forth in subsection (a), the more stringent standard shall
apply.
   (c)   Authority of Director. The Director may adopt, impose, change, or
modify specific pollutant limitations or requirements for discharges into the
County system, whether for specific or general uses or in general in order to
conform with State or federal pretreatment regulations or requirements or to
protect worker and public health, safety, and welfare.
   (d)   Prohibition. Unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement, a user may not increase the use of potable or process
water or attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with any federal, State, or local
pretreatment standard or requirement.
   (e)   Mass limitations. The Director may impose mass limitations on any user
using dilution to meet pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (f)   Industrial users. Industrial users shall comply with the federal
pretreatment regulations in 40 CFR Part 403, the national categorical
pretreatment standards set forth in 40 CFR, Subchapter N, Parts 405 - 471, and
all applicable federal, State, or local statutes, ordinances, and regulations.
   (g)   Discharge standards when another jurisdiction involved. Users that
discharge to jurisdictions outside the County shall comply with the discharge
standards adopted by the County or the outside jurisdiction, whichever is more
stringent. Users located outside the County that contribute wastewater to
County wastewater treatment plants shall comply with the provisions of this
subtitle or the standards of the jurisdiction where the user is located,
whichever is more stringent.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-505) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 66-85; Bill No. 53-
90; Bill No. 94-92; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-506. Accidental discharges – Protection against.
   (a)   Requirement. Each user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or substances at the user's cost
and expense.
   (b)   Plans and operating procedures. Detailed plans that show facilities
and operating procedures intended to provide this protection shall be submitted
to the Department for review as part of the application for a permit and be
approved by the Department before construction of the facility. The review and
approval of plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the
responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of
this subtitle.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-506) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-507. Discharge of hauled wastes.
   (a)   License required. Hauled waste may not be discharged into the County
system except by persons possessing a valid scavenger's license issued under
Article 11 of this Code.
   (b)   Prohibition relating to waste from outside the County. Hauled waste
originating outside of the County may not be discharged into the County system.
   (c)   Plants approved by Director. Hauled waste shall be discharged into the
County system only at wastewater treatment plants approved by the Director.
   (d)   Director's determination of hazard or violation. If the Director
determines that hauled wastes proposed to be discharged into the County system
constitute or may constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and operation of
the County system, a violation of this subtitle, or a violation of a hauled
waste discharge permit, the Director may refuse to permit the hauled wastes to
be discharged into the County system, order any discharge in progress to be
stopped, order any waste hauler not to discharge into the County system, or
order storage tanks and lines of any scavenger vehicle to be emptied and
thoroughly cleaned before any waste collected may be discharged into the County
system.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-507) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 66-85; Bill No. 63-
04)
§ 13-5-508. Fees.
   (a)   Scope. The fees set forth in this section do not apply to religious
facilities or to nonsignificant commercial users.
   (b)   Establishment. There are a permit fee and an annual administrative fee
separate from all other fees chargeable by the County.
   (c)   Permit fee. The permit fee is:
      (1)   for significant industrial users, $1,600 per application;
      (2)   for nonsignificant industrial users, $100 per application;
      (3)   for significant commercial users, $100 per application;
      (4)   for users required to have and maintain a grease interceptor or oil
separator, $100 per application; and
      (5)   for dischargers of hauled wastes, $100 per application.
   (d)   Administrative fee. The annual administrative fee is:
      (1)   for significant industrial users, $3,200;
      (2)   for nonsignificant industrial users, $1,300;
      (3)   for significant commercial users, $100; and
      (4)   for users required to have or maintain a grease interceptor or oil
separator, $100.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-508) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 66-85; Bill No. 37-
86; Bill No. 91-86; Bill No. 22-88; Bill No. 53-90; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-509. Wastewater discharge permits – Nonresidential users.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to nonresidential users other than
nonsignificant commercial users, who for purposes of this section are referred
to as "nonresidential users."
   (b)   Permit required as part of sewer connection permit. Nonresidential
users discharging or proposing to discharge wastewater, except hauled wastes,
into the County system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the
Director in accordance with this section. The permit shall be issued as part of
the user's sewer connection permit.
   (c)   Application. New nonresidential users shall apply for a permit at
least 90 days before commencing discharge into the County system.
Nonresidential users shall complete and file a permit application that contains
all information required by the Department Permit applications for significant
industrial users and nonsignificant industrial users shall be signed by a
responsible corporate officer, general partner, or proprietor or by a duly
authorized representative of the officer, partner, or proprietor, as defined
and provided in 40 CFR 403.12(1).
   (d)   Approval. Within 90 days after acceptance of the data furnished, if
the application including all information is complete, adequate, and accurate
and meets all the requirements of this subtitle, the Director shall approve the
issuance of the permit subject to the permit conditions set forth in
subsections (f) and (g).
   (e)   Contents of permit. A permit shall contain the following information
to the extent applicable:
      (1)   the unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged into the County system;
      (2)   limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics that may be discharged, based on applicable general
pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and
State and local law;
      (3)   limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge and
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (4)   specifications for monitoring programs that may include sampling
locations; frequency of sampling; number, types, and standards for tests; and
reporting schedules;
      (5)   requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection,
sampling, and flow monitoring facilities;
      (6)   compliance schedules;
      (7)   requirements for submission of technical and discharge reports;
      (8)   requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge;
      (9)   requirements for notification to the Director of a new introduction
into the County system of wastewater constituents or a substantial change in
the volume or character of the wastewater constituents.
      (10)   requirements for notification of any accidental discharges into
the County system by the user;
      (11)   a listing of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (12)   a statement that a permit may not be transferred to a new owner or
operator;
      (13)   a requirement that advance notification be given to the Director
of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in the
user's discharge to the County sewer system;
      (14)   requirements for notification to the Director after a violation,
including daily maximum or minimum effluent limitations, slug loadings, or
upset;
      (15)   a requirement for notification of bypass, maintenance and
operation of pretreatment facilities, and detail of bypass provisions;
      (16)   a requirement that application for a new permit must be made at
least 180 days before the expiration date of an existing permit; and
      (17)   requirements for notification of hazardous waste discharges.
   (f)   Production levels. If the permit contains equivalent mass or
concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard, the user
shall notify the Director within two business days after the user has a
reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change
within the next calendar month.
   (g)   Expiration. A permit is valid for a specified term up to five years
but may be extended up to 180 additional days with prior approval from the
Director.
   (h)   Modification. A permit may be modified during its term to meet any
amendments to the requirements of §
13-5-505 or federal or State pretreatment standards. A permit may also be
modified if the Director finds that a user failed to comply with the permit or
this title.
   (i)   Renewal. A permit may be renewed if an application for renewal is made
no later than 180 days prior to the expiration of the permit.
   (j)   Revocation or suspension; order to comply. A permit may be revoked or
suspended if the Director finds that a user failed to comply with the permit or
this title. The Director may also issue an order to comply for noncompliance
with this subtitle.
   (k)   Transfer. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued only to a
specific user for a specific use or operation and shall not be reassigned,
transferred, or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, to a new or
changed operation without express written permission of the Director.
   (l)   Application for modification. A user shall apply for modification of a
permit whenever applicable national categorical pretreatment standards are
promulgated or revised or the user plans to expand or change a use or operation
or alter its existing wastewater discharge in quantity or constituents.
   (m)   Plan for the provision of additional operational or maintenance
activities. When additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance
activities are necessary to comply with this subtitle, a user shall develop and
submit to the Director for approval a plan to provide additional pretreatment
or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities,
including the following:
      (1)   a schedule containing milestone dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the earliest possible construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to comply with all
requirements of this subtitle, including dates relating to hiring an engineer
or other appropriate personnel, completing preliminary or final plans,
executing contracts for major components, and commencing or completing
construction;
      (2)   complete plans and specifications for the proposed work that are
prepared by, signed by, and bear the seal of an engineer, but the County by its
approval of the plans and specifications does not warrant that the specified
facilities will meet the requirements of this subtitle;
      (3)   provisions for completion of any single step directed toward
compliance within nine months unless otherwise approved by the Director; and
      (4)   for a user identified as a new source of a discharge, provisions
for the installation and start up of all pollution control equipment before
commencement of the discharge and in the shortest feasible time, not to exceed
90 days, in order to achieve compliance with all applicable standards.
   (n)   Progress reports. Every nine months, but not later than 14 days
following each milestone date set forth in the schedule required under
subsection (m)(1) and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the Director that includes verification that the user has
complied with the increment of progress represented by that milestone date or,
if verification is not provided, the date on which the user expects to comply
with the increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken
to return to the approved schedule.
   (o)   Inspection and sampling. The Director may require inspection and
sampling manholes, flow measuring, recording, and sampling equipment.
   (p)   User surcharges. The Director may establish a system of user
surcharges that are based on treatment costs for compatible pollutants in order
to recover the actual cost of the treatment of excessive strength waste
introduced into the collection system by users and that are computed in
accordance with the following formula:
      Sewer use surcharge (S) = V × 8.34 × (FB (AB-250) + FS (AS-250) + FP (AP-
8))
   Where:
      V is the volume of sewage in millions of gallons discharged by a public
sewer system user during the billing period.
      FB is the sewer use surcharge rate for biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
expressed in dollars/pound.
      FS is the sewer use surcharge rate for total suspended solids (TSS)
expressed in dollars/pound.
      FP is the sewer use surcharge rate for total phosphorus (TP) expressed in
dollars/pound.
      AB is the average daily concentration of BOD constituents in the sewage
discharged expressed in mg/l.
      AS is the average daily concentration of TSS in the sewage discharged
expressed in mg/l.
      AP is the average concentration of TP in the sewage discharged expressed
in mg/l.
      250 is the maximum daily concentration (mg/l) of BOD and TSS in the
sewage discharged for which a sewer use surcharge is not required for that
sewage parameter.
      8 is the maximum daily concentration (mg/l) of TP in the sewage
discharged for which a sewer use surcharge is not required for that sewage
parameter.
Of the three terms, FB (AB-250), FS (AS-250), and FP (AP-8) in the above
formula, only those terms having positive values for the sewage discharged
shall be used in the computation of the sewer use surcharge.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-509) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 53-90; Bill No. 94-
92; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-510. Hauled waste discharge permits.
   (a)   Requirements. The discharge of hauled waste into the County system is
permitted only on compliance with the provisions of a hauled waste discharge
permit that has been obtained from the Director, payment of the required fees
and charges, and compliance by the hauler with all conditions of the hauler's
permit. The permit is subject to all provisions of this subtitle.
   (b)   Conditions of permit. A permit shall contain all conditions
demonstrated to be appropriate by the Director in accordance with this
subtitle, including:
      (1)   conditions applicable to wastewater discharge permits;
      (2)   requirements for scavenger vehicles, including vehicle permits,
type, equipment, clearance and identification, and limitations on other uses of
the vehicles;
      (3)   discharge procedures;
      (4)   limitations as to time, location, volume, and flow of discharges;
      (5)   requirements for inspections and sampling;
      (6)   fee payment procedures;
      (7)   limitations on constituents and materials to be discharged; and
      (8)   requirements and reports.
   (c)   Hauled waste manifests. Before the discharge of hauled waste into the
County system, a hauler shall submit to the operator of the facility to which
the waste is to be discharged the hauled waste manifests. The manifests shall
be in the form prescribed by the Director and shall contain, at a minimum, the
name and scavenger license number of the hauler, the capacity of the vehicle,
the name and address of the waste generator, and the description of the origin
of the waste.
   (d)   Expiration. All hauled waste discharge permits shall expire 12 months
from the date of issuance.
   (e)   Transfer. A hauled waste discharge permit shall not be assigned,
transferred, sold, loaned, or otherwise used by a new owner, new user,
different premises, new or changed operation, or anywise other than listed on
the permit, unless expressly authorized in writing by the Director.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-510) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 66-85; Bill No. 63-
04)
§ 13-5-511. Standards; modification.
   (a)   Adoption. National categorical pretreatment standards are adopted and
made part of this subtitle and enforceable by the County in accordance with
their terms.
   (b)   Notification. The Director shall notify all affected nonresidential
users of any changes in applicable federal, State, or County requirements or
standards by first class mail at the last listed address on the user's permit.
   (c)   Modification. The Director may modify the requirements of this
subtitle in order to comply with applicable State or federal requirements.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-511) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-512. Reporting requirements.
   (a)   Materials required. On request by the County, a user shall provide
plans, reports, questionnaires, notices, analytical data, and information
required to be provided by 40 CFR 403.12 or this subtitle or any other item the
Director determines is necessary to evaluate the user's waste discharge
characteristics and ensure compliance with this subtitle.
   (b)   Reports for all significant industrial users. Unless required more
frequently by the Director or applicable national categorical pretreatment
standards, each significant industrial user, after commencement of the
discharge into the County system, shall submit to the Director not less than
semiannually periodic compliance reports and the results of any monitoring of
pollutants using approved analytical and sampling procedures that are obtained
more frequently than otherwise required by this subsection.
   (c)   Reports and records for grease interceptor or oil separator. A user
required by this Code to use or maintain a grease interceptor or oil separator
that discharges into the County system shall file an annual report as required
by the permit, maintain records of compliance with the County Plumbing Code for
three years, and make records of compliance available for inspection by the
Director.
   (d)   Report for accidental discharge. A user that experiences an accidental
discharge or a slugload shall immediately inform the Department and within five
days of discovery file a written follow-up report with the Department stating:
      (1)   a description of the accidental discharge or slugload, its cause,
and its impact on the user's compliance status;
      (2)   the duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of
noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance
is reasonably expected to occur; and
      (3)   a description of steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate,
and prevent recurrence of an accidental discharge, a slugload, or other
conditions of noncompliance.
   (e)   Responsibilities of reporter. The filing of a report required under
this section does not release the user from any responsibility for loss or
damages to the County system or for fines or penalties imposed on the County by
State or federal law that are the result of any action or inaction by the user.
   (f)   Analysis. Any analysis performed as a requirement of this subtitle
shall be undertaken in accordance with procedures established by the
Administrator under 40 CFR Part 136, as amended.
   (g)   Reports by industrial user that indicate violation of this subtitle.
If the analysis of any sampling undertaken by an industrial user, whether
required or voluntary, indicates that there may be a violation of this
subtitle, the user shall notify the Director no more than 24 hours after
discovering the violation; immediately repeat the sampling and analysis; and,
within 30 days after discovering the violation, submit the repeat analysis to
the Director.
   (h)   Report certification. All reports submitted by industrial users shall
include the certification statement contained in 40 CFR 403.12 and be signed by
an authorized representative of the user.
   (i)   Plan to control slug discharges. No less than every two years, the
Director shall evaluate and determine if each significant user needs a plan to
control slug discharges and, if required by the Director, a significant
industrial user shall submit a plan that contains the specific information
described in 40 CFR 403.8(f).
   (j)   Discharge of hazardous waste. Nonresidential users shall notify in
writing the Director, the United States Environmental Protection Agency
Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste
authorities in accordance with the procedures described in 40 CFR 403.12(p) of
any discharge into the County system of a substance that is a hazardous waste
as defined in 40 CFR Part 261.
   (k)   Miscellaneous notifications. A user shall promptly notify the County
of any discharge that may violate this subtitle or have an adverse impact on a
POTW. A user shall promptly notify the County prior to any substantial change
in the volume or character of the pollutants in the user's discharges.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-512) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 53-90; Bill No. 94-
92; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-513. Monitoring facilities.
   (a)   Generally. Each non-residential user shall provide and operate, at the
user's own expense, a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and
flow measurement of each sewer discharge to the County system. Each monitoring
facility shall be situated on the non-residential user's premises, unless it
would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the non-residential user.
Monitoring facilities shall be constructed within 120 days of receipt of a
permit by a non-residential user and constructed and maintained in accordance
with all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
   (b)   Sampling. A control manhole shall be constructed at a location
approved by the Director, built in a manner approved by the Director, and
accessible to the Director for sampling at all times. For sampling, there shall
be ample room at or near a sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and
preparation of samples for analysis. Facilities, sampling, and measuring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition at the non-residential user's expense. At least annually, the
Director shall conduct one sampling visit for each significant industrial user.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-513) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 94-92; Bill No. 63-
04)
§ 13-5-514. Inspections.
   (a)   Generally. The Director may enter the facilities of a user at
reasonable hours to assure compliance with the requirements of this subtitle,
and for the purposes of inspection, sampling, or examination and copying of
records and the Director shall have the right to set up necessary devices on
the user's property to conduct inspections, sampling, compliance monitoring, or
metering operations. At least annually, the Director shall conduct an
inspection of each significant industrial user.
   (b)   User who has security measures. When a user maintains security
measures that require proper identification and clearance before entry into the
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with the security guards
so that, on presentation of suitable identification, representatives of the
Department are permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-514) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 94-92; Bill No. 63-
04)
§ 13-5-515. Confidential information.
   (a)   Generally. Information and data furnished under this subtitle shall be
available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Office of Law that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets or confidential commercial, financial, geological, or
geophysical data of the significant user under the Maryland Public Information
Act.
   (b)   Confidentiality claim. A user submitting information to the Director
may assert a confidentiality claim under the Maryland Public Information Act at
the time the information is submitted by placing on the information a cover
sheet, legend, or other form of notice employing such terms as "confidential",
"trade secret", or "proprietary". Failure to assert a claim may result in the
disclosure of information without fault to the Director or the County.
Wastewater characteristics are not considered confidential information.
   (c)   Disclosure and notification. The County may disclose information to a
County, State, or federal agency or office for uses related to this subtitle,
the NPDES permit, or the State of Maryland discharge permit on receipt of a
written request frown an authorized officer or employee of the agency. Except
when the County provides information to a federal or State court or
investigate/enforcement agency, the County shall give a user at least 10 days'
notice prior to disclosure.
   (d)   Applicable law. Requests for information, determination of claims of
confidentiality, and responses shall be in accordance with the Maryland Public
Information Act, and §§
1004 and
1005 of the Charter.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-515) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-516. Records retention.
   (a)   Retention for three years. A user required as a condition of the
permit to submit reports to the Director shall retain and preserve the records,
books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence, and summaries relating to
monitoring, sampling, and chemical analysis made by or on behalf of the user
for at least three years.
   (b)   Compliance and enforcement records. Records that pertain to matters
that are the subject of a compliance order or other enforcement or litigation
activities brought by the County shall be retained and preserved by the user
until all enforcement activities have concluded.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-516) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-517. Bypasses.
   (a)   When permitted. An anticipated bypass is permitted if the Director
determines that the criteria set forth in this section will be met. A bypass is
permitted if it does not violate this subtitle and it is for essential
maintenance to ensure efficient operation of a treatment plant.
   (b)   When prohibited. A bypass is prohibited unless necessary to prevent a
loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage and a feasible
alternative to a bypass, excluding inadequate back-up equipment that should
have been installed or maintained, is not available. A bypass is also
prohibited unless an industrial user:
      (1)   notifies the Director as soon as the user is aware of the need for
a bypass;
      (2)   notifies the Director orally no later than 24 hours after the user
is aware of an unanticipated bypass and, unless waived by the Director within
five days after oral notification is given, submits a written report that
contains a description of the bypass and its cause, the duration of the bypass
including exact dates and times, if correction has not occurred, the
anticipated time the bypass is expected to continue, and the steps taken or
phases planned to reduce, eliminate, or prevent a recurrence of the bypass.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-517) (Bill No. 94-92; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-518. Upsets.
   (a)   Affirmative defense. An upset is permitted as an affirmative defense
to an action brought against an industrial user for noncompliance with the
categorical pretreatment standards if the user:
      (1)   demonstrates through properly signed contemporaneous operating logs
and similar relevant evidence that the cause of the upset has been identified
and that the treatment facility was being operated properly and in accordance
with all applicable operating and maintenance procedures; and
      (2)   submits within 24 hours after becoming aware of the upset a
description of the indirect discharge and the cause of noncompliance; the
period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times; the anticipated time
that noncompliance will continue; and the steps being taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent a recurrence of the noncompliance and, if the
information required by this subsection (a)(2) is submitted orally, provides a
written report confirming the oral information no later than five days after
the upset.
   (b)   Burden of proof. The burden of proof shall be on the industrial user
to show that an upset has occurred.
   (c)   Industrial users. The industrial user shall control production of all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards on reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility
until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-518) (Bill No. 94-92; Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-519. Administrative enforcement; injunctive relief.
   (a)   Compliance. The Director shall require a user to take action for
compliance through issuance of an order, notice, assessment of a penalty, or
entry into a consent order or agreement whenever the Director in accordance
with this subtitle finds that a user has failed to monitor, report, or
accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
discharge; failed to report changes in wastewater constituents and
characteristics; refused reasonable access to its premises by representatives
of the County for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or violated any
other provision of this subtitle. An order or agreement authorized under this
subsection shall not be effective until the user has had the opportunity to
confer with authorized representatives of the Department.
   (b)   Suspension of service. The Director may order the immediate suspension
of water or wastewater treatment service to a user when the user fails to pay a
civil penalty, expenses, loss, or damage assessed after final adjudication when
the Director determines that an actual or potential discharge presents or
threatens an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons
or substantial danger to environment; threatens to interfere with the operation
of the County system; or threatens to violate any pretreatment limits imposed
by this subtitle, the State, or the EPA. A user notified of the suspension
order shall immediately cease all discharges. The County shall reinstate the
water or wastewater treatment service upon the submission of sufficient proof
by the user that the user has eliminated the noncomplying discharge or
conditions creating the noncompliance.
   (c)   Service and contents of order, notice, or penalty. An order, notice,
or penalty issued under this section shall be served on the user or an agent of
the user and state with reasonable specificity the nature of the violation and
the time for compliance.
   (d)   Notice to public. A list of users that meet one or more of the
following criteria for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements
during a 12-month period shall be published annually by the Director in a
newspaper of general circulation in the County:
      (1)   chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those
in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period
exceed the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant
parameter;
      (2)   technical review criteria violations in which 33% or more of all of
the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period
equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit
multiplied by 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, or 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH;
      (3)   any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit that the
Director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass-through;
      (4)   any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare, or the environment or has resulted in the Director's
exercise of emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(F)(1)(vi)(b) to halt or
prevent a discharge;
      (5)   failure to meet within 90 days after the scheduled date a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
      (6)   failure to provide within 30 days after the due date required
reports, such as baseline monitoring reportings, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on meeting compliance schedules;
      (7)   failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      (8)   any other violation or group of violations that the Director
determines adversely affect the operation or implementation of this subtitle.
   (e)   Enforcement response plan. The Director shall develop and implement an
enforcement response plan that:
      (1)   details how the Director will investigate and respond to instances
of industrial noncompliance;
      (2)   describes how the Director will investigate instances of
noncompliance;
      (3)   describes the types of escalating enforcement responses the
Director may take in response to anticipated industrial user violations and the
time periods within which responses will take place;
      (4)   identifies by title the officials responsible for implementing each
type of enforcement response; and
      (5)   adequately reflects the Director's primary responsibility to
enforce all applicable pretreatment requirements and standards, as provided in
40 CFR 403.8(F)(1) and (F)(2).
   (f)   Compliance schedules. The Director may require:
      (1)   the development of compliance schedules if additional pretreatment
or operation and maintenance will be required for an industrial user to comply
with this subtitle or a State or federal pretreatment standard or requirement;
and
      (2)   the industrial user to submit for approval a schedule specifying
the shortest time frame for the user to achieve compliance including increments
of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to construction and operation of the additional pretreatment to
bring the industrial user into compliance.
   (g)   Compliance agreements. The Director may enter into an agreement with
an industrial user to ensure compliance with pretreatment standards and
requirements.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-520) (Bill No. 40-85; Bill No. 66-85; Bill No. 94-
92; Bill No. 63-04)
SUBTITLE 6. ASSESSMENTS
§ 13-5-601. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   "Equivalent dwelling unit" has the meaning stated in §
13-5-401(4).
      (2)   "Lot" means those parcels of real property that have separate tax
account numbers according to the Property Account Identification Numbers
assigned by the Maryland Department of Assessments and Taxation, whether or not
improved, but the term does not include a lot that the owner can prove to the
satisfaction of the County is non-buildable under any circumstance.
      (3)   "Nonresidential lot" means any lot other than a residential lot.
      (4)   "Project cost" means all costs or expenses required to complete a
water or wastewater extension or upgrade, including the combined cost of
design, engineering, surveying, construction, right-of-way or property
acquisition, and connections.
      (5)   "Residential lot" means a lot that is zoned residential as shown on
the Anne Arundel County Digital Zoning Layer adopted in accordance with §
18-2-106 of this Code, or a lot upon which there is at least one dwelling unit,
as defined in
Article 18.
(Bill No. 80-20)
§ 13-5-602. Authority to impose; liability; lien.
   (a)   Authority to impose. The County may impose assessments to recover the
project cost to the County of constructing water or wastewater facilities or
the project cost of bringing private water or wastewater facilities up to
County standards so that the County may accept ownership of the private
facilities.
   (b)   Duty to pay. The owners of real property, including the County, who
connect to the County's water or wastewater facilities or whose property is
benefited by the County's water or wastewater facilities shall pay the
applicable assessments set forth in this subtitle.
   (c)   Collection. Except for properties that qualify for the deferral
described in §
13-5-815, assessments shall be billed annually over a 30-year period. For
properties that qualify for the deferral described in §
13-5-815, assessments shall be billed annually over a 40-year period.
Assessments shall be paid within 30 days of the due date on the billing
invoice, and any amount unpaid 30 days after the due date shall be collected as
provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code. Except as provided in §
13-5-603(h) and except for an annual assessment that has been billed,
assessments remain a lien against the property upon a transfer of title.
(Bill No. 80-20)
§ 13-5-603. Determination of assessment.
   (a)   Requirement. For a property required to connect to a project initiated
in accordance with §§
13-5-302 and
13-5-303 or for a project bringing private water or wastewater facilities up to
County standards so that the County may accept ownership of the private
facilities in accordance with §
13-5-105, the Director shall calculate the rate of the assessment to be levied
in order to recover the project costs for each individual project in accordance
with this section.
   (b)   Definition of net assessable amount. The Director shall determine the
net assessable amount of a project by:
      (1)   establishing the project cost;
      (2)   subtracting any costs associated with making service available
beyond the area to be served and any State aid, Federal aid, or other
contributions towards the project; and
      (3)   adding the amount necessary to reimburse the County for the
estimated interest expense of the County funds invested in the project, as
determined by the Controller.
   (c)   Assessment determined by dividing the net assessable amount by the
number of equivalent dwelling units. For purposes of the assessment, the
Director shall determine equivalent dwelling units as set forth in §
13-5-804(a), subject to the limitations set forth in subsection (e). Except as
provided in subsection (h), each lot shall be assigned at least one equivalent
dwelling unit. The Director shall set the assessment for an equivalent dwelling
unit by dividing the net assessable amount by the total number of equivalent
dwelling units attributable to all of the lots to be served by the project.
   (d)   Assessment; residential lot. For a residential lot, the assessment
shall be the equivalent dwelling unit assessment as calculated in accordance
with subsection (c) multiplied by the number of equivalent dwelling units
attributable to the lot, less any State aid, Federal aid, or County subsidy
provided for the residential lot.
   (e)   Assessment; nonresidential lot. For a nonresidential lot, the
assessment shall be:
      (1)   the equivalent dwelling unit assessment as calculated in accordance
with subsection (c) multiplied by the number of equivalent dwelling units
attributable to the uses on the nonresidential lot, except that for purposes of
the assessment, the number of equivalent dwelling units attributable to a
nonresidential lot may not exceed five for industrial uses or three for all
other nonresidential uses; and
      (2)   the costs, as determined by the Department, to upgrade, upsize, or
improve the water or wastewater facilities to serve the specific needs of the
nonresidential lot that exceed the amount calculated under paragraph (1).
   (f)   Annual assessment. The owner of each lot shall annually pay the
assessment calculated for the lot in accordance with subsection (d) or (e)
divided by 30 years, or, for projects that qualify for the deferral described
in §
13-5-815, divided by 40.
   (g)   Payment upon subdivision; change in use.
      (1)   If a lot subject to an assessment under this subtitle is subdivided
in accordance with
Article 17 of this Code, the remainder of the assessment shall be paid in full
prior to approval of the subdivision plat and the remainder shall be collected
as provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code and constitute a lien on the property. The Director may
impose an assessment on any new lots created as a result of a subdivision.
      (2)   The Director may increase or decrease the assessment of a lot if
the use on a lot is changed, and the Director shall adjust, as appropriate, the
equivalent dwelling unit assessment among the lots included in the project
area.
   (h)   Exemptions. Upon a request by the owner and confirmation by the
Department that the lot falls into one of the below categories, the following
lots are exempt from the assessment:
      (1)   unimproved common areas, open areas, recreation areas, or open
spaces shown on a subdivision plat and owned by a nonprofit community or
homeowners’ association; and
      (2)   a lot owned by a nonprofit community or homeowners’ association if
no structure on the lot is served by a private water or wastewater system at
the time of the calculation of the net assessable amount.
(Bill No. 80-20; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 13-5-604. Notice and hearing; finality; adjustments.
   (a)   Notice of assessment. Before the assessment for a lot becomes final,
the Director shall notify the owner of the property in writing:
      (1)   of the number of equivalent dwelling units and the assessment
assigned to the property;
      (2)   of the right to appeal the assessment in a writing directed to the
Director and to request a hearing on the appeal before the Director; and
      (3)   that the deadline for filing an appeal and for requesting a hearing
is 30 days after the date of the notice of assessment.
   (b)   Notice of hearing. If a hearing is requested, the Director shall
notify the property owner in writing of the date, time, and location of the
hearing. The Director may extend the hearing date upon request of the property
owner.
   (c)   Finality; extension of hearing date. The assessment becomes final
unless the property owner appeals the assessment in writing within 30 days
after the date of the notification of the assessment.
   (d)   Adjustments. The Director may make fair and reasonable adjustments if
the Director concludes that, based on an appeal of an assessment, the original
assessment was incorrect or inequitable based on the use of the lot.
(Bill No. 80-20)
§ 13-5-605. Properties permitted to connect.
   (a)   Connections and assessment rates – capital projects. Except for
projects constructed in accordance with §§
13-5-302 or
13-5-303, for projects that extend water or wastewater facilities at the
County's expense, property owners are not required to connect to the
facilities. If a property owner chooses to connect to the facilities, the
County shall impose an annual assessment at the minimum basic rates in effect
at the time of the connection. Beginning December 13, 2020, the minimum basic
assessment rate shall be $343.00 per equivalent dwelling unit for connections
to the water system and $692.00 per equivalent dwelling unit for connections to
the wastewater system. The equivalent dwelling units shall be assigned to a lot
by the method set forth in §
13-5-603(d) and (e).
   (b)   Annual minimum basic assessment rate adjustments – capital projects.
In this subsection, "CPI" means the Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers
for the United States - (CPI), published by the United States Department of
Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Beginning on July 1, 2021, and each July 1
thereafter, the Director may adjust the minimum basic assessment rates set
forth in subsection (a) by a percentage change calculated by dividing the CPI
for April of that calendar year by the CPI for April for the immediately
preceding calendar year. The Director shall give written notice of the annual
adjustment to the Office of Finance and to the County Council. The annual
adjustment shall be automatically effective on July 1 of each year.
(Bill No. 80-20)
SUBTITLE 7. SPECIAL BENEFIT CHARGES
§ 13-5-701. Definition.
   In this subtitle, "special benefit charge" means annual charges levied on
properties that are or can be connected to the County water distribution system
or the County wastewater collection system, or to both systems, at rates
calculated as provided in this subtitle to produce all or part of the revenues
necessary to enable the County to meet the debt service payments anticipated in
the current expense budget.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-607) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-702. Liability.
   The owners of real property, including the County, who connect the water or
wastewater facilities of the property with the water or wastewater facilities
of the County or whose property is benefited by the water or wastewater
facilities of the County shall pay the applicable special benefit charges. The
charges shall be paid within 30 days of the due date on the billing invoice,
and any amount unpaid 30 days after the due date shall be collected as provided
in §
1-8-101 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-608) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 23-17)
§ 13-5-703. Assessment and rate.
   (a)   When assessed. Whenever the total anticipated debt service expense
exceeds the total anticipated revenues of the debt service fund and other
funding sources available in the utility fund, the Director shall include in
the next current expense budget the rate for special benefit charges necessary
to eliminate the deficiency.
   (b)   Rate per front foot. The rate for each front foot shall be established
by dividing the total amount allocated to special benefit charges by the sum of
the number of front feet of water and wastewater lines in service and water and
wastewater lines to be placed in service during the first six months of the
fiscal year.
   (c)   Rate per lot. The annual special benefit charge for each lot subject
to the charge shall be determined by multiplying the number of front feet of
the lot by the rate.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-607) (Bill No. 63-04)
SUBTITLE 8. CHARGES AND ASSESSMENTS FOR WATER AND WASTEWATER
§ 13-5-801. Liability.
   The owners of real property, including the County, who connect the water or
wastewater facilities of the property with the water or wastewater facilities
of the County or whose property is benefited by the water or wastewater
facilities of the County shall pay the applicable charges, levies, and
assessments as provided in this subtitle. All charges, levies, and assessments,
including applicable capital connection charges, shall be collected as provided
in §
1-8-101 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, §§ 5-101, 5-102)
§ 13-5-802. Scope.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided, all charges established in this
subtitle are applicable throughout the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-103) (Bill No. 63-87)
§ 13-5-803. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Equivalent dwelling unit" means a unit of 250 gallons of water,
except that for property in the Mayo Water Reclamation Subdistrict "equivalent
dwelling unit" means a unit of 225 gallons of water.
      (2)   "Peak daily usage" means the estimated average rate of use of water
on the maximum usage day.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-201) (Bill No. 80-03)
§ 13-5-804. Determination of equivalent dwelling units.
   (a)   By Director. In this subtitle, whenever a charge is set based on
equivalent dwelling units, the property owner shall provide all information
required by the Director and the Director shall reasonably determine, based on
that information and any other information that the Director deems appropriate,
the number of equivalent dwelling units for a property based on peak daily
usage. If the Director determines within a three-year period after the initial
determination that the property owner provided materially inaccurate
information, the Director shall re-determine the number of equivalent dwelling
units and the property owner shall be liable for the difference in any charge
that is set based on equivalent dwelling units.
   (b)   By agreement.
      (1)   In this section, "peaked average daily usage" means a number of
gallons of water that is the product of the average daily water usage by a
property owner during the highest actual usage billing cycle within a defined
period times the peaking factor of 1.4.
      (2)   If the Director finds that new technology or other unique
circumstances may significantly affect the determined peak daily usage, the
Director may enter into an agreement with the property owner to recalculate the
number of equivalent dwelling units based on peaked average daily usage over a
period of time determined by the Director. The agreement must be executed no
later than three months after payment of the determined capital facility
connection charges. The agreement shall provide for refund of charges by the
County if peaked average daily usage is less than 80% of determined peak daily
usage and for payment of additional charges by the property owner if peaked
average daily usage is more than 120% of determined peak daily usage based on
the recalculation. The agreement shall include terms and conditions as
determined by the Director to protect the County's interest in receiving
payment of all additional charges and to bind as necessary the property owner
and any successor in interest. If there is a change in use of the property
during the time when the recalculation is being made, the agreement shall be
null and void.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-201.1) (Bill No. 80-03; Bill. No. 8-06; Bill No. 62-11)
§ 13-5-805. Metered water and wastewater charges.
   (a)   Generally. Charges for metered water and wastewater service are
established as provided in this section, and the charges shall begin when a lot
is connected to the County’s water or wastewater system.
   (b)   Charges. The charge for each 1,000 gallons of water usage is$3.65 for
water and $6.42 for wastewater. For the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2026, and
for each fiscal year thereafter, the County Executive shall set the charges for
water and wastewater usage in accordance with §
4-11-105 of this Code and may increase the charges in an amount not to exceed
5.00% of the then current charges. Any increase in charges in an amount greater
than 5.00% shall be set by the County Council by ordinance. There is an account
maintenance charge of $6.00 per billing cycle regardless of the amount of
usage.
   (c)   Capital facility recoupment charge.
      (1)   There is a capital facility recoupment charge of $4.00 beginning on
July 1, 2024.
      (2)   For the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2025, and for each fiscal
year thereafter, the County Executive shall set the capital facility recoupment
charge for connections to the County’s water system in accordance with §
4-11-105 of this Code and may increase the charge in an amount not to exceed
5.00% of the then current charge. Any increase in the charge in an amount
greater than 5.00% shall be set by the County Council by ordinance.
      (3)   Any residential customer whose water usage exceeds 30,000 gallons
in any billing quarter shall be charged, in addition to the usage charges in
subsection (b), the capital facility recoupment charge for every full 1,000
gallons of water used in excess of 30,000 gallons.
   (d)   Fire hydrant connection permits. For water obtained from a public fire
hydrant, the quarterly charge for each 1,000 gallons of water usage is the
usage charge paid by customers connected to the County system, plus the
quarterly capital facility recoupment charge set forth in subsection (c) for
every full 1,000 gallons of water usage.
   (e)   Reduction of sewerage charge. For a residential user, where the water
usage of the first full billing quarter beginning after April 30 exceeds 110%
of the average of the previous three billing quarters, the owner’s sewerage
charge shall be reduced by the amount over 110% of the average.
   (f)   Minimum quarterly usage charge if property not in compliance with
connection requirements. The minimum quarterly usage charge for water and
wastewater service for a property not in compliance with the connection
requirements of §
13-5-304 is equal to 40% of the usage charge for water and wastewater that
would be incurred if the property were to be connected to the County system as
computed by the Department.
   (g)   Irrigation systems on nonresidential property. For water used by an
irrigation system connected to the County’s water system by separate meter in
accordance with §
13-5-813(i), the quarterly charge for each 1,000 gallons of water usage is the
usage charge paid by customers connected to the County system, plus the
quarterly capital facility recoupment charge set forth in subsection (c) for
every full 1,000 gallons of water usage. This subsection does not apply to a
nonresidential user who paid a capital facility connection charge for water
usage by an irrigation system.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-201.2) (Bill No. 22-88; Bill No. 53-88; Bill No. 69-90;
Bill No. 35-93; Bill No. 116-93; Bill No. 49-94; Bill No. 28-95; Bill No. 49-
96; Bill No. 54-99; Bill No. 24-03; Bill No. 80-03; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 6-
05; Bill No. 10-05; Bill No. 16-11; Bill No. 37-11; Bill No. 58-12; Bill No.
73-15; Bill No. 42-16; Bill No. 41-19; Bill No. 37-23; Bill No. 45-24; Bill No.
53-24; Bill No. 43-25)
§ 13-5-806. Wastewater charges for properties with water meters on private
water sources and for properties without water service.
   (a)   Private water meters; installation. If metered water is not delivered
to a residential property with wastewater service, a property owner may
install, at the property owner's expense, a water meter on the private water
source serving the property. A connection permit is required for the
installation of a water meter on a private water source.
   (b)   Same – readings; wastewater charges.
      (1)   The Department shall read a water meter on a private water source
at least annually and charge for wastewater usage in accordance with §
13-5-805.
      (2)   For any billing quarter during which no meter reading occurs, the
charge for wastewater service shall be estimated based upon prior meter
readings or, if there have not been prior meter readings, in accordance with
subsection (f).
      (3)   If the Department determines that the estimated wastewater charges
billed between the installation of the water meter on the private water source
and the first meter reading are inaccurate, the property owner shall be
credited or billed in the next billing cycle for the difference between the
estimated charges and charges based on the actual meter reading.
      (4)   If, based on the most recent meter reading, the Department
determines that the estimated wastewater charges billed since the last meter
reading are inaccurate, the property owner shall be credited or billed in the
next billing cycle for the difference between the estimated charges and the
charges based on the actual meter reading.
   (c)   Same – required replacement. A water meter on a private water source
shall be replaced by the property owner at least once every 15 years.
   (d)   Same – repair; inspection. If the Department determines that a water
meter on a private water source is not functioning properly, the property owner
shall be given notice to repair or replace the water meter within 45 days. When
the meter is repaired or replaced, the owner shall schedule an inspection with
a Department representative. If the meter is not accessible for a scheduled
inspection, or if the meter is not repaired or replaced at the time of
inspection, the property owner shall be charged $40 for each subsequent
inspection.
   (e)   Wastewater charges when private water meter not replaced. If the owner
fails to repair or replace a water meter in accordance with a notice from the
Department, the charge for wastewater service shall be in accordance with
subsection (f).
   (f)   Wastewater charges for properties without private meters. If metered
water is not delivered to a property with wastewater service and there is no
water meter on the private water source, the charge for wastewater service
shall be the average charge for wastewater service to similar properties plus
an account maintenance charge of $3.00 per billing cycle regardless of the
amount of usage. The Director may require special meters or devices for
commercial and industrial properties that do not have metered water service.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-202) (Bill No. 63-87; Bill No. 4-88; Bill No. 35-93;
Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 6-05; Bill No. 52-14; Bill No. 61-20)
§ 13-5-807. Annual report on water and wastewater service charges.
   No later than 60 days before the end of the fiscal year, the County
Executive shall report to the County Council on the rates for metered and
unmetered water and wastewater service. The report shall state any anticipated
operating deficit for the current fiscal year; the estimated operating expenses
of the water and wastewater utility for the ensuing fiscal year; and any
recommended changes in the rates to maintain a minimum of two months of
budgeted operating expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year in the unrestricted
net assets of the water and wastewater utility fund.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-202.1) (Bill No. 35-93; Bill No. 80-03)
§ 13-5-808. Environmental protection fee.
   (a)   An environmental protection fee shall be added to all usage charges
for both water and wastewater service, except for the capital facility
recoupment charge, to recover costs associated with construction of, expansion
of, and improvements to capital facilities to service existing connected
customers at the following rates:
      (1)   30%, beginning on July 1, 2020;
      (2)   32.5%, beginning on July 1, 2021;
      (3)   35%, beginning on July 1, 2022.
   (b)   Revenues accruing from this fee shall be dedicated for debt service of
the water and wastewater utility fund.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-203) (Bill No. 63-87; Bill No. 49-96; Bill No. 24-03;
Bill No. 36-07; Bill No. 42-12; Bill No. 42-16; Bill No. 39-19; Bill No. 98-20)
§ 13-5-809. Penalties, back-billing, adjustments, and payments.
   (a)   Late payment. The Office of Finance shall assess a penalty charge of
10% on all water and wastewater service charges established in §§
13-5-805,
13-5-806, and
13-5-808 that are not paid within 30 days of the billed date. If requested by a
customer, the Controller may waive the penalty charge no more than twice during
a calendar year. In addition, the Controller shall waive the penalty charge
upon making a determination that a late penalty is a result of a County error.
The Controller may waive the penalty charge upon making a determination that an
event or issued beyond a property owner’s control has resulted in billing or
payment delays for multiple property owners, such as a state of emergency or
United States Postal Service delivery delay.
   (b)   Incorrect billings or no billings. If billings are incorrect or not
made due to an omission or error by a customer, the Office of Finance may back
bill for a period not to exceed three years.
   (c)   Uninhabitable or unoccupied property. A customer may submit an
application for a waiver of a water or wastewater usage bill for any property
that becomes uninhabitable, or for residential property that will be unoccupied
for three months or more because an owner of the property is activated to
military service pursuant to an Executive Order issued by the President of the
United States. The Department may grant the waiver and, if granted, the Office
of Finance shall reduce the bill for usage to zero for a period of up to six
months or until the property is habitable or occupied again. The waiver may be
renewed in increments of up to six months upon application of the owner, for a
maximum total of no more than ten years. The application shall be submitted to
the Department within six months of the property becoming uninhabitable or the
owner being activated to military service, or prior to the expiration of a
previously granted six month waiver, and the property owner shall provide the
Department with proof that the property is uninhabitable or a copy of the
military orders calling the owner to active duty. If there are any costs to the
utility to abandon service, even on a temporary basis, or to reestablish
service, the customer shall pay these costs.
   (d)   Payment plans. In accordance with written policy of the Department,
the Office of Finance may establish payment plans for the payment of any usage
charges, penalties, and turnoff fees.
   (e)   Billing for higher than normal utility consumption. In accordance with
written policy of the Department, the Office of Finance may adjust higher than
normal utility consumption bills that are caused by events beyond the control
of or are unknown to the customer or that do not reflect the actual service
rendered.
   (f)   Sewer system backup reimbursement. The Department may reimburse a
residential customer up to $1,000 for property damage sustained as a result of
a sewer system backup into the customer's home, after a determination by Risk
Management that the backup is not a liability of the County or caused by
customer negligence. The customer shall provide receipts of expenses incurred
to cleanup or replace damaged property and proof that the customer was not
compensated for the damage by insurance.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-204) (Bill No. 80-03; Bill No. 5-13; Bill No. 66-14;
Bill No. 61-20; Bill No. 114-21)
§ 13-5-810. Procedure when charges not paid.
   (a)   Water service unpaid for 60 days. Whenever charges for water service
in excess of $200 remain unpaid for at least 60 days after the billing date,
and after written notice is left on the premises or mailed to the last-known
address of the owner, the County shall turn off water from the property in
arrears and the water shall remain turned off until the unpaid charges have
been paid or a payment plan has been established with the Office of Finance in
accordance with §
13-5-809(d). On declaration of a state of emergency by the County Executive in
accordance with State or County law, the County Executive may suspend the
provisions of this subsection.
   (b)   Water or wastewater unpaid for 90 days. Whenever charges for water or
wastewater service, or both, remain unpaid for at least 90 days after the
billing date, the charges may be collected from the person liable to pay them
by a legal action in the same manner as other debts are collectible in the
County, notwithstanding the existence of other collection remedies.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-205) (Bill No. 22-88; Bill No. 80-03)
§ 13-5-811. Charge for restoration of water service.
   Whenever water service has been turned off in accordance with §
13-5-810, and if the charges remain unpaid 60 days after the billing date, a
service charge of $50 shall be paid in order to restore service after the
payment of the previously unpaid charges. Whenever water service has been
turned off in accordance with §
13-5-108, a service charge of $50 shall be paid to restore service after
compliance with §
13-5-108.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-206) (Bill No. 49-94; Bill No. 61-20)
§ 13-5-812. Charge for meter reading, special billing, and meter test.
   There is a charge of $35 for a request for a meter reading, a special
billing, or a meter test. In accordance with written policy of the Department,
the Office of Finance may waive the charge.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-207) (Bill No. 49-94; Bill No. 36-11; Bill No. 61-20)
§ 13-5-813. Water and wastewater system connection charges and assessments.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "CPI" means the Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers for the
United States - (CPI), published by the United States Department of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics.
      (2)   "Properties with existing improvements" means improved properties
that are supplied water by means of a private well system when County water
becomes available or improved properties that have wastewater service by means
of a private septic system when County wastewater becomes available.
      (3)   "Properties with new improvements" means properties with new
construction that do not have water supplied by means of a private well system
when County water becomes available or properties with new construction that do
not have wastewater service by means of a private septic system when County
wastewater service becomes available.
   (b)   Scope. The charges specified in this section shall apply to each
property connecting to the County's water system or wastewater system and to
each commercial or industrial property that has an existing connection and
undergoes an expansion or addition to the improvements on the property or a
change of use that the Director determines will result in an increase in the
water required during peak daily usage.
   (c)   Water system capital facility connection charge.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsections (p), (r), and (s) for connections
to the County’s water system, the capital facility connection charge for each
equivalent dwelling unit is $10,800 beginning on July 1, 2024.
      (2)   For the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2025, and for each fiscal
year thereafter, the County Executive shall set the capital facility connection
charge for connections to the County’s water system in accordance with §
4-11-105 of this Code and may increase the charge in an amount not to exceed
5.00% of the then current charge. Any increase in the charge in an amount
greater than 5.00% shall be set by the County Council by ordinance.
   (d)   Wastewater system capital facility connection charge.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsections (p), (r), and (s) for connections
to the County’s wastewater system, the capital facility connection charge for
each equivalent dwelling unit is $10,800 beginning on July 1, 2024.
      (2)   For the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2025, and for each fiscal
year thereafter, the County Executive shall set the capital facility connection
charge for connections to the County’s wastewater system in accordance with §
4-11-105 of this Code and may increase the charge in an amount not to exceed
5.00% of the then current charge. Any increase in the charge in an amount
greater than 5.00% shall be set by the County Council by ordinance.
   (e)   Properties with new improvements. For properties with new improvements
receiving an allocation under §
13-5-403, the capital facility connection charge shall be paid as provided in
that section.
   (f)   Connection methods for water and wastewater services; tap connection
fee. Except for a County capital project or petition project initiated in
accordance with §
13-5-303, connections to the County's water or wastewater system shall be made
in accordance with one of the following methods:
      (1)   An owner shall be required to enter into a public works agreement
with the County to authorize connection to the County's water or wastewater
system if:
         (i)   the water or wastewater service is to be installed within a
right-of-way owned by the State;
         (ii)   the water service pipe size is greater than two inches in
diameter or the wastewater service pipe size is greater than six inches in
diameter;
         (iii)   there are three or more service connections to be installed
within 500 feet;
         (iv)   the depth of the water or wastewater distribution main is 18
feet or greater; or
         (v)   an easement is needed for any part of the water or wastewater
service connection.
      (2)   If a public works agreement is not required in accordance with
paragraph (1), the owner shall apply for a water or wastewater service tap
connection permit before making a connection to the County's water or
wastewater system. The fee for a tap connection permit shall be $225 for each
water or wastewater connection for each equivalent dwelling unit. Beginning on
July 1, 2021, and each July 1 thereafter, the Director may adjust the fee by a
percentage change calculated by dividing the CPI for April of that calendar
year by the CPI for April for the immediately preceding calendar year. The
Director shall give written notice of the annual adjustment to the Office of
Finance and to the County Council. The annual adjustment shall be automatically
effective on July 1 of each year.
   (g)   Residential properties with existing improvements. Except for payments
partially deferred in accordance with §
13-5-815, for residential properties with existing improvements, the applicable
capital facility connection charge shall be paid as follows:
      (1)   In full when application for connection is made; or
      (2)   Any portion may be paid when an application for connection is made
and the remainder shall be financed in 30 annual installments, or for
connections eligible for partial deferment under §
13-5-815, in 40 annual installments. The installments shall accrue annual
interest at the bond rate established by the Controller as of the date of
issuance of a construction contract notice to proceed for a petition project
or, for all other connections, the date of issuance of a connection permit. Any
installments shall be paid within 60 days of the billing date.
   (h)   Nonresidential properties with existing improvements. For
nonresidential properties with existing improvements and for which a connection
is constructed under a County capital project or a petition project initiated
in accordance with §
13-5-303, the capital facility connection charge shall be paid in full when
application for connection is made.
   (i)   Nonresidential properties with irrigation systems.
      (1)   All nonresidential users with irrigation systems connected to the
County's water system prior to July 1, 2011 shall apply for and obtain a
connection permit and install a separate water meter for the irrigation system
before July 1, 2013.
      (2)   Before an irrigation system on nonresidential property can be
connected to the County's water system, the user shall apply for and obtain a
connection permit and shall install a separate water meter for the irrigation
system.
      (3)   A nonresidential user who is required to install a separate water
meter under paragraphs (1) or (2) shall not be required to pay a capital
facility connection charge to connect an irrigation system to the County's
water system by separate water meter.
      (4)   For a nonresidential user, the rate for water usage by an
irrigation system shall be as set forth in §
13-5-805(g), and shall apply to a nonresidential user who had an irrigation
system connected to the County's water system by separate meter prior to July
1, 2011.
   (j)   Installment payments. For any installment payments under this section,
an installment may be prepaid at any time; the right to make installment
payments shall be forfeited if the owner fails to comply with the provisions of
§
13-5-305; each installment with interest constitutes a lien on the property
until paid; and if any installment is not paid within 60 days of its billing
date, the Controller may deem the unpaid balance to be due and payable.
   (k)   Properties exempt from all or part of capital facility connection
charges.
      (1)   Religious facilities, parsonages, housing for the elderly of
moderate means, incorporated nonprofit community association facilities,
structures for nonprofit veterans and military service organizations exempt
from taxation under section 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code with a
rated capacity of 500 people or fewer pursuant to the Fire Prevention Code,
nonprofit educational structures, and accessory dwelling units, as defined in §
18-1-101 of this Code, are exempt from capital facility connection charges.
      (2)   Workforce housing is exempt from 50% of the capital facility
connection charges.
      (3)   Affordable housing units controlled by a nonprofit organization in
a development where at least 25% of the units are affordable dwelling units, as
defined by § 7-501(c) of the Land Use Article of the State Code, are exempt
from 50% of the capital facility connection charges for each unit developed as
affordable housing.
      (4)   Moderately priced dwelling units are exempt from 50% of the capital
facility connection charges.
   (l)   Classification change. The Director of Public works may increase or
decrease the capital facility connection charge for any property in a County
capital project area, if the use of the property is changed from one to another
of the use classifications in §
13-5-604.
   (m)   Lien enforcement. Any lien of unpaid installments or deferred charges
is subordinate only to the lien of State and County taxes and special benefit
assessments, and payment shall be enforced at the same time and in the same
manner as such taxes and assessments. Upon title transfer by deed, the unpaid
balance shall become due and payable, except when at least one record owner
remains the same either individually or as a trustee. The balance of the
capital facility connection charge shall be subject to discount for the
interest portion of the charges at the same rate as that applied for the levy.
   (n)   Deferred charges. The Controller may allow the expending of a maximum
of $500,000 from the general County capital projects fund on a revolving fund
basis to support the cost of deferred charges authorized by §
13-5-815. Other revenues authorized by the County Council may be paid into the
revolving fund.
   (o)   Application requirements. An application for connection to a utility
for new construction may not be made until a building permit is issued and any
work required under a public works agreement is completed.
   (p)   Capital facility connection charges – petition projects.
      (1)   This subsection applies to connections to the County's water or
wastewater system as a result of a petition of a majority of owners of real
property in a defined area in accordance with §
13-5-303.
      (2)   If a property owner applies for a connection permit within six
months of written notice from the Department that the project has been released
for service, the capital facility connection charge shall be the amount in
effect under subsection (d) or (f) on the date the Director makes the
determination required under §
13-5-303(k).
   (q)   Exemption for volunteer fire companies. A fire station on property
owned by a volunteer fire company formed pursuant to §
12-1-201 of this Code is exempt from the capital facility connection charges
described in this section.
   (r)   Turnkey water quality improvement contract. For any property that will
connect to the County's wastewater system by virtue of a turnkey water quality
improvement contract executed on July 16, 2018, the capital facility connection
charge shall be $7,202 for connections to the County's wastewater system.
   (s)   Development applications submitted prior to June 1, 2019. For a
property for which an application for approval of a building permit, sketch
plan, final plan, preliminary plan, or site development plan was submitted to
the Office of Planning and Zoning prior to June 1, 2019, or for which an
allocation was granted prior to June 1, 2019, the capital facility connection
charge shall be $7,202 for connections to the County’s water system and $7,202
for connections to the County’s wastewater system. The rates in this subsection
shall increase by 2.5% on July 1 of each year from 2020 through 2022 and
beginning in 2024.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-208) (Bill No. 63-87; Bill No. 22-88; Bill No. 55-91;
Bill No. 52-00; Bill No. 24-03; Bill No. 80-03; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 63-04;
Bill No. 5-05; Bill No. 36-07; Bill No. 78-08; Bill No. 37-11; Bill No. 62-11;
Bill No. 51-14; Bill No. 20-15; Bill No. 74-15; Bill No. 109-15; Bill No. 111-
15; Bill No. 78-16; Bill No. 18-19; Bill No. 41-19; Bill No. 54-19; Bill No.
90-19; Bill No. 85-20; Bill No. 98-20; Bill No. 6-23; Bill No. 80-24; Bill No.
53-24; Bill No. 72-24; Bill No. 31-25)
§ 13-5-814. Exemption for elderly or disabled.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Combined gross income" means the combined gross income of all
homeowners, if more than one, and all persons actually residing in the same
dwelling, except persons whose contributions, reasonably apportionable towards
the cost of upkeep, maintenance and repair of the dwelling, are in the form of
fixed rental charges.
      (2)   "Gross income" means the total income from all sources, for the
calendar year immediately preceding the fiscal year application, whether or not
included in the definitions of gross income for federal
or State tax purposes, including but not limited to benefits under the Social
Security Act, the United States Civil Service Commission, Veterans'
Administration, or Railroad Retirement Act as these acts may be amended from
time to time, gifts in excess of $300, alimony, support money, nontaxable
strike benefits, public assistance received in cash grants, pensions or
annuities, unemployment insurance benefits and workers' compensation benefits.
Gross income shall include the net income received from business, rental or
other endeavors; but in no event shall a loss from business, rental or other
endeavors be used in the determination of gross income.
      (3)   "Maximum income level" means 80% of the median income adjusted for
household size for the Baltimore Primary Metropolitan Statistical area, as
defined and published annually by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development.
   (b)   Exemption. Any single-family dwelling owned and occupied by any person
60 years of age or older with a combined gross income that is less than the
maximum income level, or a surviving spouse with a combined gross income that
is less than the maximum income level, or a person receiving disability
benefits as a result of a finding of permanent and total disability under the
Social Security Act, the United States Civil Service Commission, Veterans'
Administration, or the Railroad Retirement Act shall be exempt from capital
facilities connection charges, capital facilities assessment charges, and front
foot assessment charges until the sale or transfer of the property, at which
time the above charges become due and payable by the property owner.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-209) (Bill No. 74-88; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 78-04;
Bill No. 85-20; Bill No. 98-20)
§ 13-5-815. Partial deferral of residential wastewater system connection
charges and assessments.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Assessment" means the assessment imposed under §§
13-5-601 et seq. for a connection to a wastewater extension.
      (2)   "Critical area" has the meaning stated in §
18-1-101 of this Code.
      (3)   "Eligible area" means property that is located in:
         (i)   the critical area;
         (ii)   an on-site wastewater management problem area;
         (iii)   an area designated in the County's Master Plan for Water
Supply and Sewerage Systems as a septic to sewer conversion area; or
         (iv)   an area that is adjacent to one of the areas listed in (i)
through (iii) and that is also within the boundaries of a wastewater extension
project that includes one of the areas listed in (i) though (iii).
      (4)   "On-site wastewater management problem area" means an area
determined to be a wastewater management problem area in the County's Master
Plan for Water Supply and Sewerage Systems, as adopted by the County Council.
   (b)   Partial deferral. For connections to an extension of the County's
wastewater system within an eligible area, the owner of a residential property
with existing improvements may choose to defer payment of up to 50%, separately
or in total, of the assessment and the capital facility connection charges
imposed under §
13-5-813 until the earlier of 40 years after the date of connection or upon a
title transfer by deed of the property. The portion of any charge or assessment
that is not deferred shall be paid in accordance with §§
13-5-601 et seq. and
13-5-813(g).
   (c)   Interest rate. The capital facility connection charges deferred under
subsection (b) shall accrue annual interest at the bond rate established by the
controller as of the date of issuance of a construction contract notice to
proceed for the wastewater extension project.
   (d)   Lien enforcement. The capital facility connection charges deferred
under subsection (b), any interest accrued under subsection (c), and any
assessment charges deferred under subsection (b), shall be a lien on the
property, subordinate only to the lien of State and County taxes and special
benefit assessments, and payment shall be enforced at the same time and in the
same manner as such taxes and assessments.
   (e)   Payment of deferred charges and unpaid balance. Upon the earlier of 40
years after the date of connection or title transfer by deed, except when at
least one record owner remains the same either individually or as a trustee:
      (i)   The unpaid balance of the capital facility connection charges, plus
any interest accrued under subsection (c) and §
13-5-813(g), becomes due and payable;
      (ii)   The deferred portion of the assessment becomes due and payable;
and
      (iii)   The remainder of the assessment shall be paid in accordance with
§§
13-5-601 et seq.
   (f)   Eligibility. The deferral authorized in this section is only available
to the owner of the property at the time the property is connected to the
County's wastewater system.
(Bill No. 90-19; Bill No. 85-20; Bill No. 98-20)
§ 13-5-816. Subsidies for wastewater extension projects.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Combined gross income" has the meaning stated in §
13-5-815.
      (2)   "Critical area" has the meaning stated in §
18-1-101 of this Code.
      (3)   "Eligible area" means property that is located in:
         (i)   the critical area;
         (ii)   an on-site wastewater management problem area;
         (iii)   an area designated in the County's Master Plan for Water
Supply and Sewerage Systems as a septic to sewer conversion area; or
         (iv)   an area that is adjacent to one of the areas listed in (i)
through (iii) and that is also within the boundaries of a wastewater extension
project that includes one of the areas listed in (i) though (iii).
      (4)   "Gross income" has the meaning stated in §
13-5-815.
      (5)   "On-site wastewater management problem area" means an area
determined to be a wastewater management problem area in the County's Master
Plan for Water Supply and Sewerage Systems, as adopted by the County Council.
      (6)   "Properties with existing improvements" has the meaning stated in §
13-5-813.
   (b)   Subsidy allowed. At the discretion of the Director and upon
application of the property owner, the County may subsidize the per-property
project cost for residential properties with existing improvements located in a
wastewater extension project in an eligible area. The subsidy may be:
      (1)   up to 25% of the per-property project cost for a property owned by
an individual or trustee if the combined gross income is equal to or less than
the level set forth in COMAR 26.03.13.04D(1); or
      (2)   up to 12.5% of the per-property project cost for a property owned
by an individual or trustee if the combined gross income is greater than the
level set forth in COMAR 26.03.13.04D, or for property owners other than an
individual or trustee.
   (c)   Criteria. In determining whether to subsidize a wastewater extension
project in an eligible area, the Director shall consider:
      (1)   the proximity of the wastewater extension project to existing
wastewater infrastructure;
      (2)   the environmental and health benefits of the wastewater extension
project;
      (3)   engineering considerations;
      (4)   the availability of funds for a subsidy;
      (5)   the financial viability of the wastewater extension project; and
      (6)   Federal or State aid.
(Bill No. 95-19; Bill No. 98-20)
§ 13-5-817. Water and wastewater revolving fund.
   (a)   Establishment. In order to attract commercial and industrial business
enterprises to the County and to encourage existing commercial and industrial
enterprises in the County to expand within the County, there is hereby
established the water and wastewater revolving fund within the general County
capital projects fund to provide for the financing of water and wastewater
capital facility connection charges in accordance with this section.
   (b)   Application. A commercial or industrial enterprise may apply to the
Chief Administrative Officer for authorization to borrow funds from the water
and wastewater revolving fund to make installment payments of capital facility
connection charges for a period not to exceed five years if the commercial or
industrial enterprise is new construction, a relocation, or an expansion or
renovation of existing facilities and will generate significant positive impact
on the County by creating new jobs, generating increased tax revenues, or
meeting specific economic needs of the County.
   (c)   Security. Loans made under this section shall be made only to
financially responsible applicants and shall be properly secured. The Chief
Administrative Officer, with the advice of the Controller and the Chief
Executive Officer of the Anne Arundel Economic Development Corporation, shall
determine financial responsibility and shall approve the methods of securing
such loans.
   (d)   Interest. Installment payments shall bear interest at the rate of 8%
per installment.
   (e)   Transferability. Installment payments are transferable when the
property is transferred.
(1985 Code, Art. 6, § 5-210) (Bill No. 13-89; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 98-20)
SUBTITLE 9. OTHER CHARGES AND FEES
§ 13-5-901. Rates for disposal of septic tank sludge, chemical waste, and
holding tank waste.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Chemical waste" means the waste collected in portable chemical
toilets normally used at temporary locations, such as construction sites, or
waste discharged from a marine sanitation pumpout device located at a marina.
      (2)   "Holding tank waste" means the waste pumped from holding tanks that
are permitted by the County to collect and temporarily store wastewater from
residential or nonresidential structures.
      (3)   "Septic tank sludge" means the waste pumped from domestic septic
tanks and does not include industrial wastes not generated by normal private
homes.
   (b)   Unacceptable chemicals. Wastes containing chemicals that are
deleterious to the biological treatment systems of County owned and operated
wastewater treatment plants may not be accepted at County owned and operated
wastewater treatment plants.
   (c)   Charges – Septic tank sludge and chemical wastes. The following
charges are established for the disposal and treatment of septic tank sludge
and chemical wastes at County owned and operated wastewater treatment plants:
      (1)   for septic tank sludge, for each gallon accepted, 7.8 cents; and
      (2)   for chemical wastes from chemical portable toilets or from marine
sanitation pumpout devices, 7.8 cents for each gallon accepted.
   (d)   Charges – Holding tank waste. The charge for the disposal and
treatment of holding tank waste at County owned and operated wastewater
treatment plants for each 1,000 gallons shall be the charge for wastewater
established in accordance with §
13-5-805(b). Before holding tank waste may be discharged at County owned and
operated wastewater treatment plants, the owner of the holding tank must
purchase a holding tank manifest from the Department. The charge for the
manifest shall be based on the maximum gallon capacity of the holding tank as
determined by the Department of Health. The owner of the holding tank shall
submit the manifest to the liquid waste hauler who empties the holding tank and
the holding tank manifest shall be submitted to the County by the liquid waste
hauler at the time the holding tank waste is discharged at a County owned or
operated wastewater treatment plant.
   (e)   Administrative powers. The Director may:   
      (1)   adopt rules, regulations, and directives and issue orders relating
to the administration and receiving of septic tank sludge, holding tank waste,
and chemical wastes;
      (2)   establish operating hours and schedules for the receipt of septic
tank sludge, holding tank waste, and chemical wastes at County owned or
operated wastewater treatment plants; and
      (3)   prohibit the acceptance of septic tank, holding tank, and chemical
toilet wastes generated from outside the boundaries of the County at County
owned or operated wastewater treatment plants where the acceptance is deemed
detrimental to the best interests of the County.
   (f)   Record. The Director shall keep a record of the rules, regulations,
orders, and directives issued by the Director. The record shall be open to
public inspection at reasonable times.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-609) (Bill No. 22-88; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 67-
13)
§ 13-5-902. Rates for private fire protection systems.
   (a)   Rates. The following charges are established for unmetered water
connections for the purpose of providing private fire protection and shall be
billed and paid quarterly:
Connection Size (inches) Rate
Connection Size (inches) Rate
2                        $10
2 ½                     $15
3                        $22
4                        $37
6                        $82
8                        $150
10                       $225
12                       $337
 
   (b)   Agreement. The County Executive or the County Executive's designee
shall enter into written agreements with each unmetered private fire protection
system user governing the use under the terms and conditions determined by the
Director. A charge may not be made for water actually used to extinguish a
fire, as long as that water may not be used for any other purpose.
   (c)   Use of water for other than fire protection. Whenever the Director
finds that unmetered private fire protection water is being used for purposes
other than fire protection, the Director may estimate the amount of water so
used, charge for it, at the rates provided for in §
13-5-803 and deny further unmetered service to the premises.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-610) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-903. Private fire hydrant charge.
   There is a private fire hydrant charge of $18.75 per quarter that shall be
billed quarterly to the owner of the hydrant. The charge is for the routine
inspection and maintenance of private fire hydrants and is in addition to other
charges.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-611) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-5-904. Fees for fire hydrant permits.
   The following fees are established for fire hydrant connection permits and
shall be collected by the Department in connection with the issuance of fire
hydrant connection permits:
 
Charges
Permit fee                    $25
Regular annual inspection fee $25
Water meter repair fee        Actual cost of repair and parts
Water meter rental charge     $15 per day, up to a maximum of $150 per quarter
 
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-612) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 58-12)
§ 13-5-905. Fees for County fire hydrant meters.
   Deposits for the use of County fire hydrant water meters shall be the
certified replacement costs for each type of water meter, as determined
annually by the Director. Before July 1 of each year, the Director shall
certify water meter replacement costs to the Office of Finance and the County
Council and, effective July 1 of each fiscal year, the certified amount shall
be the deposit fee for the use of County fire hydrant water meters. The deposit
fee shall be paid to the Department when a water meter is rented.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-613) (Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 58-12)
§ 13-5-906. Fire flow test charge.
   There is a fee of $232 for each fire flow test conducted by the Department,
payable when application is made for the test.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-5-614) (Bill No. 63-04)
TITLE 6. WEEDS AND VEGETATION
Section
   
13-6-101.   Definitions.
   
13-6-102.   Scope.
   
13-6-103.   Rank vegetation and noxious weeds prohibited on property.
   
13-6-104.   Method of destruction of noxious weeds.
   
13-6-105.   Notice to remove and removal.
§ 13-6-101. Definitions.
   In this title, "noxious weeds" means plant material that is generally known
to be allergenic, irritating to the skin, or otherwise toxic, either topically
or when ingested, and "rank vegetation" means any growth of weeds or grass to a
height of 12 inches or higher.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-501) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-6-102. Scope.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, the provisions of this
subtitle apply to all land in the County other than wetlands, bird or game
sanctuaries, and nature study areas.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, §§ 25-4-502, 25-4-503) (Bill No. 63-04)
§ 13-6-103. Rank vegetation and noxious weeds prohibited on property.
   (a)   Scope. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
      (1)   open space zoning districts;
      (2)   RA zoning districts except in subdivisions of three acres or less
other than minor subdivisions;
      (3)   unimproved lots of three acres or more, except for a 25-foot buffer
along the portion of any such lot that adjoins an improved lot of less than one
acre and a 25-foot buffer running a distance of 100 feet along the road
fronting that unimproved parcel commencing at the boundary line of the improved
lot and unimproved lot;
      (4)   parcels titled to a governmental entity or community association;
or
      (5)   stormwater management ponds or devices maintained in accordance
with Article 16, Title 4 of this Code and any agreement executed in accordance
with §
16-4-401 of this Code.
   (b)   Modification. The Director may modify the provisions of this section
for agricultural property, natural wooded areas, areas publicly owned and
maintained as natural areas, open space areas covenanted with the County as
open space, open areas, or recreational areas, and areas where a growth of
grass or weeds is necessary for soil stabilization and erosion control.
   (c)   Prohibition. An owner, occupant, or person in control of real property
may not allow or maintain on the property a growth of noxious weeds or rank
vegetation.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-505) (Bill No. 68-88; Bill No. 54-89; Bill No. 63-
04; Bill No. 26-22; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 13-6-104. Method of destruction of noxious weeds.
   Noxious weeds shall be destroyed by cutting and removal, plowing under, or
another method recommended by the Department other than chemical spraying,
except that noxious weeds located in the critical area as defined in §
18-1-101 of this Code shall be destroyed by a method recommended by the
Department and approved by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, § 25-4-506) (Bill No. 54-89; Bill No. 63-04; Bill No. 4-
05)
§ 13-6-105. Notice to remove and removal.
   (a)   Complaint and investigation. If a complaint is filed with the Director
that a violation of the provisions of §
13-6-103 may have occurred, the Director shall investigate the complaint.
   (b)   Notice. If an investigation reveals that a violation has occurred, the
Director shall serve written notice on the owner, occupant, or person in
control of the property on which the violation exists. The notice shall require
that abatement of the violation be commenced within seven days after service of
the notice; that noxious weeds or rank vegetation be cut, trimmed, or removed;
and that noxious weeds be destroyed.
   (c)   Removal by County. If the owner, occupant, or person in control fails
to comply with the notice within seven days after service of the notice, the
County shall cause the growth of noxious weeds or rank vegetation to be cut,
trimmed, or removed to be in compliance with this title or shall cause the
noxious weeds to be destroyed.
   (d)   Costs. The cost and expense of the work by the County, including
overhead and administrative costs, shall be billed to the property owner and
shall be paid within 30 days of the date of the bill, and any amount unpaid 30
days after the date of the bill shall be collected as provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 25, §§ 25-4-507, 25-4-508) (Bill No. 68-88; Bill No. 63-04;
Bill No. 23-17)
TITLE 7. WATERSHED PROTECTION AND RESTORATION PROGRAM
Section
   
13-7-101.   Definitions.
   
13-7-102.   Watershed Protection and Restoration Program.
   
13-7-103.   Stormwater remediation fee.
   
13-7-104.   Appeals.
   
13-7-105.   Exemptions – Property.
   
13-7-106.   Exemptions – Substantial financial hardship.
   
13-7-107.   Reduction of fee.
   
13-7-108.   Competitive Grant Program.
§ 13-7-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Attached dwelling" means a duplex, semi-detached, or townhouse,
dwelling as defined in §
18-1-101(47) of this Code.
      (2)   "Base rate" means the stormwater remediation fee to be charged for
each equivalent residential unit per year.
      (3)   "Condominium" has the meaning stated in §
17-1-101(17) of this Code.
      (4)   "Detached single-family dwelling" has the meaning stated for
"dwelling, single-family detached" in §
18-1-101(47) of this Code.
      (5)   "Dwelling unit" has the meaning stated in §
18-1-101(47) of this Code.
      (6)   "Equivalent residential unit" means 2,940 square feet.
      (7)   "Farm" means a property, or contiguous properties under the same
ownership, with or without buildings, that is used for cultivating and managing
the soil for composting, growing, harvesting, and selling of crops or the
products of forestry, horticulture or hydroponics; processing agricultural
products, regardless of whether there is a change in natural state of the
product; breeding, raising, or managing livestock, including horses, cattle,
poultry, fish, game, bees, or fur-bearing animals; dairying; or equestrian
activities and events not conducted under a license issued by the State Racing
Commission.
      (8)   "Homeowners Association" means an incorporated or unincorporated
homeowners association, civic or community association, council of condominium
unit owners, or similar entity.
      (9)   "Impervious surface" has the meaning stated in the Environment
Article, § 4-201.1(d), of the State Code.
      (10)   "Multifamily residential property" means real property located in
any zoning district that is improved by a "dwelling, multifamily", as that term
is defined in §
18-1-101(47) of this Code.
      (11)   “Nonresidential property” means real property located in a
commercial, industrial, maritime, mixed use, Odenton Town Center, Open Space,
Town Center, or Small Business zoning district as shown on the Anne Arundel
County Digital Zoning Layer adopted in accordance with §
18-2-106 of this Code, and includes real property in those zoning districts
improved by an attached dwelling or a detached single family dwelling.
“Nonresidential property” also includes real property located in a residential
zoning district as shown on the Anne Arundel County Digital Zoning Layer
adopted in accordance with §
18-2-106 of this Code with a use other than a dwelling; real property owned by
not-for-profit entities such as Homeowners Associations, fraternal
organizations, religious groups or organizations, healthcare facilities, and
other real property devoted to non-governmental charitable, or institutional
uses; and real property located partially in a residential district and
partially in any district other than a residential zoning district as shown on
the Anne Arundel County Digital Zoning Layer adopted in accordance with §
18-2-106 of this Code.
      (12)   "Religious group or organization" means a religious organization
that is certified under § 501(c)(3) or (d) of the Internal Revenue Code and
that is exempt from real property tax under § 7-204 of the Tax-Property Article
of the State Code.
      (13)   Residential property, tier one" means real property located in
Zoning District RA or RLD as shown on the Anne Arundel County Digital Zoning
Layer adopted in accordance with § 18-2-106 of this Code, and improved with a
detached single-family dwelling.
      (14)   "Residential property, tier two" means real property located in
Zoning District R1, R2, or R5 as shown on the Anne Arundel County Digital
Zoning Layer adopted in accordance with § 18-2-106 of this Code, and improved
with a detached single-family dwelling.
      (15)   "Residential property, tier three" means real property located in
Zoning District R10, R15, or R22 as shown on the Anne Arundel County Digital
Zoning Layer adopted in accordance with § 18-2-106 of this Code, and improved
with an attached dwelling or a detached single-family dwelling. "Residential
property, tier three" also includes real property in Residential Zoning
District RA, RLD, R1, R2, or R5 that is improved by an attached dwelling or is
a mobile home space under a license issued pursuant to Article 11, Subtitle 9
of this Code.
      (16)   "Stormwater remediation fee" means the fee charged in accordance
with this title to fund or support, in full or in part, the purposes set forth
in §
4-11-119(c) of this Code.
      (17)   "Unimproved property" means real property that has no impervious
surface.
(Bill No. 2-13; Bill No. 44-13; Bill No. 74-13; Bill No. 84-23)
§ 13-7-102. Watershed Protection and Restoration Program.
   (a)   Program established. There is a Watershed Protection and Restoration
Program as mandated by § 4-202.1 of the Environment Article of the State Code.
   (b)   Purposes. The purposes of the Watershed Protection and Restoration
Program are to support compliance with the requirements of the County's
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System permit, Chesapeake Bay Total Maximum Daily Load and local watershed
Total Maximum Daily Load, and stormwater Watershed Implementation Plans through
stormwater management practices and stream and wetland restoration activities,
and to maintain and administer the Watershed Protection and Restoration Special
Revenue Fund established under §
4-11-119 of this Code.
(Bill No. 2-13; Bill No. 42-13)
§ 13-7-103. Stormwater remediation fee.
   (a)   Fee established. There is an excise tax known as the stormwater
remediation fee imposed on the use of real property improved with impervious
surface as required by § 4-202.1(e) of the Environment Article of the State
Code. The stormwater remediation fee may not be imposed on real property in the
City of Annapolis.
   (b)   Base rate. The base rate of the stormwater remediation fee for one
equivalent residential unit shall be $89.25 per year. For the fiscal year
beginning July 1, 2020, and for each fiscal year thereafter, the County
Executive shall set the stormwater remediation fee at a rate sufficient to meet
the purposes set forth in § 4-11-119(c) of this Code and may increase the fee
in an amount not to exceed 5.00% of the then current fee. Any increase in an
amount greater than 5.00% shall be set by the County Council by ordinance.
   (c)   Residential property fee. The stormwater remediation fee for each real
property in the following categories shall be:
      (1)   residential property, tier one - two times the base rate;
      (2)   residential property, tier two - the base rate; and
      (3)   residential property, tier three - 40% of the base rate for each
dwelling unit or mobile home space.
   (d)   Multifamily residential and nonresidential properties fee. Except as
provided in subsections (e), (f), (g), (h), (i) (j), (k), (l), (m), and (n) the
stormwater remediation fee for a multifamily residential property or a
nonresidential property shall be determined in accordance with the following
procedure:
      (1)   The Director determines the number of equivalent residential units
assigned to the property by dividing the total impervious surface of the
property by the value of one equivalent residential unit.
      (2)   For a non-residential property, the Director computes the
stormwater remediation fee by multiplying the base rate by the number of
equivalent residential units assigned to the property.
      (3)   For a multifamily residential property, the Director computes the
stormwater remediation fee by multiplying the number of equivalent residential
units assigned to the property by 40% of the base rate.
   (e)   Condominiums fee. If a multifamily residential property is a
condominium, the stormwater remediation fee determined for buildings containing
dwelling units in accordance with subsection (d) shall be divided by the number
of dwelling units and that amount shall be billed separately to each
condominium dwelling unit owner.
   (f)   Private roads – fee. If a nonresidential property is a private road
with a separate tax account number and is not owned by a Homeowners
Association, the stormwater remediation fee shall be the base rate.
   (g)   Homeowners Associations – fee. If a nonresidential property is owned
by a Homeowners Association, the total stormwater remediation fee for all
properties owned by the same Homeowners Association may not exceed the number
of property tax accounts for the property owners within the boundaries of the
Homeowners Association multiplied by 40% of the base rate.
   (h)   Nonresidential properties – cap on fee. The stormwater remediation fee
for a nonresidential property may not exceed 25% of the State and County real
property tax that would be levied based on the assessment of the property prior
to any tax credits, deferrals, or exemptions that are applicable in accordance
with the Tax-Property Article of the State Code or Article 4, Title 2 of this
Code.
   (i)   Certain marinas – fee. Marinas in good standing with the Maryland
Department of Natural Resources Clean Marina Initiative with more than seven-
and-one-half acres of impervious surface shall pay a fee for each additional
acre or fraction thereof in excess of seven-and-one-half acres equivalent to
25% of the base rate.
   (j)   Private airfields or airports – fee. If a nonresidential property is a
private airfield or airport as defined in Article 18 of this Code, the
stormwater remediation fee shall be two times the base rate.
   (k)   Farms – fee. The stormwater remediation fee for a farm shall be 40% of
the base rate for each property tax account associated with the farm that has
impervious surface.
   (l)   Properties with certain permits – fee. If a nonresidential property is
subject to a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit including
stormwater management controls, the stormwater remediation fee shall be 30 % of
the rate calculated under subsection (d)(2).
   (m)   Nonprofit organizations – fee. Unless otherwise provided under this
section, the stormwater remediation fee for nonresidential property owned by a
nonprofit organization that is exempt from taxation under 501(c)(3) or (d) of
the Internal Revenue Code and exempt from real property tax under the Tax-
Property Article of the State Code shall be $1.00.
   (n)   Residential properties in nonresidential zones – fee. For a property
located in a Commercial, Industrial, Maritime, Mixed Use, Odenton Town Center,
Open Space, Town Center, or Small Business Zoning District that is improved
solely by an attached dwelling or a detached single family dwelling, including
accessory structures, which is used solely as the primary residence of the
property owner, the stormwater remediation fee shall be the lesser of the fee
for residential property, tier two or the fee calculated in accordance with
subsection (d).
   (o)   Collection. The stormwater remediation fee shall be billed annually to
the owner of the real property on which it is imposed. The stormwater
remediation fee shall be collected as provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code. The Controller shall include an explanation in each
property tax bill that states "pursuant to § 4-202.1(h)(1)(ii) of the
Environment Article of the State Code, the stormwater remediation fee is a
local government fee established in response to federal stormwater management
requirements. The federal requirements are designed to prevent local sources of
pollution from reaching local waterways."
   (p)   Waiver of interest on overdue fees.
      (1)   The Controller may authorize a one-time waiver of interest and
penalties accrued in accordance with §
4-1-103 of this Code on an overdue stormwater remediation fee between 2013 and
the date of the waiver if:
         (i)   the overdue stormwater remediation fee is imposed on a
nonresidential property exempt from real property tax under the Tax-Property
Article of the State Code, and no real property taxes were assessed against the
property as of June 15, 2013;
         (ii)   the stormwater remediation fee imposed on the property has not
been paid in whole or in part since June 15, 2013; and
         (iii)   there is an incorrect mailing address on file with the State
Department of Assessments and Taxation for the owner of the property subject to
interest on an overdue stormwater remediation fee.
      (2)   The Controller, with the approval of the Director, may authorize a
one-time waiver of interest and penalties accrued in accordance with §
4-1-103 of this Code on an overdue stormwater remediation fee between 2013 and
the date of the waiver if the overdue stormwater remediation fee is imposed on
property owned by a nonprofit entity exempt from County real property tax under
the Tax-Property Article of the State Code, and no County real property taxes
were assessed against the property between June 15, 2013 and the date of the
waiver.
      (3)   Once interest and penalties are waived under this subsection, they
may not be waived again for the same property.
      (4)   Notwithstanding this subsection, the County may collect, in
accordance with §
1-8-101 of this Code or any provision of State or County law, an overdue
stormwater remediation fee and any interest or penalty that is not waived.
(Bill No. 2-13; Bill No. 40-13; Bill No. 42-13; Bill No. 43-13; Bill No. 44-13;
Bill No. 45-13; Bill No. 74-13; Bill No. 2-15; Bill No. 91-15; Bill No. 53-16;
Bill No. 69-16; Bill No. 40-19; Bill No. 84-23; Bill No. 84-24)
§ 13-7-104. Appeals.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Median impervious surface of residential property, tier 2" means
2940 square feet.
      (2)   "Median impervious surface of residential property, tier 3" means
1200 square feet.
   (b)   Administrative appeal. A property owner may appeal a stormwater
remediation fee to the Department. An appeal shall be submitted on or before
September 30 in order to receive a correction of the stormwater remediation fee
for the current billing year.
   (c)   Grounds for appeal. Grounds for appeal of the stormwater remediation
fee include:
      (1)   incorrect classification of real property for purposes of
determining the stormwater remediation fee;
      (2)   a property in the category residential property, tier 1 having less
impervious surface than the median impervious surface of residential property,
tier 2, for a charge at the tier 2 level;
      (3)   a property in the category residential property, tier 2 having less
impervious surface than the median impervious surface of residential property,
tier 3, for a charge at the tier 3 level;
      (4)   for nonresidential or multifamily residential property, errors in
the calculation of the impervious surface of the property;
      (5)   mathematical errors in calculating the stormwater remediation fee;
      (6)   the real property is not subject to the stormwater remediation fee
under §
13-7-105;
      (7)   the property owner is exempt from the stormwater remediation fee
under §
13-7-106;
      (8)   errors in the identification of the property owner of real property
subject to the stormwater remediation fee;
      (9)   for nonresidential property owned by a Homeowners Association,
errors in the number of property tax accounts for the property owners within
the boundaries of the Homeowners Association; or
      (10)   a property located in a Commercial, Industrial, Maritime, Mixed
Use, Odenton Town Center, Open Space, Town Center, or Small Business Zoning
District improved solely by an attached dwelling or detached single family
dwelling, including accessory structures, and is used solely as the primary
residence of the property owner that is not charged a stormwater remediation
fee that is the lesser of the fee for residential property, tier two or the fee
calculated in accordance with §
13-7-103(d).
   (d)   Application. An appeal must be submitted in writing on an application
form provided by the Department. A property owner shall include a detailed
statement of the grounds of the appeal and all information or supporting
documentation as required by the Department. Failure to provide all information
required on the application form or to attach any relevant documentation is a
basis for a denial of an appeal. If the basis for appeal is:
      (1)    that the zoning district of the real property is incorrect, the
property owner shall provide proof of the zoning district of the property as
shown on the Anne Arundel County Digital Zoning Layer adopted in accordance
with §
18-2-106 of this Code;
      (2)    that there is an error in the calculation of the impervious
surface of the property, the property owner shall supply documentation prepared
and certified by a registered professional engineer or professional land
surveyor of the impervious surface of the property; or
      (3)   that there is an error in the number of dwellings or dwelling units
that may be billed by a Homeowners Association, the property owner shall
provide proof of the number of property tax accounts for the property owners
within the boundaries of the Homeowners Association.
   (e)   Written decision. The Director shall issue a written decision
indicating whether the appeal is granted or denied and a copy shall be provided
to the property owner, the Controller, and any counsel of record. The written
decision of the Director shall set forth all reasons for the decision and shall
set forth any change in the amount of the stormwater remediation fee. For
fiscal year 2014, the Director shall issue the written decision within 90 days
of the filing of the appeal. For any year after fiscal year 2014, the Director
shall issue the written decision within 45 days.
   (f)   Adjusted billing. If the decision of the Director changes the amount
of the stormwater remediation fee, the Controller shall issue a new bill to the
property owner.
   (g)   Stay. An application for an appeal filed under subsection (d) shall
act as an immediate stay on the collection of the stormwater remediation fee,
without interest or penalty. A property owner shall pay the fee within 30 days
of a final determination of the amount of fee.
   (h)   Tax Court. A property owner who is aggrieved by a decision of the
Director on an appeal or by the imposition of a stormwater remediation fee
shall pay the stormwater remediation fee and may request a refund in accordance
with Local Government Article, § 20-113, of the State Code and may appeal to
the Maryland Tax Court in accordance with Local Government Article, § 20-117,
of the State Code.
(Bill No. 2-13; Bill No. 44-13; Bill No. 74-13; Bill No. 19-14; Bill No. 2-15;
Bill No. 84-23)
§ 13-7-105. Exemptions – Property.
   (a)   State and local government property. A stormwater remediation fee may
not be imposed on real property owned by the entities listed in the Environment
Article, § 4-202.1(e)(2), of the State Code.
   (b)   Unimproved property. A stormwater remediation fee may not be imposed
on unimproved property.
(Bill No. 2-13)
§ 13-7-106. Exemptions – Substantial financial hardship.
   (a)   Program established. There is a Substantial Financial Hardship
Exemption Program. The purpose of the Program is to exempt from the payment of
the stormwater remediation fee a property owner who is able to demonstrate
substantial financial hardship as a result of the fee.
   (b)   Qualifications for exemption. To qualify for a substantial financial
hardship exemption:
      (1)   the real property for which the exemption is requested shall
contain a detached single family dwelling or a dwelling unit in an attached
dwelling or multifamily residential property;
      (2)   at least one of the property owners shall be an occupant of the
property; and
      (3)   at least two of the following four criteria shall be met to
demonstrate substantial financial hardship:
         (i)   the combined gross income, as defined in the Tax-Property
Article, § 9-104, of the State Code, does not exceed the poverty guidelines
updated periodically in the Federal Register by the United States Department of
Health and Human Services under the authority of 42 U.S.C. § 9902(2);
         (ii)   at least one of the property owners who resides at the property
receives an energy assistance subsidy in accordance with a Fuel and Utility
Assistance Program established under the Human Services Article, § 5-5A-07, of
the State Code;
         (iii)   at least one of the property owners who resides at the
property receives supplemental Security Income under 42 U.S.C. § 1381, et seq.
or food stamps under 42 U.S.C. § 2011, et seq.; or
         (iv)   at least one of the property owners who resides at the property
receives veterans or Social Security disability benefits under the Social
Security Act, the Railroad Retirement Act, any federal act for members of the
United States Armed Forces, or any federal retirement system.
   (c)   Mobile home park tenants. A person with a valid lease or contract to
use a mobile home space in a licensed mobile home park qualifies for the
substantial financial hardship exemption if at least one of the persons listed
on the lease or contract is an occupant of a mobile home in the mobile home
space and at least two of the four criteria set forth in subsection (b)(3) are
met. If a substantial financial hardship exemption is granted under this
subsection and the stormwater remediation fee is charged to an owner of a
mobile home park, the stormwater remediation fee for the mobile home park shall
be reduced by 40% of the base rate.
   (d)   Rules and regulations. The Office of Finance shall administer the
Substantial Financial Hardship Exemption Program and the Controller shall adopt
rules and regulations governing the Program. The rules and regulations shall
provide:
      (1)   the application deadline;
      (2)   that the application shall be made on a form provided by the Office
of Finance;
      (3)   a description of documentation that shall be provided by an
applicant; and
      (4)   any other matters deemed necessary by the Controller to administer
the Substantial Financial Hardship Exemption Program.
   (e)   Validity of exemption. Any exemption granted is only valid for the
year that payment of the stormwater remediation fee is due.
(Bill No. 2-13)
§ 13-7-107. Reduction of fee.
   The Director shall adopt rules and regulations in accordance with the
Environment Article, § 4-202.1(f)(1), of the State Code to reduce, in an amount
not to exceed 50%, the stormwater remediation fee for a real property that has
a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit that includes
stormwater management controls, or to account for existing on site systems,
facilities, services, or activities that reduce the quantity or improve the
quality of stormwater discharged from a property. Marinas covered under a
current National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit with stormwater
management controls for marinas shall be entitled to a 25% reduction of the
stormwater remediation fee for the marina. Marinas in good standing with the
Maryland Department of Natural Resources Clean Marina Initiative shall be
entitled to a total reduction not to exceed 50% of the stormwater remediation
fee for the marina. The Director may enter into an agreement for a fee
reduction conditioned upon the successful implementation of an approved
stormwater remediation project.
(Bill No. 2-13)
§ 13-7-108. Competitive Grant Program.
   Beginning July 1, 2014, the Department may establish a grant program
consistent with § 4-202.1(h)(4)(vi) of the Environment Article of the State
Code to award grants on a competitive basis to an entity determined to be a 501
(c) organization by the Internal Revenue Service for watershed restoration and
rehabilitation projects relating to planning, design, and construction of
stormwater management practices and stream and wetland restoration, consistent
with § 4-202.1(h)(4)(vi) of the Environment Article of the State Code and the
Department's Watershed Implementation Program.
(Bill No. 2-13)
ARTICLE 14. RECREATION AND PARKS
   Title
      
1.   IN GENERAL
      
2.   PROHIBITED CONDUCT IN PARKS
      
3.   ENFORCEMENT
Charter reference – §
548 et seq.
State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-323.
TITLE 1. IN GENERAL
Section
   
14-1-101.   Definitions.
   
14-1-102.   Rules and regulations.
   
14-1-103.   Operating hours.
   
14-1-104.   Fees.
   
14-1-105.   Integrated Pest Management Plan.
§ 14-1-101. Definitions.
   In this article, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Bicycle" means a bicycle as defined in the Transportation Article,
§ 11-104, of the State Code.
      (2)   "Department" means the Department of Recreation and Parks.
      (3)   "Director" means the Director of Recreation and Parks or the
Director's designee.
      (4)   "Park" means a park, reservation, playground, recreation center, or
other lot in the County owned, operated, or established by the County and
devoted to recreation or a similar purpose.
      (5)   "Play vehicle" means a play vehicle as defined in the
Transportation Article, § 21-101, of the State Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 1-101)
§ 14-1-102. Rules and regulations.
   (a)   Adoption. To provide for the safe and enjoyable use by citizens of
parks and recreation areas owned or leased by the County or operated in a
degree by the Department and to provide for safe and enjoyable participation in
athletic and recreational activities supervised by the Department, the Director
may adopt rules and regulations on the following subjects:
      (1)   use by the public of County-owned or leased parks and recreation
areas;
      (2)   public participation, player conduct, eligibility, and the playing
of organized athletics under the Department's jurisdiction; and
      (3)   other subjects that will permit the efficient implementation,
administration, and operation of athletic programs and recreational uses.
   (b)   Submission of proposed rule or regulation. Before the adoption of a
rule or regulation, the Director shall submit the proposed rule or regulation
to the Recreation Advisory Board for review. After review, the Board shall
advise the Director of its recommendations with respect to the rule or
regulation.
   (c)   Publication. Except as provided in subsection (d), after adoption of a
rule or regulation that applies to each park in the County but before the rule
or regulation becomes effective, the Director shall cause a copy of the rule or
regulation to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the County
at least once a week for two consecutive weeks, shall send copies of the rule
or regulation to the Police Department and the Chief Clerk of the District
Court for Anne Arundel County, and whenever possible shall give other publicity
to the rule, regulation, order, or directive to bring it to the attention of
the public.
   (d)   Immediate effective dates. On a determination of immediate need, the
Director may adopt rules and regulations that will become effective
immediately.
   (e)   Public records. The Director shall keep a record of the rules,
regulations, orders, and directives issued, and the record shall be open to
public inspection at reasonable times. A copy of rules and regulations shall be
made available to the public on request and be conspicuously posted in each
park whenever practical.
   (f)   Violation of rules or regulations. A person may not violate a rule or
regulation adopted by the Director in accordance with this section.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 1-102)
§ 14-1-103. Operating hours.
   (a)   Generally. Parks generally shall be open to the public between sunrise
and sunset of each day unless different hours are established by the Director
and the hours are posted at the affected parks.
   (b)   Closing parks to the public. A park or section of a park may be
declared closed to the public by the Director whenever the Director determines
that the closing is necessary because of park conditions, weather, or for
another reason that is in the public interest.
   (c)   Trespass in closed parks. A person other than an authorized County
employee may not be in a park or a section of a park while it is closed to the
public.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 1-103)
§ 14-1-104. Fees.
   With the advice of the Recreation Advisory Board, the Director may establish
fees for participation in recreation programs.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 1-104)
§ 14-1-105. Integrated Pest Management Plan.
   (a)   Definition. For purposes of this section, "least toxic pesticide"
means a substance not listed by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency as a pesticide in Toxicity Category I or II, a carcinogen, or an inert
ingredient of toxicological concern.
   (b)   Plan required. An Integrated Pest Management Plan that meets or
exceeds the standards required for school playgrounds and athletic fields under
the Agriculture Article of the State Code and provides for the use of only the
least toxic pesticides available is required for all County parks and athletic
fields.
   (c)   Notice of plan. The Department shall:
      (1)   post a copy of the Department's Integrated Pest Management Plan and
any proposed updates to the Plan on the County website; and
      (2)   post a notice of the Plan at each County park and athletic facility
that shall include:
         (i)   a statement that explains the Integrated Pest Management Plan
and lists any pesticide that may be used as part of the Plan;
         (ii)   the street address, website address, and telephone number for
the Department for questions regarding the Integrated Pest Management Plan; and
         (iii)   a statement that the Department maintains the product label or
material safety data sheet of each pesticide used by the Department, that the
label or data sheet is available for review, and that the Department may be
contacted for additional information and comment.
   (d)   Notification prior to application. At least 24 hours before a
pesticide is applied at a park or athletic facility, the Department shall post
a notice at the park at which the pesticide is to be applied. The notice shall
include:
      (1)   the common name of the pesticide;
      (2)   the location of the application;
      (3)   the planned date and time of application;
      (4)   any United States Environmental Protection Agency warning regarding
exposure to the pesticide to be applied;
      (5)   a brief description of potential adverse effects based upon the
material safety data sheet of the pesticide to be applied; and
      (6)   a notice that weather conditions or other circumstances may cause
the actual date of application to be postponed to a later date or dates, for
which notice will be provided if the date is more than 14 days after the
planned application date.
   (e)   Emergency pest control. A pesticide may be applied without prior
notification only if an emergency pest situation exists. Within 24 hours after
an emergency pesticide application, the Department shall post at the park a
notice that a pesticide was applied for emergency pest control. The notice
shall include:
      (1)   the common name of the pesticide applied;
      (2)   the approximate location of the application;
      (3)   the date of application; and
      (4)   the reason for the emergency application.
(Bill No. 64-12)
Editor's note:
   Section 2 of Bill No. 64-12 provides that this section shall take effect on
July 1, 201
TITLE 2. PROHIBITED CONDUCT IN PARKS
Section
   
14-2-101.   Alcoholic beverages.
   
14-2-102.   Camping.
   
14-2-103.   Deprivation of use and enjoyment.
   
14-2-104.   Destruction of property.
   
14-2-105.   Fires.
   
14-2-106.   Fireworks, firearms, explosives.
   
14-2-107.   Horses.
   
14-2-108.   Litter.
   
14-2-109.   Meetings.
   
14-2-110.   Model airplanes, rockets, and the like.
   
14-2-111.   Picnics.
   
14-2-112.   Profit-making activities.
   
14-2-113.   Selling.
   
14-2-114.   Sound amplification equipment.
   
14-2-115.   Traffic.
   
14-2-116.   Vehicle repairs.
   
14-2-117.   Wild animals; wildlife management agreement.
   
14-2-118.   Animals in parks.
   
14-2-119.   Boat ramps in parks.
§ 14-2-101. Alcoholic beverages.
   A person may not drink or possess alcoholic beverages in a park unless as
part of a group having permission for exclusive use of the park.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-101)
§ 14-2-102. Camping.
   (a)   Permit. A person may not camp in a park in other than a designated
area and without a permit issued by the Director.
   (b)   Sanitation. Campers shall keep camping areas clean. Garbage, refuse,
and rubbish shall be placed in receptacles provided for that purpose.
   (c)   Installation of permanent facilities prohibited. A person may not
install permanent camping facilities or dig or level the ground at a campsite
in a park.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-102)
§ 14-2-103. Deprivation of use and enjoyment.
   A person may not deprive others of reasonable use and enjoyment of a park by
indulging in riotous, boisterous, threatening, or indecent conduct or abusive,
threatening, profane, or indecent language.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-103)
§ 14-2-104. Destruction of property.
   (a)   Applicability. This subsection does not apply to construction projects
or maintenance performed on park land or structures.
   (b)   Prohibitions. A person may not:
      (1)   tamper with, mar, deface, remove, or destroy an official sign;
      (2)   damage, use without authority, or remove an installation, fixture,
equipment, or vehicle in or from the park;
      (3)   cut, pull up, burn, carve, or in any manner mutilate, misuse, or
damage any tree, shrub, plant, grass, or flower on park grounds; or
      (4)   intentionally destroy, injure, deface, remove, or disturb soil,
rocks, or mineral formations unless incidental to a permitted activity.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-104)
§ 14-2-105. Fires.
   (a)   Prohibitions. A person may not:
      (1)   build a fire in a park except in a fireplace or other facility
constructed for a fire; or
      (2)   use a charcoal grill or a gasoline or gas stove without written
permission from of the Director.
   (b)   Additional regulations relating to fire hazards. Smoking or the
building of fires may be prohibited in parks or limited by the Director
whenever in the Director's judgment a potential fire hazard exists.
   (c)   Liability for damages. A person who builds a fire in a park except in
a fireplace or other facility constructed for a fire is responsible for damage
and expense caused by carelessness.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-105)
§ 14-2-106. Fireworks, firearms, explosives.
   A person may not discharge fireworks, firearms, or explosives in a park
without written permission from the Director and the other necessary permits.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-106)
§ 14-2-107. Horses.
   A person may not ride, walk, or otherwise have a horse on park grounds
except on bridle paths designated for that purpose by the Director.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-107)
§ 14-2-108. Litter.
   A person may not dump refuse, garbage, or rubbish anywhere on park grounds
except in designated receptacles, or bring garbage, refuse, or rubbish into a
park and deposit it in park trash receptacles.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-108)
§ 14-2-109. Meetings.
   (a)   Restriction. A person may not hold a meeting in a park if the meeting
will deprive the public of the reasonable use and enjoyment of the park or
interfere with the public's right of free passage in the park.
   (b)   Written permission required. A person may not hold an organized
gathering of 40 or more individuals in a park without written permission from
the Director.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-109)
§ 14-2-110. Model airplanes, rockets, and the like.
   A person may not launch or fly a power model airplane, rocket, or similar
device from a park area without written permission from the Director.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-110)
§ 14-2-111. Picnics.
   A person may not picnic in a park in other than a designated area without
written permission from the Director.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-111)
§ 14-2-112. Profit-making activities.
   A person may not utilize a tennis court, basketball court, athletic field,
or other activity area in a park for conducting private instruction or lessons
for which a fee is charged unless the program is conducted or sponsored by the
Department.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-112)
§ 14-2-113. Selling.
   A person may not sell anything in a park without written permission from the
Director.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-113)
§ 14-2-114. Sound amplification equipment.
   A person may not use sound amplification equipment in a park without written
permission from the Director.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-114)
§ 14-2-115. Traffic.
   (a)   Speed limit. A person may not operate a motor vehicle, bicycle,
minibike, play vehicle, or unicycle in a park at a speed in excess of 10 miles
per hour unless permitted by posted official notice. The Director shall
conspicuously post speed limits in all parks.
   (b)   Trucks and commercial vehicles. A person may not operate a truck or
commercial vehicle, other than one owned or operated by the County or used by a
person, team, or organization to transport persons participating in athletic or
recreational activities in a park, on park premises without written permission
from the Director.
   (c)   Operation and obstructions generally. A person may not obstruct a park
entrance with a motor vehicle, bicycle, minibike, play vehicle, or unicycle. A
person may not operate or stop a motor vehicle, bicycle, minibike, play
vehicle, or unicycle in a park area, except on a paved road, without written
permission from the Director.
   (d)   Overnight parking. A person may not park a motor vehicle in a park
overnight. This subsection does not apply to County-owned, County-operated, or
official vehicles.
   (e)   Designated parking. A person shall park a motor vehicle in a park only
in designated parking areas.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-115)
State Code reference – Transportation Article, § 25-102(a)(5).
§ 14-2-116. Vehicle repairs.
   Except in an emergency, a person may not lubricate, repair, or perform
mechanical work on a vehicle in a park.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-116)
§ 14-2-117. Wild animals; wildlife management agreement.
   A person may not capture, confine, injure, destroy, or interfere with a wild
animal in a park, except with permission granted by the Director, pursuant to a
wildlife management agreement.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-117) (Bill No. 77-08)
§ 14-2-118. Animals in parks.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, "at large", "animal", "owner", and
"public nuisance" have the meanings stated in §
12-4-101 of this Code.
   (b)   Public nuisance. The owner of an animal may not permit the animal to
be a public nuisance in a park.
   (c)   Running at large. The owner of an animal may not permit the animal to
be at large in a park.
   (d)   Removal of animal excreta. The owner of an animal shall remove excreta
deposited in a park by the animal.
(Bill No. 69-15)
§ 14-2-119. Boat ramps in parks.
   A person may not use a boat ramp in a park without valid authorization
issued by the Department.
(Bill No. 69-15)
TITLE 3. ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
14-3-101.   Enforcement.
§ 14-3-101. Enforcement.
   (a)   Generally. In addition to other enforcement measures allowed by this
Code, the Director, for a period of time determined by the Director, may
declare a person who violates any provision of this article to be ineligible to
participate in County athletic programs or may ban the violator from County
owned, leased, or operated facilities.
   (b)   Order of Department. A person shall follow a directive or order of an
employee of the Department to comply with the provisions of this Code in a
park.
   (c)   Civil offenses. It is a Class E civil offense to violate any provision
of this article or §
9-1-706 in a park.
(1985 Code, Art. 19, § 2-301) (Bill No. 69-15; Bill No. 80-22)
State Code reference – Local Government Article, § 10-323.
ARTICLE 15. CONSTRUCTION AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODES
   Title
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   CONSTRUCTION CODES
      
3.   FIRE PREVENTION CODE
      
4.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
      
5.   ENFORCEMENT
TITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
15-1-101.   Conflict.
   
15-1-102.   Training and inspections – Building, Electrical, Mechanical, and
Plumbing Codes.
   
15-1-103.   Right of entry generally.
   
15-1-104.   Right of entry – Health Department.
   
15-1-105.   Supplement.
§ 15-1-101. Conflict.
   If a provision of this article conflicts with another provision of County
law, the provision that establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of health and safety shall prevail.
(1985 Code, Art. 22, § 1-103)
§ 15-1-102. Training and inspections – Building, Electrical, Mechanical, and
Plumbing Codes.
   (a)   Training. The Director of the Department of Inspections and Permits
shall establish a program for training building, electrical, mechanical, and
plumbing inspectors to perform all of the matters required for a complete final
inspection of a residence. The training program shall be structured so as to
ensure the ability of an inspector to perform the inspection properly and
reasonably.
   (b)   Inspections. Inspections required under §§
15-2-101,
15-2-102, and
15-2-103 are ordinarily performed by a building inspector. Inspections required
under §§
15-2-202 et seq. are ordinarily performed by an electrical inspector.
Inspections required under §§
15-2-301,
15-2-402 et seq., and
15-2-502 et seq. are ordinarily performed by a mechanical inspector or a
plumbing inspector. However, any of these inspectors may perform a complete
final residential inspection for compliance with all the required construction
codes if the inspector has been certified by the Director as having
successfully completed the training program referred to in subsection (a).
(1985 Code, Art. 20, §§ 1-103, 1-104) (Bill No. 2-88; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No.
1-12)
§ 15-1-103. Right of entry generally.
   The County may enter on premises or into a building other than an inhabited
private dwelling during reasonable hours in the discharge of official duties to
make an inspection or test of an installation or equipment. A person may not
hinder, impede, or interfere with an official or employee in the discharge of
official duties.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 3-102)
§ 15-1-104. Right of entry – Health Department.
   (a)   Generally. Subject to the limitations of
Title 4 and other law, the Health Officer may enter and inspect dwellings,
dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, dormitory rooms, and premises
for the purpose of determining whether there is compliance with the Property
Maintenance Code contained in
Title 4. In addition, if the Health Officer has reason to believe that an
actual or potential health or safety hazard exists on private property and it
is essential to the public health and welfare that investigation and abatement
be undertaken immediately, the Health Officer or the Health Officer's designee
may enter onto private property to determine whether an actual or potential
health or safety hazard exists and take such action as may be necessary to
abate an actual or potential health or safety hazard.
   (b)   Consultation. Before making inspections within a contiguous area in
accordance with a plan authorized in § 15-4-105, the Health Officer shall first
consult with organizations, representatives of property owners, and other
residents of the contiguous area.
   (c)   Access provided by owner, occupant, or person in charge. On
appointment or on presentation by the Health Officer of proper identification,
a copy of a relevant plan of inspection under which entry is sought, and a
schedule of the specific areas and facilities to be inspected, the owner,
occupant, or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house, rooming unit, or dormitory room may give the Health Officer entry and
free access to the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, rooming house, or
dormitory room or to the surrounding premises.
   (d)   Judicial assistance to gain entry. If an owner, occupant, or other
person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or a multiple
dwelling or rooming house refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with,
restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to a structure or premises where
an inspection authorized by
Title 4 is sought, the Health Officer may seek in a court of competent
jurisdiction a cease and desist order against the owner, occupant, or other
person in charge.
   (e)   Unrelated evidence found on inspection. The Health Officer shall keep
confidential all evidence not related to the purposes of
Title 4 that is discovered in the course of an inspection under
Title 4.
(1985 Code, Art. 22, §§ 4-102, 4-103, 4-104, 4-105)
§ 15-1-105. Supplement.
   There is a Supplement to this Code that is incorporated by reference into
this Code. The name of the Supplement is "
Anne Arundel County Construction and Property Maintenance Codes Supplement",
dated October 1, 2005. The provisions in the Supplement may not be altered or
revised except by ordinance adopted by the County Council.
(Bill No. 68-06; Bill No. 1-12)
TITLE 2. CONSTRUCTION CODES
Section
Subtitle 1. Building
   
15-2-101.   International Building Code.
   
15-2-102.   International Residential Code.
   
15-2-103.   International Energy Conservation Code.
   
15-2-104.   International Existing Building Code.
   
15-2-105.   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
Subtitle 2. Electrical
   
15-2-201.   Scope.
   
15-2-202.   National Electrical Code.
Subtitle 3. Fuel Gas
   
15-2-301.   Adoption.
Subtitle 4. Mechanical
   
15-2-401.   Scope.
   
15-2-402.   International Mechanical Code.
Subtitle 5. Plumbing
Part 1. In General
   
15-2-501.   Scope.
   
15-2-502.   International Plumbing Code.
   
15-2-503.   Water analysis.
Part 2. Private Sewage Disposal and Well Code
   
15-2-504.   Adoption.
   
15-2-505.   Application fee.
   
15-2-506.   Powers of Health Officer.
   
15-2-507.   Inspection fee – Wells.
SUBTITLE 1. BUILDING
§ 15-2-101. International Building Code.
   The "2021 International Building Code", as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as the Building Code for the County
with the additions, insertions, omissions, and changes set forth in the
Supplement.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 2-101) (Bill No. 2-88; Bill No. 75-91; Bill No. 72-94;
Bill No. 46-03; Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
§ 15-2-102. International Residential Code.
   The "2021 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings",
as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference
as part of this Building Code for buildings described in section 101.2 of
"Chapter 1 - Construction Code Administrative Provisions" as set forth in the
Supplement.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 2-103) (Bill No. 75-91; Bill No. 72-94; Bill No. 46-03;
Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
§ 15-2-103. International Energy Conservation Code.
   The "2021 International Energy Conservation Code", as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as part of this
Building Code with the additions, insertions, omissions, and changes set forth
in the
Supplement.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 2-105) (Bill No. 75-91; Bill No. 72-94; Bill No. 46-03;
Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
§ 15-2-104. International Existing Building Code.
   The "2021 International Existing Building Code," as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as part of this
Building Code with the additions, insertions, omissions, and changes set forth
in the
Supplement.
(Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
§ 15-2-105. International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
   The "2021 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code," as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as part of this
Building Code with the additions, insertions, omissions, and changes set forth
in the
Supplement.
(Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
SUBTITLE 2. ELECTRICAL
§ 15-2-201. Scope.
   (a)   Applicability. This subtitle applies to equipment and the installation
of electrical equipment for light, heat, or power in or on public or private
buildings, structures, or premises, including yards, carnival lots, parking
lots, and industrial substations, and to power supply to radio and television
transmitting and receiving systems in or on buildings, structures, or premises.
   (b)   Inapplicability. This subtitle does not apply to work performed by
employees or agents of electric light and power companies, electric railway
companies, telegraph or telephone companies, on the companies' buildings,
plants, installations, or systems; work performed by employees of the State or
the United States government on State or federal buildings, plants,
installations, or systems; or electrical installations in ships, boats,
automobiles, trucks, or vehicles other than trailers being used for residential
or office use, or repairs to any electrical installations in them.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 3-101)
§ 15-2-202. National Electrical Code.
   (a)   Adoption. The "National Electrical Code (NFPA 70)", 2020 Edition, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association, is adopted by reference
as the Electrical Code for the County, with the additions, insertions,
omissions, and changes set forth in the
Supplement.
   (b)   Changes. Changes in the Electrical Code, interpretation of the Code,
or administrative procedures affecting electrical contractors may not be
implemented without written notification 60 days before implementation to the
Board of Electrical Examiners and all electrical contractors licensed in the
County.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 3-201) (Bill No. 2-88; Bill No. 75-91; Bill No. 72-94;
Bill No. 46-03; Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
SUBTITLE 3. FUEL GAS
§ 15-2-301. Adoption.
   The "2021 International Fuel Gas Code", as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as the Fuel Gas Code for the
County, with the additions, insertions, omissions, and changes set forth in the
Supplement.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 4-102) (Bill No. 46-03; Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 123-15;
Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
SUBTITLE 4. MECHANICAL
§ 15-2-401. Scope.
   This subtitle does not apply to:
      (1)   persons employed by a public utility or by the United States
government, while those persons are performing work on installations or systems
on or within buildings or structures owned or occupied by a public utility or
by the United States government; or
      (2)   a person, firm, or corporation engaged in the installation,
maintenance, repair, or replacement of refrigeration, air conditioning or
heating equipment in motor vehicles or railroad rolling stock.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 5-102) (Bill No. 1-12)
§ 15-2-402. International Mechanical Code.
   (a)   Adoption. The "2021 International Mechanical Code", as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference for the control
of matters pertaining to the designing, installing, servicing, altering,
remodeling, or repairing of heating systems, cooling systems, or refrigeration
systems, as the Mechanical Code for the County, with the additions, insertions,
omissions, and changes set forth in the
Supplement.
   (b)   Changes. No changes in the Mechanical Code, interpretation of the
Mechanical Code, or administrative procedures affecting mechanical contractors
shall be implemented without written notification 60 days before implementation
to the Board of Environmental Systems Examiners and all licensed mechanical
contractors.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 5-201) (Bill No. 2-88; Bill No. 75-91; Bill No. 72-94;
Bill No. 46-03; Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
SUBTITLE 5. PLUMBING
PART 1. IN GENERAL
§ 15-2-501. Scope.
   (a)   Applicability. This subtitle applies to plumbing, private and
semipublic sewage disposal system construction, private water distribution
systems, private sewage collection systems, and private storm drain collection
systems, including work authorized to be performed by utility contractors under
§
11-4-604 of this Code, done in any building or on any public or private
property within the County.
   (b)   Disposal system contractors. In referring to disposal system
contractors, this subtitle applies to that portion of the disposal system
contracting that includes installing septic tanks, drywells, drainfield
systems, and semi-public package sewage disposal systems.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 6-101)
State Code reference – Business Occupations and Professions Article, Title 12.
§ 15-2-502. International Plumbing Code.
   (a)   Adoption. The "2021 International Plumbing Code", as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as the Plumbing Code
for the County with the additions, insertions, omissions, and changes set forth
in the
Supplement.
   (b)   Changes. Changes in the Plumbing Code, interpretation of the Code, or
administrative procedures affecting plumbing contractors may not be implemented
without written notification 60 days before implementation to the Plumbing
Commission and all plumbing contractors licensed in the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 6-201) (Bill No. 83-87; Bill No. 75-91; Bill No. 72-94;
Bill No. 20-00; Bill No. 46-03; Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20;
Bill No. 25-24)
State Code reference – Business Occupations and Professions Article, Title 12 .
§ 15-2-503. Water analysis.
   A property owner or the agent of a property owner may request an analysis of
a water system. The fee for the well water analysis of an individual water
system is $25 unless the analysis is requested or administered during the
course of, and while under proper permit for, installation or repair of the
system.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 6-103) (Bill No. 13-05; Bill No. 1-12)
PART 2. PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND WELL CODE
§ 15-2-504. Adoption.
   Chapters 16 and 17 of the "Anne Arundel County Plumbing Code, 1993" are
adopted by reference as part of the Anne Arundel County Building Code, with the
additions, insertions, omissions, and changes set forth in the
Supplement.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 6-301) (Bill No. 46-03; Bill No. 1-12)
§ 15-2-505. Application fee.
   In addition to the other fees required by this article, an applicant for a
permit issued under this subtitle shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of
$25 at the time of application.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 1-105) (Bill No. 46-92; Bill No. 23-04; Bill No. 1-12)
§ 15-2-506. Powers of Health Officer.
   The Health Officer may:
      (1)   prohibit the installation of hand-dug wells;
      (2)   require adequate safety measures when digging or drilling test
holes for sewerage system installations and immediate backfilling of the holes
when abandoned;
      (3)   require adequate grouting of wells; and
      (4)   reject installation of an individual sewage disposal system, even
though the soil test is satisfactory, if the history of the area indicates any
one of the following conditions:
         (i)   seasonally high ground water table;
         (ii)   pollution of water wells or any potential water supply;
         (iii)   soil characteristics that will not sustain continuous
permeability;
         (iv)   a history of surrounding sewage disposal system failures and
polluted wells;
         (v)   unsuitable topography as determined by a soil survey and
recommended by the Soil Conservation District; or
         (vi)   other conditions that may be prejudicial to public health.
(1985 Code, Art. 14, § 1-102) (Bill No. 1-12)
§ 15-2-507. Inspection fee – Wells.
   A person who applies to the Health Department for a permit to drill a well
in the County shall submit to the Department at the time of application the
following nonrefundable inspection fee:
      (1)   for a new well, $630;
      (2)   for a replacement well, $315;
      (3)   for a geothermal, test, observation, or monitoring well, $160; and
      (4)   for a well or cluster of wells to be used exclusively to transfer
heat to or from the ground or groundwater, $160.
(1985 Code, Art. 16, § 21-101) (Bill No. 37-95; Bill No. 13-05; Bill No. 42-08;
Bill No. 1-12)
TITLE 3. FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Section
   
15-3-101.   Definitions.
   
15-3-102.   Scope.
   
15-3-103.   Administration.
   
15-3-104.   Fire Prevention Code.
   
15-3-105.   Implementation.
   
15-3-106.   Re-inspection fee.
   
15-3-107.   Arrest powers.
§ 15-3-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Existing building, condition, or facility" means any building,
plant, condition, or equipment that existed before January 25, 2021, or any
building, plant, condition, or equipment for which a building, electrical,
mechanical, or plumbing permit was issued before January 25, 2021.
      (2)   "New building, condition, or facility" means any building, plant,
condition, or equipment for which a building, electrical, mechanical, or
plumbing permit was issued on or after January 25, 2021.
      (3)   "NFPA" means National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch
Park, P.O. Box 9101, Quincy, MA 02269-9101.
      (4)   "International Code Council (ICC)" means the International Code
Council, Inc., 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 708, Falls Church, VA 22041-3401.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 2-101) (Bill No. 31-93; Bill No. 82-06; Bill No. 75-13;
Bill No. 95-20)
§ 15-3-102. Scope.
   (a)   Applicability.
      (1)   This title applies to new buildings, conditions, or facilities.
Except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d), this title does not apply
to existing buildings, conditions, or facilities unless:
         (i)   the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee has found that the
continuation of an existing condition constitutes a distinct hazard adverse to
life, property, public safety, or welfare as to require correction; or
         (ii)   except as provided in paragraph (2), the building undergoes a
change from one occupancy classification to another or from one occupancy sub-
classification to another.
      (2)   The use of a single-family detached dwelling as a recovery
residence is not a change of occupancy classification or sub-classification
under paragraph (1)(ii) if the recovery residence:
         (i)   1.   is certified under Title 19, Subtitle 25 of the Health-
General Article of the State Code; and
            2.   is in compliance with the occupancy limitations established by
Maryland Certification of Recovery Residences (MCORR); or
         (ii)   1.   is not certified under Title 19, Subtitle 25 of the
Health-General Article of the State Code;
            2.   has no more than two occupants per sleeping room and not more
than six occupants total; and
            3.   is inspected annually by the Fire Marshal for the following
fire safety measures:
               A.   functioning smoke detectors;
               B.   windows suitable for exit in all sleeping rooms as required
by the code in effect at the time of inspection;
               C.   functioning carbon monoxide detectors if there are gas
appliances;
               D.   functioning fire extinguishers in plain sight, or in
clearly marked locations, that are serviced or inspected annually by a third
party;
               E.   an interior free of fire hazards, such as hoarding
conditions, and with adequate access to electrical facilities, hot water
heaters, exit doors, windows, and hallways;
               F.   a prohibition against smoking or vaping inside the
dwelling;
               G.   an emergency plan posted in a conspicuous location that
includes emergency phone numbers, exit procedures, marked fire exits, and an
evacuation map; and
               H.   fire exits marked with reflective signage at a minimum.
   (b)   Inapplicability. This title does not apply to one- and two-family
dwellings, except for:
      (1)   the installation and maintenance of smoke detectors and residential
sprinklers when required by the State Code or this Code; and
      (2)   Fire Department access and Fire Department access roads as required
by NFPA 1 Fire Code, except for private driveways serving only one dwelling
unit.
   (c)   NFPA 1 Uniform Fire Code permit requirements. The permit requirements
of section 1.12 of NFPA 1 Uniform Fire Code, 2018 Edition apply to all
buildings, plants, conditions, and equipment, regardless of the issuance date
of a building, electric, mechanical, or plumbing permit.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 2-102) (Bill No. 31-93; Bill No. 18-96; Bill No. 7-03;
Bill No. 82-06; Bill No. 75-13; Bill No. 95-20; Bill No. 61-23)
§ 15-3-103. Administration.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the Fire Chief or the Fire
Chief's designee shall enforce and administer the provisions of this title.
(Bill No. 82-06)
§ 15-3-104. Fire Prevention Code.
   (a)   Adoption. The following codes and standards are adopted by reference
as the Fire Prevention Code for the County with the additions, insertions,
omissions, and changes set forth in the Supplement:
      (1)   "NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code, 2018 Edition", as published by the
National Fire Protection Association;
      (2)   "NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2018 Edition", as published by the
National Fire Protection Association; and
      (3)   certain requirements of the International Building Code as adopted
by reference by the Maryland Building Performance Standards and this Code.
   (b)   Conflicts. If there are conflicts within the documents set forth in
subsection (a) of this section or within the amendments, deletions, or
corrections made to those documents, the most restrictive provision shall
apply.
   (c)   Matters not provided for. Any requirement essential for fire safety
that is not specifically covered by this Code shall be determined by the Chief
Fire Marshal or the Chief Fire Marshal's designee in accordance with the NFPA
National Fire Codes or other NFPA technical publications.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, §§ 2-104, 2-105) (Bill No. 31-93; Bill No. 18-96; Bill No.
25-97; Bill No. 20-00; Bill No. 82-06; Bill No. 75-13; Bill No. 95-20)
§ 15-3-105. Implementation.
   The implementation of this title shall be in accordance with the inspection
frequency and priority policy of the Fire Marshal Division.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 2-103) (Bill No. 31-93; Bill No. 18-96; Bill No. 7-03;
Bill No. 82-06)
§ 15-3-106. Re-inspection fee.
   A fee of $100 shall be charged for re-inspections for each called-for
inspection that is not ready for inspection. Re-inspection may not be scheduled
or conducted without payment of the fee. Notice that a re- inspection fee is
required shall be provided in writing on a form prescribed by the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 2-103.1) (Bill No. 18-96; Bill No. 82-06)
§ 15-3-107. Arrest powers.
   The Fire Chief and other personnel as are designated in writing by the Fire
Chief have the same general police powers, including arrest powers, as sworn
members of the County Police Department for the express purpose of enforcing
any fire safety law in effect in the County, including this title. This power
shall extend to any arrest or other lawful action necessary to permit the
peaceful completion of any lawful action by the Fire Department.
(1985 Code, Art. 18, § 2-108) (Bill No. 31-93; Bill No. 7-03; Bill No. 82-06;
Bill No. 75-13)
TITLE 4. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
Subtitle 1. Definitions; General Provisions
   
15-4-101.   Definitions.
   
15-4-102.   Administration and enforcement.
   
15-4-103.   Compliance with title required.
   
15-4-104.   Modifications.
Subtitle 2. Property Maintenance Code
   
15-4-201.   Adoption.
Subtitle 3. Refuse and Sewage Disposal Systems
   
15-4-301.   Refuse – vacant lots; roads; shopping centers; storage.
   
15-4-302.   Refuse and trash.
   
15-4-303.   Sewage disposal systems.
Subtitle 4. Abatement and Demolition
   
15-4-401.   Emergency abatement of health or safety hazards.
   
15-4-402.   Abatement of nuisances.
   
15-4-403.   Repair orders; court-ordered demolition – Health Department.
   
15-4-404.   Seasonal waiver for exterior violations on affected properties.
Subtitle 5. Nuisance Properties
   
15-4-501.   Definitions.
   
15-4-502.   Declaration of nuisance property.
   
15-4-503.   Required safeguarding.
   
15-4-504.   Monitoring property; abatement actions.
   
15-4-505.   Release of nuisance property designation.
SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 15-4-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Department" means the Health Department.
      (2)   "Garbage" means organic waste consisting of the residue of animal,
fruit, or vegetable matter that results from the preparation, cooking,
handling, or storage of food, but the term does not include feces.
      (3)   "Health Officer" means the Health Officer or the Health Officer's
designee.
      (4)   "Nuisance" means a menace to the public health, safety, or welfare
arising from the accumulation of garbage, trash, or refuse or the presence of
stagnant water or combustible material.
      (5)   Refuse" means ashes, garbage, trash, junk, industrial waste, dead
animals, or other solid waste materials, including salvable waste.
(Bill No. 68-06; Bill No. 64-07)
§ 15-4-102. Administration and enforcement.
   Except as otherwise provided in this title, the Health Officer and the
Department shall administer and enforce all provisions of this title.
(Bill No. 68-06)
§ 15-4-103. Compliance with title required.
   An owner or other person may not occupy or lease to another person a
dwelling or dwelling unit unless it and the premises are clean, sanitary, fit
for human occupancy, and in compliance with this title and other applicable
State and County law.
(Bill No. 68-06)
§ 15-4-104. Modifications.
   (a)   Generally. The Health Officer may approve an application for a
modification to any provision of Title 4 of this article upon finding that:
      (1)   practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship will result from
strict application of Title 4 of this article;
      (2)   the purposes of Title 4 will be served by the alternate proposal;
and
      (3)   the modification will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, or welfare and not be injurious to other properties.
   (b)   Form of decision. The modification decision shall include written
findings and conclusions and shall be maintained in the files of the
Department.
   (c)   Conditions. In granting a modification, the Health Officer may require
conditions to secure the objectives of the provision that has been modified.
(Bill No. 68-06)
SUBTITLE 2.  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 15-4-201. Adoption.
   The "2003 International Property Maintenance Code" as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as the property
maintenance code for the County, with the additions, insertions, omissions, and
changes set forth in the Supplement.
(Bill No. 68-06)
 
SUBTITLE 3. REFUSE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
§ 15-4-301. Refuse–vacant lots; roads; shopping centers; storage.
   Unless expressly allowed by other law, a person may not store refuse or
dispose of, deposit, or dump refuse on any vacant lot or tract of land or on
any road, walkway, or parking lot, including a shopping center or drive-in
parking lot.
(Bill No. 68-06)
§ 15-4-302. Refuse and trash.
   (a)   Prohibition. An owner or occupant of any premises may not permit the
accumulation of refuse or other waste on the premises if the accumulation may
create a health, accident, or safety hazard or is accumulated in a manner that
may cause or permit any part of the refuse or other waste to be carried or
deposited by the elements onto any other property.
   (b)   Refuse containers. The owners and occupants of any premises are
jointly and severally responsible for providing a sufficient number of
containers for storage of refuse and other waste matter to prevent overflow
between times of collection and for maintaining the premises in accordance with
the standards of this section.
   (c)   Maintenance of trash receptacles. The owners and occupants of shopping
centers and commercial establishments shall install and maintain trash
receptacles on the pedestrian walkway areas of the shopping centers and
commercial establishments. The trash receptacles shall be provided in adequate
number and shall be clearly designated as trash receptacles.
   (d)   Storage of useable materials. Stored useable materials on any premises
shall be stacked or piled in an orderly manner that leaves at least a 12-inch
space between the material and the ground level. No stored materials shall be
stacked or piled against an exterior wall.
(Bill No. 68-06)
§ 15-4-303. Sewage disposal systems.
   (a)   Installation and operation. Each sewage disposal system shall be
installed in accordance with the County Private Sewage Disposal and Well Code
as set forth in Title 2, Subtitle 5, Part 2 of this article and shall be
capable of performing the function for which it is designed.
   (b)   Maintenance. Each sewage disposal system shall be maintained in a
safe, sanitary, and functional condition, free from obstructions, leaks, and
defects, so as to avoid creating a public health nuisance.
   (c)   Design capacity. Each sewage disposal system shall be maintained based
on the original design and no property shall be improved in excess of the
septic system capacity.
(Bill No. 68-06)
SUBTITLE 4. ABATEMENT AND DEMOLITION
§ 15-4-401. Emergency abatement of health or safety hazards.
   The Health Officer may take cognizance of any condition on property that
poses or may reasonably be expected to pose a clear and present health or
safety hazard; order the person responsible for creating, maintaining, or
permitting an actual or potential health or safety hazard to take immediate
action to abate the problem; and take direct action to abate the problem if the
responsible person cannot be contacted or cannot or will not take immediate
action to abate the problem.
(Bill No. 68-06)
§ 15-4-402. Abatement of nuisances.
   (a)   Abatement after notice. The Health Officer may enter an unimproved lot
or vacant premises and cause a nuisance located on the lot or premises to be
abated whenever the owner or person in charge of the lot or premises fails to
do so within 15 days after service of notice from the County to abate the
nuisance.
   (b)   Service of notice. The notice shall be served by posting it on the
property or mailing a copy by certified mail to the last known address of the
person in whose name the property is assessed for taxation.
(Bill No. 68-06)
§ 15-4-403. Repair orders; court-ordered demolition–Health Department.
   When the Health Officer determines that a structure is dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary, or otherwise unfit for human use, the Health Officer shall order
that the structure be repaired or otherwise made safe and sanitary. If the
person fails to obey the order, the Health Officer may apply to a court of
competent jurisdiction for a demolition order.
(Bill No. 68-06)
§ 15-4-404. Seasonal waiver for exterior violations on affected properties.
   Unless otherwise ordered by the Health Officer, exterior work required to
satisfy the risk reduction standard under the Environment Article, Title 6,
Subtitle 8, of the State Code shall be delayed during the period from November
1 through April 1, inclusive, and shall be completed within 30 days thereafter.
(Bill No. 61-15)
SUBTITLE 5. NUISANCE PROPERTIES
§ 15-4-501. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, “nuisance property” means an unoccupied property for
which:
      (1)   on two or more occasions during a six month period, the Health
Officer has taken action under §
15-4-401, §
15-4-402, or section 108.2 of the Property Maintenance Code adopted in §
15-4-201, or the Department of Public Works has taken action under §
13-6-105(c) of this code; or
      (2)   the Department of Inspections and Permits has issued a notice of
unsafe structure in accordance with section 115.3 of the Building Code adopted
in §
15-2-101, which has been disregarded by the property owner.
(Bill No. 79-22)
§ 15-4-502. Declaration of nuisance property.
   (a)   Notice to property owner. Before declaring a property a nuisance
property, the Health Officer shall send a notice of nuisance property to the
owner of the property by first-class mail and by posting on the property. The
notice shall provide the owner with the opportunity to avoid a declaration of
nuisance property, if, within 30 days of the mailing, the owner:
      (1)   safeguards the nuisance property as required in §
15-4-403; and
      (2)   submits a plan to the Health Officer for regular maintenance and
safeguarding of the property.
   (b)   Declaration. The Health Officer may declare a property a nuisance
property if a property owner fails to respond to a notice within 30 days or
fails to comply with a plan submitted in accordance with subsection (a)(2).
(Bill No. 79-22)
§ 15-4-503. Required safeguarding.
   (a)   In general. Every nuisance property must be safeguarded as follows:
      (1)   All first floor windows, doors, and other openings on any structure
must be closed, securely locked, or boarded up with material approved by the
Health Officer;
      (2)   As long as the structure on a nuisance property remains vacant, it
must remain boarded up and signs against trespass must be conspicuously posted;
      (3)   The property shall be kept free of litter, trash and debris, and
noxious weeds or rank vegetation; and
      (4)   The property shall be subject to regular upkeep and kept in
compliance with this code.
   (b)   Compliance required. Taking action required in subsection (a) does not
relieve the owner of responsibility to demolish an unsafe structure or to
repair and maintain the property in conformity with this code.
   (c)   Notice. The Health Officer may post a notice on the property to inform
the public that a property is a nuisance property.
(Bill No. 79-22)
§ 15-4-504. Monitoring property; abatement actions.
   Except for an unsafe structure that is boarded up, after a property is
declared a nuisance property, the responsible department shall monitor the
property every 30 days and take action as authorized under this code for any
violation.
(Bill No. 79-22)
§ 15-4-505. Release of nuisance property designation.
   After a property owner maintains the property in accordance with this
subtitle for a period of at least three months, the Health Officer may rescind
the declaration of nuisance property. No structure may be reoccupied until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued. The rescinding of a declaration does
not preclude the Health Officer from issuing a notice of nuisance property at
any time the property is no longer in compliance with this subtitle.
(Bill No. 79-22)
TITLE 5. ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
15-5-101.   Civil enforcement.
   
15-5-102.   Civil fines.
   
15-5-103.   Civil fine notice provisions.
   
15-5-104.   Stop-work order.
   
15-5-105.   Notice of violations–Property Maintenance Code.
   
15-5-106.   Lien–Health Department.
§ 15-5-101. Civil enforcement.
   The County, through the Director or Officer of the Department responsible
for enforcement, may enforce this article through injunctive proceedings or any
other appropriate proceedings. A court of competent jurisdiction may issue a
restraining order, interlocutory or final injunction, or other form of relief
to restrain or correct violations of this article.
(1985 Code, Art. 14, § 9-103; Art. 18, § 2-109; Art. 20, § 7-101; Art. 22, § 5-
210) (Bill No. 20-87; Bill No. 42-87; Bill No. 37-91; Bill No. 70-92; Bill No.
24-93; Bill No. 31-93)
§ 15-5-102. Civil fines.
   (a)   Piers and bulkheads. It is a Class B civil offense to construct or
replace a pier or bulkhead without a building permit or to exceed construction
allowed by an approved building permit.
   (b)   Construction without a building permit. It is Class C civil offense to
perform work without a required building permit or to perform work in excess of
that approved by a building permit.
   (c)   Nuisance properties. It is a Class C civil offense to fail to comply
with a notice of nuisance property or to fail to safeguard a nuisance property,
punishable by civil fine as provided in §
9-2-101 of the Code, and each day that an offense continues constitutes a
separate offense.
   (d)   Building Code. It is a Class D civil offense to violate any provision
of the Anne Arundel County Building Code.
   (e)   Electrical Code. It is a Class D civil offense to violate any
provision of the Anne Arundel County Electrical Code.
   (f)   Fire Prevention Code. It is a Class D civil offense to violate any
provision of the Anne Arundel County Fire Prevention Code.
   (g)   Fuel Gas Code. It is a Class D civil offense to violate any provision
of the Anne Arundel County Fuel Gas Code.
   (h)   Mechanical Code. It is a Class D civil offense to violate any
provision of the Anne Arundel County Mechanical Code.
   (i)   Plumbing and Private Sewage Disposal and Well Construction Code. It is
a Class D civil offense to violate any provision of the Anne Arundel County
Plumbing Code, including the Private Sewage Disposal and Well Construction
Code, punishable by a civil fine as provided by §
9-2-101 of this Code.
   (j)   Property Maintenance Code. It is a Class D civil offense to violate
any provision of the Property Maintenance Code, punishable by a civil fine as
provided by §
9-2-101 of this Code, except that the failure to comply with a notice and order
is a civil offense punishable by a civil fine of $25 per day.
(1985 Code, Art. 14, § 9-101; Art. 18, § 2-110; Art. 20, §§ 2-102(53), 3-404,
4-103(20), 5-202(19), 6-402; Art. 22, § 6-101) (Bill No. 20-87; Bill No. 42-87;
Bill No. 75-91; Bill No. 31-93; Bill No. 46-03; Bill No. 37-04; Bill No. 79-22)
State Code reference – Local Government Article, 10-202.
§ 15-5-103. Civil fine notice provisions.
   Except for violations of the Anne Arundel County Construction and Property
Maintenance Codes Supplement, Construction Code, Chapter 1 - Construction Code
Administrative Provisions, as amended, written notice shall be given to the
violator of any provision of the Building Code, Fuel Gas Code, Mechanical Code,
Plumbing Code, or Electrical Code 14 days before a civil fine is assessed to
allow for correction of the violation.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, §§ 2-102(54), 4-103(20), 5-202(19), 6-202(20)) (Bill No.
123-15)
§ 15-5-104. Stop-work order.
   (a)   Issuance. On notice from the Department responsible for enforcement
that work on any building or structure or equipment is being prosecuted
contrary to the provisions of this article or in an unsafe and dangerous
manner, the work shall be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in
writing, shall be given to the owner of the property involved, the owner's
agent, the person doing the work, or posted on the job site, and shall state
the conditions under which work may be resumed.
   (b)   Civil fine for violation. Any person who continues any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, is liable for a civil fine not to exceed $1,000.
(1985 Code, Art. 20, §§ 3-403, 6-401) (Bill No. 11-86; Bill No. 46-03)
§ 15-5-105. Notice of violations–Property Maintenance Code.
   (a)   Notice to person responsible. When the Health Officer determines that
there has been a violation of Title 4 of this article, written notice shall be
served on the violator in the manner provided by the Maryland Rules. If service
cannot be effected as provided by the Maryland Rules, the notice shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure or property designated
in the notice.
   (b)   Transfer of ownership. When the owner of a dwelling unit or structure
has received a notice of violation, the owner shall provide a copy of the
notice of violation to a prospective purchaser or lessee.
   (c)   Recordation. The Health Officer may record a notice of violation among
the land records.
(Bill No. 68-06)
§ 15-5-106. Lien–Health Department.
   When it is necessary for the Health Officer to demolish a structure, take
direct action to abate a health or safety hazard, abate a nuisance, or remove
refuse, the cost of the demolition, abatement, or removal, including reasonable
administrative fees, shall be charged to the violator. If the costs remain
unpaid by an owner 30 days after the date of billing, the costs shall be
collected as provided in§ 1-8-101 of this Code.
(Bill No. 68-06)
CONSTRUCTION AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODES SUPPLEMENT
October 1, 2005
Supplement to
Article 15 of the Anne Arundel County Code
Contains legislation current through Bill No. 29-25
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Construction Code
International Building Code Amendments
International Residential Code Amendments
International Energy Conservation Code Amendments
International Existing Building Code Amendments
National Electrical Code Amendments
International Fuel Gas Code Amendments
International Mechanical Code Amendments
International Plumbing Code Amendments
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code Amendments
Fire Prevention Code Amendments
   
National Fire Protection Association 1 Uniform Fire Code Amendments/2018
   
National Fire Protection Association 101, Life Safety Code Amendments/2018
Private Sewage Disposal and Well Code Amendments
International Property Maintenance Code Amendments
Reference Table
Attorney's note – The provisions in this document may not be altered or revised
except by ordinance adopted by the County Council.
CONSTRUCTION CODE
   The following “Chapter 1 – Construction Code Administrative Provisions” is
intended to replace Chapter 1 of each of the following adopted codes: the 2021
International Building Code, the 2021 International Residential Code for One-
and Two-Family Dwellings, the 2021 International Energy Conservation Code, the
2021 International Fuel Gas Code, the 2021 International Mechanical Code, the
2021 International Plumbing Code, and the 2021 International Swimming Pool and
Spa Code. This chapter is also intended to become Article 80 of the National
Electrical Code, 2020 edition.
   Chapter 1
Construction Code Administrative Provisions
Section 101
Administration
General
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Construction Code of Anne
Arundel County (hereinafter referred to as the "Construction Code").
101.2 Scope. Except as provided in sections 101.2.1, 101.2.2 and 101.2.3, the
provisions of the Construction Code shall apply to the construction,
alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and
occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or
structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or
structures.
   101.2.1 Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings.  Detached one- and two-family dwellings, recovery residences as
defined in §
18-1-101 of the County Code that comply with §
15-3-102(a)(2) of the County Code, and multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a
separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the
2021 International Residential Code.
   Exception: The following shall be permitted to be constructed under the 2021
International Residential Code:
   1.   Live/work units located in townhouses complying with section 619 of the
2021 International Building Code and section P2904 of the Construction Code;
and
   2.   Existing structures built prior to 2008 (non-suppressed) that are
owner-occupied lodging houses with five (5) or fewer guest rooms or residential
board and care facilities providing services to five (5) or fewer residents.
   101.2.2 Existing buildings. Existing buildings undergoing repair,
alterations or additions, and change of occupancy shall be permitted to comply
with the 2021 International Existing Building Code.
   101.2.3 Additions, alterations, or repairs. Additions, alterations, or
repairs to any structure shall conform to the requirements for a new structure
without requiring the existing structure to comply with all of the requirements
of the Construction Code, unless otherwise stated. Additions, alterations, or
repairs may not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely
affect the performance of the building.
   101.2.4 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices may not apply unless
specifically adopted.
101.3 Intent. The purpose of the Construction Code is to establish the minimum
requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare
through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation,
adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and
property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to
provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency
operations.
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes specified in sections 101.4.1 through
101.4.9 and referenced elsewhere in this Code shall be considered part of the
requirements of the Construction Code.
   101.4.1 Building. The provisions of the 2021 International Building Code
shall apply to the design and the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location,
maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any
appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. The
following appendices are adopted as part of the Building Code: Appendix C
“Group U-Agricultural Buildings”, Appendix E “Supplementary Accessibility
Requirements”, Appendix F “Rodentproofing”, Appendix G “Flood-Resistant
Construction”, and Appendix I “Patio Covers”.
   101.4.2 Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, 2020
edition (NFPA 70), shall apply to the installation of electrical systems,
including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures,
fittings, and appurtenances thereto.
   101.4.3 Gas. The provisions of the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code shall
apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas
appliances, and related accessories as covered in the Construction Code. These
requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery
to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of
residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories. The
following appendices are adopted as part of the Fuel Gas Code: Appendix A
(IFGS) “Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping”, Appendix B (IFGS) “Sizing of
Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category I
Appliances and Appliances Listed for Use with Type B Vents”, and Appendix C
(IFGS) “Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent Venting Systems”.
   101.4.4 Mechanical. The provisions of the 2021 International Mechanical Code
shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs, and replacement of
mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and/or
appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and
refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems. The
following appendix is adopted as part of the Mechanical Code: Appendix A
“Chimney Connector Pass-Throughs”.
   101.4.5 Plumbing. The provisions of the 2021 International Plumbing Code
shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing
systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances,
and where connected to a water or sewage system, all aspects of a medical gas
system. The following appendices are adopted as part of the Plumbing Code:
Appendix B “Rates of Rainfall for Various Cities”, Appendix D “Degree Day and
Design Temperatures”, and Appendix E “Sizing of Water Piping System”. The
provisions of the Anne Arundel County Private Sewage Disposal and Well Code
shall apply to private sewage disposal systems.
   101.4.6 Energy. The provisions of the 2021 International Energy Conservation
Code shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of
applicable buildings for energy efficiency.
   101.4.7 Residential. The provisions of the 2021 International Residential
Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings shall apply to all matters governing the
design and construction of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade
plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures.
The following appendices are adopted as part of the Residential Code: Appendix
AA “Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping”, Appendix AB “Sizing of Venting
Systems Serving Appliances Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances and
Appliances Listed for Use with Type B Vents”, Appendix AC “Exit Terminals of
Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent Venting Systems”, Appendix AE “Manufactured
Housing Used as Dwellings”, Appendix AG “Piping Standards for Various
Applications”, Appendix AH “Patio Covers”, Appendix AJ “Existing Buildings and
Structures”, Appendix AK “Sound Transmission”, Appendix AN “Venting Methods”,
Appendix AO “Automatic Vehicular Gates,” Appendix AP “Sizing of Water Piping
System”, Appendix AQ “Tiny Houses”, Appendix AR “Light Straw-Clay
Construction”, and Appendix AS “Strawable Construction”.
   101.4.8 Swimming pools and spas. The provisions of the 2021 International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall apply to the construction, alteration,
movement, renovation, replacement, repair, and maintenance of aquatic
recreation facilities, pools, and spas. The swimming pools and spas covered by
this code are either permanent or temporary, and shall be only those that are
designed and manufactured to be connected to a circulation system and that are
intended for swimming, bathing, or wading.
   101.4.9 Existing buildings. The provisions of the 2021 International
Existing Building Code shall apply to all matters governing repairs to,
alterations of, additions to, and changes of tenancy, use, or occupancy of
existing structures.
Section 102
Applicability
102.1 General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the
Construction Code specify different materials, methods of construction, or
other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a
conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific
requirement shall be applicable.
102.2 Other laws. The provisions of the construction code shall not supersede
any provisions of local, State, or federal law.
102.3 Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or
to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to
refer to such chapter, section, or provision of the Construction Code.
102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in the
Construction Code shall be considered part of the requirements of the
Construction Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where
differences occur between provisions of the Construction Code and referenced
codes and standards, the provisions of the Construction Code shall apply.
102.5 Partial invalidity. In the event that any part or provision of the
Construction Code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect
of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions.
102.6 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the
date of adoption of the Construction Code shall be permitted to continue
without change, except as is specifically covered in the Construction Code, or
as is deemed necessary by the Code Official for the general safety and welfare
of the occupants and the public.
102.7 Existing systems installation. Plumbing, mechanical, electrical, and fuel
gas systems lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of the
Construction Code shall be permitted to have their use and maintenance
continued if the use, maintenance, or repair is in accordance with the original
design and no hazard to life, health, or property is created by such system.
102.8 Requirements not covered by Code. Requirements necessary for the
strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed
installation, or for the public safety, health, and general welfare, not
specifically covered by the Construction Code, shall be determined by the Code
Official.
Section 103
Department of Inspections and Permits
103.1 Administration and enforcement agency. The County Department of
Inspections and Permits shall be the agency charged with the administration and
enforcement of the Construction Code unless otherwise designated.
103.2 Code Official. The Director of Inspections and Permits shall be known as
the Code Official.
103.3 Deputies. In accordance with Anne Arundel County Charter and Code, the
Code Official shall have the authority to delegate administration and
enforcement of the Construction Code to the related technical officers,
inspectors, plan examiners, and other employees. Such employees shall have
powers as delegated by the Code Official.
Section 104
Duties and Powers of Code Official
104.1 General. The Code Official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions
of the Construction Code. The Code Official shall have the authority to render
interpretations of the Construction Code and to adopt policies and procedures
in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
policies, and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of
the Construction Code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect
of waiving requirements specifically provided for in the Construction Code.
Nothing in this section may be interpreted as a waiver of any defense possessed
by an officer or employee in law or equity nor may this section be interpreted
to provide a remedy to an aggrieved party.
104.2 Applications and permits. The Code Official shall receive applications,
review construction documents, issue permits for the erection, alteration,
demolition, and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for
which such permits have been issued, and enforce compliance with the provisions
of the Construction Code.
   104.2.1 Preliminary meeting. When requested by the permit applicant or the
Code Official, the Code Official shall meet with the permit applicant prior to
the application for a construction permit to discuss plans for the proposed
work or change of occupancy in order to establish the specific applicability of
the provisions of the Construction Code.
104.3 Notices and orders. The Code Official shall issue all necessary notices
or orders to ensure compliance with the Construction Code.
104.4 Inspections. The Code Official shall make all of the required inspections
or the Code Official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection
by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in
writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by
the responsible individual. The use of all reports of inspection must be
approved by the Code Official in advance. The Code Official is authorized to
engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical
issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
   104.4.1 Fire inspection. Buildings and structures involving the use and
handling of flammable or explosive materials, other hazardous uses and
occupancies, and buildings of all use groups, except those under the scope of
the International Residential Code, shall be inspected by the Office of the
Fire Marshal in accordance with the Anne Arundel County and State of Maryland
Fire Prevention Code. The inspections shall be made to ensure compliance with
the provisions of the Anne Arundel County and State of Maryland Fire Prevention
Code with respect to: protection against fire and panic; maintenance of
exitways and operation of fire door assemblies; fire protection systems; fire
alarm, signaling and central station alarm systems; conduct of fire drills and
fire brigades; and all special fire-extinguishing equipment.
104.5 Identification. The Code Official shall carry proper identification when
inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under the
Construction Code.
104.6 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
the provisions of the Construction Code, or where the Code Official has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises
a condition which is contrary to or in violation of the Construction Code which
makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the Code
Official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times
to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by the Construction Code, provided
that if such structure or premises be occupied that proper identification be
presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is
unoccupied, the Code Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate
the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises
and request entry. If entry is refused, the Code Official shall have recourse
to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
104.7 Department records. The Code Official shall keep records of applications
received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of
inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in
the official records for the period required for retention of public records.
104.8 Liability. The Code Official, or employee charged with the enforcement of
the Construction Code, while acting for the county in good faith and without
malice in the discharge of the duties required by the Construction Code or
other pertinent law or ordinance, may not thereby be rendered liable personally
and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to
persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission
in the discharge of official duties. Any civil suit instituted against an
officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in
the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of the Construction
Code shall be defended by the County Attorney until the final termination of
the proceedings. The Code Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for
costs in any action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of the Construction Code.
104.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment, and devices
approved by the Code Official shall be constructed and installed in accordance
with such approval.
   104.9.1 Used materials and equipment. The use of used materials which meet
the requirements of the Construction Code for new materials is permitted. Used
equipment and devices may not be reused unless approved by the Code Official.
   104.9.2 New, altered, extended, or repaired systems. New systems and parts
of existing systems, which have been altered, extended, renovated, or repaired,
shall be tested as prescribed herein for defects.
104.10 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of the Construction Code, the Code Official shall
have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon
application of the owner or owner's representative, provided the Code Official
shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of
the Construction Code impractical and the modification is in compliance with
the intent and purpose of the Construction Code, and that such modification
does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural
requirements. The details of any action granting modifications shall be
recorded and entered in the files of the Department.
   104.10.1 Flood hazard areas. The Code Official may not grant modifications
to any provision related to flood hazard areas, except as allowed by § 16-2-301
of the County Code, unless the provisions modified are specific to the
Construction Code.
104.11 Alternative materials, design, and methods of construction and
equipment. The provisions of the Construction Code are not intended to prevent
the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by the Construction Code, provided
that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design,
or method of construction shall be approved where the Code Official finds that
the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the
provisions of the Construction Code and that the material, method, or work
offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that
prescribed in the Construction Code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability, and safety.
   104.11.1 Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the
approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in the
Construction Code, shall consist of valid research reports from sources
approved by the Code Official.
   104.11.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with
the provisions of the Construction Code, or evidence that a material or method
does not conform to the requirements of the Construction Code, or in order to
substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the Code Official
shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made
at no expense to the County. Test methods shall be as specified in the
Construction Code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of
recognized and accepted test methods, the Code Official shall approve the
testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an agency approved by the Code
Official. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the Code Official for the
period required for retention of public records.
Section 105
Permits
105.1 Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the use, tenant, or occupancy
of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair,
remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing
system, the installation of which is regulated by the Construction Code, or to
cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the Code
Official and obtain the required permit.
   105.1.1 Annual permit. In lieu of an individual permit for each alteration
to an already approved electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing installation,
the Code Official is authorized to issue an annual permit upon application
therefor to any person, firm, or corporation regularly employing one or more
qualified trade persons in the building, structure, or on the premises owned or
operated by the applicant for the permit.
   105.1.2 Annual permit records. The person to whom an annual permit is issued
shall keep a detailed record of alterations made under such annual permit. The
Code Official shall have access to such records at all times or such records
shall be filed with the Code Official as designated.
105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of the
Construction Code may not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be
done in any manner in violation of the provisions of the Construction Code or
any other laws or ordinances of this County. Permits shall not be required for
the following:
   105.2.1 Building:
      105.2.1.1 The following detached accessory structures:
         105.2.1.1.1 One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and
storage sheds, playhouses, gazebos, pavilions, and pergolas, provided the
average height does not exceed 10 feet and the floor area does not exceed 150
square feet if accessory to a residential structure, except that permits are
required for accessory structures located in the critical area.
         105.2.1.1.2 One-story detached unoccupied storage sheds, provided that
the average height does not exceed 10 feet and the floor area does not exceed
64 feet if accessory to a nonresidential structure, except that permits are
required for accessory structures located in the critical area.
         105.2.1.1.3 Decks not exceeding an area of 200 square feet, not more
than 30 inches above grade at any point within 36 inches horizontally or any
edge of the deck, and are not attached to a dwelling or structure if accessory
to a residential structure, except that permits are required for decks located
in the critical area.
      105.2.1.2 Fences accessory to a residential structure not over 6 feet
(1829 mm) high, except that permits are required for fences located on
waterfront property and corner lots with intersecting streets.
      105.2.1.3 Retaining walls that are not over 2 feet (1219 mm) in height
measured from the lowest grade to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.
      105.2.1.4 Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does
not exceed 5,000 gallons (18925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width
does not exceed 2:1.
      105.2.1.5 Sidewalks and driveways and patios not more than 8 inches (762
mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and not part
of an accessible route.
      105.2.1.6 Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops,
and similar finish work.
      105.2.1.7 Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets
and scenery.
      105.2.1.8 Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610
mm) deep.
      105.2.1.9 Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes, not including service systems.
      105.2.1.10 Swings and other playground equipment accessory to structures
as regulated by the International Residential Code.
      105.2.1.11 Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not
project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require
additional support.
      105.2.1.12 Movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters, and partitions not
over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height.
      105.2.1.13 Tents, and membrane structures having an area of 200 square
feet or less (19 m2).
      105.2.1.14 Agricultural buildings, specifically livestock shelters,
livestock buildings, shade structures, milking barns, structures for primary
agricultural and value-added processing, poultry shelters, barns, buildings and
structures used for storage of farm equipment and machinery, horticultural
structures, detached production greenhouses, crop protection shelters, sheds,
grain silos, riding arenas, stables, and buildings or structures for farm
alcohol production facilities. The following are not agricultural buildings for
the purpose of this Code:
         105.2.1.14.1 Buildings or structures that house livestock, horses,
equipment, machinery, or fowl owned by others than the landowner or farm
manager, unless covered by the terms of a written agreement.
         105.2.1.14.2 Buildings or shelters on property not covered by a soil
conservation and water quality plan approved by the Anne Arundel Soil
Conservation District.
         105.2.1.14.3 Buildings open to the general public for commercial,
recreational, or other use, unless only open to the general public with an
approved zoning certificate of use or a horse stable license issued by the
Maryland Department of Agriculture and the use by the general public is limited
to the ground floor level and a maximum of 50 occupants at any one time, or,
with approval by the Fire Marshal and compliance with an annual fire
inspection, a maximum of 200 people.
         105.2.1.14.4 Buildings that exceed 40 feet in height.
         105.2.1.14.5 Buildings or structures closer than 60 feet from adjacent
buildings, unless the agricultural buildings are approved by the Code Official
to be located closer than 60 feet to adjacent buildings after review and
approval of the building plan for fire safety by the Fire Chief or his
designee.
         105.2.1.14.6 Buildings not located on properties of five acres or more
zoned RA – Rural Agricultural Districts or RLD – Residential Low Density, or
not currently assessed as agricultural by the Maryland State Department of
Assessments and Taxation.
         106.2.1.14.7 Buildings located on properties without active farming,
such as crop production fields, vegetable production, or a fenced pasture for
livestock or equine operation.
         105.2.1.14.8 A building utilized as a large animal veterinarian
clinic, as defined in §
18-1-101 of the County Code, unless the large animal veterinarian clinic is
located in an existing building constructed under a building permit.
   105.2.2 Electrical:
      105.2.2.1 Listed cord and plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
      105.2.2.2 Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the
outlets therefor.
      105.2.2.3 Repair or replacement of branch circuit over-current devices of
the required capacity in the same location.
      105.2.2.4 Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable
experimental laboratories.
      105.2.2.5 Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved, permanently
installed receptacles.
      105.2.2.6 Electrical equipment used for radio and television
transmissions. But the provisions of the Construction Code shall apply to
equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installations of towers and
antennas.
      105.2.2.7 The testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus.
   105.2.3 Gas:
      105.2.3.1 Portable heating appliance.
      105.2.3.2 Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
   105.2.4 Mechanical:
      105.2.4.1 Portable heating appliance.
      105.2.4.2 Portable ventilation equipment.
      105.2.4.3 Portable cooling unit.
      105.2.4.4 Steam, hot, or chilled water piping within any heating or
cooling equipment regulated by the Construction Code.
      105.2.4.5 Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or
make it unsafe.
      105.2.4.6 Portable evaporative cooler.
      105.2.4.7 Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (5 kg)
or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or
less.
      105.2.4.8 Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed
piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
   105.2.5 Plumbing:
      105.2.5.1 The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste, or vent
pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil,
waste, or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and
replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work
and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in the
Construction Code.
      105.2.5.2 The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes,
valves, or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets,
provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or
rearrangement of valves, pipes, or fixtures.
   105.2.6 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be
performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted
within the next business day to the Code Official.
   105.2.7 Repairs. Application or notice to the Code Official is not required
for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps, or the connection of
approved portable electrical equipment to approved, permanently installed
receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall,
partition, or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or
load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress,
or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor
shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas,
soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring, or mechanical or other
work affecting public health or general safety.
   105.2.8 Public service agencies. A permit otherwise required by this Article
shall not be required for the installation, alteration, or repair of
generation, transmission, distribution or metering, or other related equipment
that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by
established right.
105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first
file an application in writing on a form furnished by the Department for that
purpose.
   105.3.1 Such application shall:
      105.3.1.1 Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made;
      105.3.1.2 Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by
legal description, street address, or similar description that will readily
identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work;
      105.3.1.3 Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
      105.3.1.4 Be accompanied by construction documents and other information
as required in Section 106;
      105.3.1.5 State the valuation of the proposed work;
      105.3.1.6 Be signed by the owner, or the owner's authorized agent; and
      105.3.1.7 If the application is for construction of a residential pier,
include a certification that the applicant owns riparian rights and that the
community in which the property is located does not own riparian rights for the
subject lot, or any land, lots, or parcels abutting the subject lot, and shall
include copies of any recorded instruments supporting the certification; and
         105.3.1.7.1 Shall certify that notice was sent, by certified or
electronic mail, to any homeowner’s association that governs the property that
is the subject of the application, notifying the association that an
application has been filed for a residential pier, or, if the applicant
certifies that contact information for the homeowner’s association was not
available, a certification that property owners of all property abutting the
applicant’s property were sent the notice; and
      105.3.1.8 Give such other data and information as required by the Code
Official.
   105.3.2 Application for electrical permit. To obtain an electrical permit,
the applicant shall be the holder of the applicable license described under §
11-4-302(b) or (d) of the County Code.
   105.3.3 Application for gas permit. To obtain a gas permit, the applicant
shall be the holder of the applicable license described under § 11-4-401(2) or
(3) of the County Code.
   105.3.4 Application for mechanical permit. To obtain a mechanical permit,
the applicant shall be the holder of the applicable license described under §
11-4-502(b) or (c) of the County Code.
   105.3.5 Application for plumbing permit. To obtain a plumbing permit, the
applicant shall be the holder of the applicable license described under § 11-4-
605(a), (c), or (d) of the County Code.
   105.3.6 Action on application. The Code Official shall examine or cause to
be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable
time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not
conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the Code Official shall reject
such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Code Official
is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the
Construction Code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the Code Official
shall issue a permit as soon as practicable. Permits shall be subject to the
requirements of the Construction Code in effect at the time of permit
application. A permit may not be issued for work on any property for which the
property owner has received a notice of violation of state or local critical
area law, until the requirements of § 8-1808(c)(4) of the Natural Resources
Article of the State Code have been satisfied.
   105.3.7 Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged
existing buildings in flood hazard areas. For applications for reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of existing buildings or
structures located in a flood hazard area as established by Article 16 of the
County Code, the Code Official shall examine or cause to be examined the
construction documents and shall prepare a finding with regard to the value of
the proposed work. For
   buildings that have sustained damage of any origin, the value of the
proposed work shall include the cost to repair the building or structure to its
pre-damage condition. If the Code Official finds that the value of proposed
work equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or
structure before the damage occurred, such finding shall constitute substantial
improvement or substantial damage and shall meet the requirements of the County
Code for flood hazard areas.
   105.3.8 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any
proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned and may be cancelled by
the Department of Inspections and Permits one year after the date of filing,
unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been
issued, except that the Code Official is authorized to grant one or more
extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The
extension shall be requested in writing and good cause shown.
105.4 Validity of permit. The issuance of a permit may not be construed to be a
permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the
construction code or of any other provision of the County Code. Permits
presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the
Construction Code or other provision of the County Code are not valid. The
issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data does not
prevent the Code Official from requiring the correction of errors in the
construction documents and other data. The Code Official is also authorized to
prevent occupancy or use of a structure that violates the Construction Code or
any other provision of the County Code.
105.5 Expiration. A permit under which no work is commenced within one year
after issuance shall expire. A permit under which work continues in accordance
with section 105.5.2 shall expire three years after the issuance date.
   105.5.1 Definition. For the purposes of section 105.5, "commenced" means the
placement of the first element of construction, usually footings, and a
requested and approved inspection for which the building permit was issued.
   105.5.2 Work stoppage. A permit under which work has begun and stopped for
any reason shall become null and void one year after the work has stopped. Work
will be considered stopped when the builder fails to prosecute the work so as
to ensure completion within a reasonable period of time considering the type of
construction involved. Work placement of less than one-third of the estimated
total cost in a one-year period will normally be considered as having suspended
work. Whenever the Department determines by inspection that work on any
building or structure for which a permit has been issued and the work started
has been suspended for a period of one year, the owner of the property upon
which the structure is located, or other person or agent in control of said
property, shall, within 90 days from the receipt of written notice from the
Department, obtain a new permit to complete the required work and diligently
pursue the work to completion, or shall remove or demolish the building within
180 days from the date of written notice.
   105.5.3 Associated permits. Plumbing, electrical, mechanical, and gas
permits secured for the purpose of providing services for the building shall
run for the life of the building permit as defined in this section.
   105.5.4 Permit extension. Upon written request filed with the Department
prior to permit expiration, and if the Department finds that a hardship exists,
the times set forth in section 105.5 may be extended for up to one additional
year from the date of expiration. A permit that is extended is subject to a $50
fee.
   105.5.5 Permit renewal. Upon written request filed with the Department no
later than one year after permit expiration, or a longer period at the sole
discretion of the Code Official, and if the Department finds that a hardship
exists, an expired permit may be renewed for up to one additional year from the
date of the renewal request. A permit that is renewed is subject to a $50 fee.
A permit that has been renewed must comply with the Construction Codes adopted
in Article 15 of the County Code at the time of the renewal.
105.6 Requirements for issuance. No building permit shall be issued under any
circumstances or conditions that are in conflict with any provisions or
requirements of the Construction Code, public works regulations, subdivision
regulations, zoning ordinances, or any other regulation or ordinance duly
adopted by the County Council, or other applicable law. The Code Official is
hereby authorized and directed to assist in the enforcement of such statutes,
ordinances, and regulations to the full extent of the powers delegated by the
County Code.
   105.6.1 Suspension or revocation. Any permit determined by the Code Official
to have been issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate, or
incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any
of the provisions of the Construction Code shall be suspended or revoked upon
written notification to the permittee. Upon revocation, the Code Official may
refund related fees upon written request and good cause shown.
105.7 Placement of permit. The permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the
work until the completion of the project.
105.8 Historic properties. A permit to demolish or remove a structure on the
Maryland Inventory of Historic Properties may not be issued unless the
applicant demonstrates compliance with § 17-6-501 of the County Code.
105.9 Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person who performs work
for the installation or repair of buildings, structures, or electrical, gas,
mechanical, or plumbing systems, for which the construction code is applicable,
to comply with all provisions of the County Code.
Section 106
Construction Documents
106.1 Submittal documents. Construction documents, statement of special
inspections, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each
permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a design
professional registered in the State of Maryland where required by applicable
law. Where special conditions exist, the Code Official is authorized to require
additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design
professional. The construction documents shall include manufacturer's
installation instructions that provide supporting documentation. The Code
Official may waive this requirement for detached one- and two-family dwellings
as regulated by the International Residential Code and for work of a minor
nature. All residential plans submitted for "plans on file" must be signed and
sealed by a design professional registered in the State of Maryland.
   106.1.1 Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall
be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are
permitted to be submitted. Construction documents shall be of sufficient
clarity to indicate the location, nature, and extent of the work proposed and
show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the Construction Code
and relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations, as determined by the
Code Official.
      106.1.1.1 Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the
fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with the
Construction Code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to
the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information
as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9 of the
Building Code.
   106.1.2 Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient
detail the location, construction, size, and character of all portions of the
means of egress in compliance with the provisions of the Construction Code. In
other than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1, the construction documents
shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor and
in all rooms and spaces.
   106.1.3 Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents for all buildings
shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine
compliance with the Construction Code. The construction documents shall provide
details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing,
intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints,
intersections at roof, eaves, or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive
membrane, and details around openings. The construction documents shall include
manufacturer's installation instructions that provide supporting documentation
that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction
documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The
supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which
was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.
   106.1.4 Load calculations. Where an addition or alteration is made to an
existing electrical system, an electrical load calculation shall be prepared to
determine if the existing electrical service has the capacity to serve the
added load. The Code Official may waive the submission of load calculations
when the work is of a minor nature.
   106.1.5 Information for construction in flood hazard areas. For buildings
and structures located in whole or in part in flood hazard areas as established
by Article 16 of the County Code, construction documents shall include:
      106.1.5.1 Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and
flood zones, and the design flood elevation, as appropriate;
      106.1.5.2 The elevation of the proposed lowest floor, including basement;
in areas of shallow flooding (AO zones and Coastal A zones), the height of the
proposed lowest floor, including basement, above the highest adjacent grade;
      106.1.5.3 The elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural
member in coastal high hazard areas (V Zone); and
      106.1.5.4 If design flood elevations are not included on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the Code Official and the applicant shall
obtain and reasonably utilize any design flood elevation and floodway data
available from other sources.
106.2 Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for
a permit shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn in accordance with the
provisions of Article 17 of the County Code and showing to scale the size and
location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances
from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades
and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations;
and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate survey. In the case of
demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the
location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on
the site or plot.
106.3 Examination of documents. The Code Official shall examine or cause to be
examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such
examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance
with the requirements of the construction code and other pertinent laws or
ordinances.
   106.3.1 Approval of construction documents. When the Code Official issues a
permit, the construction documents shall be approved in writing or by stamp.
One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the Code
Official. The other sets shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at
the site of work, and shall be open to inspection by the CODE OFFICIAL or a
duly authorized representative.
   106.3.2 Previous approvals. The Construction Code may not require changes in
the construction documents, construction, or designated occupancy of a
structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise
lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good
faith within 180 days after the effective date of the Construction Code, and
has not been abandoned.
   106.3.3 Phased approval. The Code Official is authorized to issue a permit
for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or
structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure
have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements
have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the Construction Code.
The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or
structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation
and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted.
   106.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge.
      106.3.4.1 General. When it is required that documents be prepared by a
registered design professional, the Code Official shall be authorized to
require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a
registered design professional who shall act as the registered design
professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner
shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible
charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design
professional in responsible charge. The Code Official shall be notified in
writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible
charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. The
registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for
reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including
phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the
building. Where structural observation is required by Section 1709 of the
International Building Code, the statement of special inspections shall name
the individual or firms which are to perform structural observations and
describe the stages of construction at which structural observations are to
occur.
      106.3.4.2 Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred
submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted
at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the Code
Official within a specified period. Deferral of any submittal items shall have
the prior approval of the Code Official. The registered design professional in
responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction
documents for review by the Code Official. Documents for deferred submittal
items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible
charge who shall review them and forward them to the Code Official with a
notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed
and been found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The
deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the design and submittal
documents have been approved by the Code Official.
106.4 Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance
with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during
construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction
documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction
documents.
106.5 Retention of construction documents. One set of approved construction
documents shall be retained by the Code Official for a period of not less than
180 days from the date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by
state or local laws.
106.6 Application, plans, and specifications. The application for a permit
shall be accompanied by the following information with sufficient clarity,
detail, and dimensions to show the nature and character of the work to be
performed:
   106.6.1 Sets of architectural, structural, mechanical, electrical, and
plumbing specifications, and structural calculations as determined by the Code
Official;
   106.6.2 Site development plans as determined by the Planning and Zoning
Officer;
   106.6.3 Sprinkler layout plans and specifications as determined by the Code
Official;
   106.6.4 Mechanical design criteria and calculations for energy conservation
as determined by the Code Official; and
   106.6.5 A grading plan application, where applicable.
106.7 Requirements for application. No building permit application for
construction of any habitable structure shall be accepted until an approved
percolation test and septic design are furnished to the permit application
center or until either an operating public sewer system is available for the
connection or a utility agreement has been executed to provide an extension
from an existing system which is currently in operation. When quality of
materials is essential for conformity to the Building Code, specific
information shall be given to establish such quality and the Construction Code
may not be cited, or the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a
substitute for specific information.
Section 107
Temporary Structures and Uses
107.1 General. The Code Official may issue a permit for temporary construction.
The permit shall be limited as to time of service, but the temporary
construction may not be permitted to continue for more than one year after the
permit is issued.
107.2 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the
structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light,
ventilation, and sanitary requirements of the Construction Code as necessary to
ensure public health, safety, and general welfare.
107.3 Temporary power. The Code Official is authorized to give permission to
temporarily supply and use power as part of an electric installation before
such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of
completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall
comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat, or power
in the Electrical Code for the County.
107.4 Termination of approval. The Code Official is authorized to terminate
such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary
structure or use to be discontinued.
Section 108
Fees
108.1 Payment of fees. A permit may not be issued until the fees prescribed by
law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released or issued
until the additional fee, if any, has been paid.
108.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas,
mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for
each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as
established by the applicable governing authority. A $43 nonrefundable permit
application fee will be assessed for all permits.
   108.2.1 Building Permit Fees
Estimated Value Fee
Estimated Value Fee
$0 - $ 3,000    $86
3,001 - 5,000   $103
5,001 - 10,000  $147
10,001 - 15,000 $164
15,001 - 20,000 $198
20,001 - 25,000 $242*
*Plus.010 times the estimated value above $25,000
 
      108.2.1.1 Estimated value. In computing the estimated value, include the
fair market value of all construction or work for which the permit is issued,
including all painting, papering, roofing, electrical work, plumbing, permanent
or fixed heating equipment, elevator equipment, fire sprinkler equipment, and
any other permanent equipment essential to the operation of the building as a
building. Exclude equipment required for manufacturing or other special
occupant, land value, and development cost. The minimum acceptable valuation
for new buildings shall be based on the International Code Council Permit Fee
Schedule Type of Construction Method Report as provided by the Department. No
portion of a building, including mechanical, electrical, or plumbing work,
shall be excluded from the valuation for a building permit because of other
permits required by the governing agency.
      108.2.1.2 Government agencies and Anne Arundel Community College. A
government agency will be issued permits without charge if construction
inspection and enforcement is provided by a government agency other than the
County. All permits will be issued to Anne Arundel County  and Anne Arundel
Community College without charge.
      108.2.1.3 Churches and other nonprofit agencies. Churches, parsonages,
eleemosynary, and community association facilities, and fire stations on
properties owned by a volunteer fire company formed pursuant to §
12-1-201 of this Code shall be charged the minimum fee under sections 108.2.1,
108.2.3, 108.2.4, 108.2.5, and 108.2.6.
      108.2.1.4 Investigation fees. Whenever work for which a permit or
application for inspection is required under the Construction Code has been
commenced without issuance of a permit or request for inspection, an
investigation shall be made before a permit or request for inspection may be
issued for the work. In addition to the regular permit fee, an investigation
fee of$150 shall be collected. The payment of the investigation fee may not
exempt a person from compliance with the provisions of the Construction Code or
from any penalty prescribed by law.
   108.2.2 Soil percolation test fees. The fees for a soil percolation test
made by the Department of Health are:
      1.   Platted lot, $450;
      2.   Initial unplatted lot, $750; and
      3.   Retest of unplatted lot, $400.
      108.2.2.1 Application Fee. A $43 nonrefundable application fee shall be
assessed for all soil percolation tests.
   108.2.3 Electrical permit fees. The fees set forth in section 108.2.3 shall
be paid to the County for an electrical permit and for the specified inspection
services, except that if the total permit fee calculated for additions,
alterations, or repairs to existing structures or services exceeds the
comparable fee for new construction, the fee calculated for new construction
shall be paid.
 
108.2.3.1 NEW CONSTRUCTION: RESIDENTIAL                                            FEE
Single-family detached and single-family attached, including 2-family unit:
   (1)   For service equipment of no more than 200 amperes                   $147
   (2)   For service equipment of more than 200 amperes and no more than 300 $207
amperes
   (3)   For service equipment of more than 300 amperes and no more than 400 $259
amperes
                                                                                   $259 plus
                                                                                   $69 per
                                                                                   additional
   (4)   For service equipment of more than 400 amperes                      100
                                                                                   amperes or
                                                                                   fraction
                                                                                   of 100
                                                                                   amperes
 
 
108.2.3.2 APARTMENTS AND 5-FAMILY DWELLINGS:                                 FEE
(1)   For service equipment of no more than 200 amperes                   $117
(2)   For service equipment of more than 200 amperes and no more than 300 $166
amperes
(3)   For service equipment of more than 300 amperes and no more than 400 $207
amperes
                                                                             $207 plus
                                                                             $55 per
                                                                             additional
(4)   For service equipment of more than 400 amperes                      100
                                                                             amperes or
                                                                             fraction
                                                                             of 100
                                                                             amperes
 
 
108.2.3.3 NEW CONSTRUCTION: NEW BUILDINGS, INCLUDING COMMERCIAL SHELL        FEE
BUILDINGS AND WHITE BOX PERMITS
(1)   For service equipment of no more than 200 amperes                   $216
(2)   For service equipment of more than 200 amperes and no more than 300 $276
amperes
(3)   For service equipment of more than 300 amperes and no more than 400 $328
amperes
                                                                             $328 plus
                                                                             $103 per
                                                                             additional
(4)   For service equipment of more than 400 amperes                      100
                                                                             amperes or
                                                                             fraction
                                                                             of 100
                                                                             amperes
 
 
108.2.3.4 ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, REMODELING (DOES NOT INCLUDE SERVICE FEE
CHANGE OR SUBPANEL): RESIDENTIAL
Any number of electrical outlets and fixtures                          $95
 
 
108.2.3.5 ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS, REMODELING (INCLUDING SERVICE CHANGE OF     FEE
SUBPANEL): RESIDENTIAL
(1)   Any number of electrical outlets and fixtures totaling less than 200 $147
amperes
(2)   Any number of electrical outlets and fixtures totaling 200 or more   $207
amperes and less than 300 amperes
(3)   Any number of electrical outlets and fixtures totaling 300 or more   $259
amperes and less than 400 amperes
                                                                              $259 plus
                                                                              $69 per
                                                                              each
(4)   Any number of electrical outlets and fixtures totaling 400 or more   additional
amperes                                                                       100
                                                                              amperes or
                                                                              fraction
                                                                              of 100
                                                                              amperes
 
 
108.2.3.6 ADDITIONS, ALTERATION, TENANT FIX-
UP, FINISHING (DOES NOT INCLUDE SERVICE      FEE
CHANGE: COMMERCIAL
(1)   1 to 10 electrical outlets and      $34
fixtures
(2)   11 to 40 electrical outlets and     $69
fixtures
(3)   41 to 75 electrical outlets and     $103
fixtures
(4)   More than 75 electrical outlets and $103 plus $17 per additional
fixtures                                     25outlets and fixtures or fraction
                                             of 25 outlets and fixtures
   
 
108.2.3.7 ADDITION, ALTERATION, TENANT FIX-UP, FINISHING (INCLUDES SERVICE   FEE
CHANGE): COMMERCIAL
(1)   For service equipment of no more than 200 amperes                   $216
(2)   For service equipment of more than 200 amperes and no more than 300 $276
amperes
(3)   For service equipment of more than 300 amperes and no more than 400 $328
amperes
                                                                             $328 plus
                                                                             $103 per
                                                                             additional
(4)   For service equipment of more than 400 amperes                      100
                                                                             amperes or
                                                                             fraction
                                                                             of 100
                                                                             amperes
 
108.2.3.8 OTHER WORK FEE
108.2.3.8 OTHER WORK                                            FEE
(1)   Electrical appliance or motor, repair or replacement
   1 electrical appliance or motor                           $25
   More than 1 electrical appliance or motor                 $43
(2)   Fire alarm systems
   New fire alarm system                                     $346 flat rate
   Fire alarm system and other low voltage devices (any numbe$69 flat rate
(3)   Radio and television receiving installation            $69
(4)   Signs                                                  $69
(5)   Swimming pool, residential                             $69
(6)   Temporary service or pole service                      $69
 
   108.2.4 Fuel gas permit fees. A gasfitting permit fee for gas fuel-burning
equipment shall be paid to the County according to the pipe size as follows:
Pipe Diameter (Inches) Fee
Pipe Diameter (Inches) Fee
2 1/2 or less          $69
3                      $77
4                      $112
6                      $173
8                      $346
10                     $519
12 or larger           $735
 
   A gasfitting permit fee is based on the size of the gas pipe leading from
the gas meter in the building, the service gas pipe entering a building, or the
gas pipe leading from an existing gas service pipe inside of a building. The
gasfitting permit fee based on the size of the pipe supplying the system shall
cover, without additional cost, one or more gas burning appliances supplied
with gas from the pipe. An inspection fee of $173 or $34 per unit, whichever is
greater, shall be paid to the County for onsite gas installations.
   108.2.5 Mechanical permit fees. A permit fee for residential uses including
one- and two-family and multifamily dwellings shall be paid to the County as
follows:
      108.2.5.1 New residential installations:
 
Heating and air conditioning system             $121
Heating system only                             $95
Air conditioning system only                    $95
Ductwork only                                   $95
Minimum fee for permit in the Residential Class $51
Replacement systems                             $51
 
      108.2.5.2 Nonresidential installations: Except as provided in section
108.2.5.3, the permit fee for the installation, repair, or replacement of
mechanical equipment requiring a permit under the Construction Code shall be
calculated from the following table based on the estimated cost of the work,
including equipment, labor, and material. The Department may require
verification of the costs.
 
Estimated Cost    Permit Fee
$0 to $2,000      $51
$2,001 to $5,000  $69
$5,001 to $7,000  $86
$7,001 to $9,000  $112
$9,001 to $11,000 $129
 
      For estimated costs in excess of $11,000, the fee is$129 plus .008 times
the amount in excess of $11,000.
      108.2.5.3 Nonresidential fire suppression systems. For all nonresidential
fire suppression systems, the permit fee is $51.
   108.2.6 Plumbing permit fees. The following plumbing permit fees shall be
paid to the County:
      108.2.6.1 For new detached single-family dwellings only, for fixtures and
appurtenances,$173;
      108.2.6.2. For townhouses and two-family dwellings only, for fixtures and
appurtenances,$129;
      108.2.6.3 For new multifamily units only, for fixtures and
appurtenances,$86;
      106.2.6.4 For installation or reconstruction of, or addition to, septic
tank, $350;
      108.2.6.5 For installation or reconstruction of, or addition to, drain
field or dry well, $475;
      108.2.6.6 For repair of a septic distribution box, $225;
      108.2.6.7 For installation or repair of a pump pit, $225;
      108.2.6.8 For installation or repair of septic piping only, $225;
      108.2.6.9 For installation or repair of a holding tank, $225;
      108.2.6.10 For commercial onsite sewage disposal systems with a flow rate
in excess of 2,000 gallons/day: for installation,$2,595; for each additional
2,000 gallons/day of flow,$2,595; and for installation or reconstruction of a
commercial grease trap only,$1,730;
      108.2.6.11 For installation of a nitrogen-reducing non-conventional
sewage disposal system, $750;
      108.2.6.12 For installation of an advanced pretreatment unit, $600;
      108.2.6.13 For installation of a combination of sewage disposal system
components, including septic tank, drainfield, dry well, distribution box, pump
pit, mound system, or pressure-dosed bed, $600;
      108.2.6.14 For reconstruction or addition to existing plumbing: for the
first plumbing fixture, $51; for each additional plumbing fixture, $8; and each
fixture left out of original permit application, $25; and
      108.2.6.15 For commercial shell building groundwork, $51 flat fee.
   108.2.7 Onsite water and sewer fees. For onsite water, an inspection fee of
$25, and for onsite sewer, an inspection fee of $25, for each equivalent
dwelling unit, as defined in §
13-5-803 of the County Code, in multifamily residential, commercial, and
industrial construction. The minimum fee for onsite water only is $164, for
onsite sewer only is$164, and for both onsite water and sewer is $328.
   108.2.8 Public water and sewer connection fees. For public water connection
$51, and for public sewer connection, $51. Applicants shall pay any user or
capital connection charges associated with water and sewer permits required by
Article 13 of the County Code prior to the issuance of permits.
108.3 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration,
removal, or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the
work authorized by a building permit may not relieve the applicant or holder of
the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
108.4 Building permit refunds. No refunds will be given for issued building
permits.
   108.4.1 Refund for unissued permit. Prior to building permit issuance, a 50%
refund may be issued. Permit application fees are not refundable.
108.5 Electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and fuel gas permit refunds. If no work
has been done under any trade permit, the holder of the permit may return the
permit to the Department. On cancellation of the permit, 75% of the fee shall
be refunded if application for the refund is made within 90 days after the
issuance of the permit.
   108.5.1 Transfer of electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and fuel gas permits.
A fee of $25 shall be paid to the County for transfer of a trade electrical
plumbing, mechanical, or fuel gas permit. A person licensed under Article 11 of
the County Code may not apply for an electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or fuel
gas permit or commence work for which another person licensed under Article 11
was issued a permit unless the original licensee has withdrawn or been removed
from the work and has notified the Department in writing. Letters of
explanation from the person for whom the work is to be performed or from either
or both licensees shall be sent to the Code Official explaining the
circumstances. If an electrical plumbing, mechanical, or fuel gas contractor
who signed an application for an electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or fuel gas
permit dies, the permit shall be held in abeyance from the date of death. The
extent of the work satisfactorily completed by the deceased shall be recorded
on the Inspector's record and on the permit. If the owner decides to have the
remainder of the work done, the original permit shall be reactivated on written
request of the owner. The electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or fuel gas
contractor who is to complete the work shall sign the original electrical,
plumbing, mechanical, or fuel gas application on file at the Department and
shall be held responsible for the work completed.
108.6 Renewal fee. A permit which is renewed or extended for any reason is
subject to a $25 fee.
Section 109
Inspections
109.1 General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Code Official and such construction or work shall
remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval
as a result of an inspection may not be construed to be an approval of a
violation of the provisions of the Construction Code or of other ordinances of
the county. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of the Construction Code or of other ordinances of the County may
not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to
remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the Code
Official nor the County shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or
replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
109.2 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the Code Official is
authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures, and sites
for which an application has been filed.
109.3 Required inspections. The Code Official, upon notification, shall make
the inspections set forth in sections 109.4 through 109.12.
109.4. Building and energy inspections.
   109.4.1 Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation
inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any
required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required
forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall
be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTMC
94, the concrete need not be on the job.
   109.4.2 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-
floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel
and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories, and other
ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or
floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor.
   109.4.3 Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the
lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical
construction, the elevation certification required in section 1612.5 of the
Building Code shall be submitted to the Code Official.
   109.4.4 Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof
deck or sheathing, all framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and
pipes, chimneys, and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough
electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes, and ducts are inspected and
approved.
   109.4.5 Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations
in fire-resistance-rated assemblies may not be concealed from view until
inspected and approved.
   109.4.6 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to
determine compliance with energy provisions of the Construction Codes and shall
include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R and U
values, fenestration U value, duct system R value, and HVAC and water-heating
equipment efficiency.
109.5 Electrical.
   109.5.1 Underground. Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or
ditches are excavated and bedded, piping and conductors installed, and before
backfill is put in place. Where excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete,
frozen chunks, and other rubble that would damage or break the raceway, cable,
or conductors, or where corrosive action will occur, protection shall be
provided in the form of granular or selected material, sleeves, or other means.
   109.5.2 Bonding for swimming pools and spas.
      109.5.2.1 Pool shell bonding. Pool shell bonding inspections shall be
made after the installation of all conductive grillage, underwater luminaires,
or conductive pool appurtenances, but before shell or perimeter decking
materials are installed.
      109.5.2.2 Pool and spa perimeter surface bonding. Pool and spa perimeter
surface bonding inspections shall be made after final grade has been determined
and required conductive perimeter components and appurtenances are installed,
but before perimeter decking materials are installed.
   109.5.3 Rough-in. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the structure is
watertight and all wiring and other components to be concealed are complete,
and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
   109.5.4 Final electrical inspection. A final inspection shall be made of the
electrical system after all work required by the electrical permit is completed
and the system is operational.
109.6 Mechanical.
   109.6.1 Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are
excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before backfill is put in place.
When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks, and other
rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean
backfill shall be placed on the job site.
   109.6.2 Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing,
fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all ducting and other components to
be concealed are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling
membranes.
   109.6.3 Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the mechanical
system and when the system is operational.
109.7 Fuel gas.
   109.7.1 Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are
excavated and bedded, piping is installed and before backfill is put in place.
When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks, and other
rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean
backfill shall be on the job site.
   109.7.2 Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing,
fireblocking, and bracing are in place and components to be concealed are
complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
   109.7.3 Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the installation
and when the system is operational.
109.8 Plumbing inspections and water and sewer connections.
   109.8.1 Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are
excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in
place.
   109.8.2 Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing,
fireblocking, firestopping, draftstopping, and bracing is in place and all
sanitary, storm, and water distribution piping is roughed-in, and prior to the
installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
   109.8.3 Final inspection shall be made after the building is complete, all
plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the system is
operational.
109.9 Fire suppression systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13D or section
P2904 of the International Residential Code.
   109.9.1 Rough-in inspection shall be made prior to framing inspection and
when all piping, supports, and other components have been installed.
   109.9.2 Final inspection shall be made when the fire suppression system is
completed and operational.
109.10 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the
Code Official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any
construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the
Construction Code and other laws that are enforced by the Department.
109.11 Special inspections. Special inspections shall be conducted pursuant to
section 1704 of the Building Code.
109.12 Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work
required by the building permit is completed and all systems have received
final inspections.
109.13 Inspection agencies. The Code Official is authorized to accept reports
of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the
requirements as to qualifications and reliability.
109.14 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the building
permit or the holder’s duly authorized agent to notify the Code Official when
work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
provide access to and means for inspections of such work as required by the
Construction Code.
109.15 Re-inspection fee.
   109.15.1 There is a fee of $150 for re-inspection for each requested
inspection that is not canceled at least 24 hours prior to the scheduled
inspection or which is not accessible to the inspector.
   109.15.2 There is a fee of $150 for re-inspection for each requested
inspection which is not ready for inspection.
109.16 Approval required. Work may not be done beyond the point indicated in
each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the Code
Official. The Code Official, upon notification, shall make the requested
inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is
satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent that
the construction fails to comply with the Construction Code and the basis
therefor. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion
may not be covered or concealed until authorized by the Code Official.
Section 110
Certificate of Occupancy
110.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied,
and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or
structure or portion thereof shall be made until the Code Official has issued a
certificate of occupancy or a final inspection therefor as provided herein.
Issuance of a certificate of occupancy may not be construed as an approval of a
violation of the provisions of the Construction Code or of other ordinances of
the County. A certificate of occupancy or final inspection for any building or
structure erected, altered, repaired, or changed to a different use may not be
issued unless:
   110.1.1 The work completed under a building permit has been inspected and no
violations of the Construction Code have been found; and
   110.1.2 The following improvements required under a public works agreement
or a grading permit have been completed to the extent determined by the Code
Official to be applicable and sufficient to protect the general health, safety,
and welfare:
      110.1.2.1 On roads or other rights-of-way, blacktop base course or other
suitable base that has been approved by the Department of Inspections and
Permits;
      110.1.2.2 Storm drainage facilities relative to the lots in question, not
including facilities for the conversion of a sediment pond to a stormwater
management pond;
      110.1.2.3 Underground fire suppression storage tanks;
      110.1.2.4 Street name signs;
      110.1.2.5 Traffic control signs; and
      110.1.2.6 Utilities.
   110.1.3 Notwithstanding the provisions of section 110.1.2, a certificate of
occupancy may be issued for any building or structure which is adequately
served by basic improvements completed under a public works agreement, as
determined by the Department of Inspections and Permits.
110.2 Certificate of occupancy or final inspection. After the Code Official
inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of
the Construction Code or other laws that are enforced by the Department of
Inspections and Permits, the Code Official shall issue a final inspection or a
certificate of occupancy that contains the following:
   110.2.1 The building permit number;
   110.2.2 The address of the structure;
   110.2.3 The name of the owner or tenant;
   110.2.4 A description of that portion of the structure for which the
certificate is issued;
   110.2.5 A statement that the described portion of the structure has been
inspected for compliance with the requirements of the Construction Code for the
occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed
occupancy is classified;
   110.2.6 The name of the Code Official;
   110.2.7 The edition of the Code under which the permit was issued;
   110.2.8 The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
3 of the Building Code;
   110.2.9 The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6 of the Building
Code; and
   110.2.10 Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.
110.3 Temporary occupancy. The Code Official is authorized to issue a temporary
certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by
the permit, provided that such portion or portions may be occupied safely. The
Code Official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of
occupancy is valid.
   110.3.1 Temporary certificate of occupancy. A temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued only after the Code Official receives a notarized
statement from the permittee and the prospective buyer or lessee, if
applicable, reciting the work remaining to be done and the schedule for the
completion of the work and granting the permittee a right of entry for the
purposes of performing the work and granting the County a right of entry for
inspection of the work. A temporary certificate of occupancy is valid for no
more than 120 days unless extended in writing by the Code Official.
110.4 Revocation. The Code Official is authorized to suspend or revoke, in
writing, a permit, certificate of occupancy, or final inspection approval
issued under the provisions of the Construction Code when the permit
certificate or approval is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect
information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure
or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the
provisions of the Construction Code.
110.5 Fee for certificate of occupancy. If a permittee or property owner allows
occupancy prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a penalty of
$1,000 shall be paid to the County prior to a final inspection and the issuance
of the certificate of occupancy.
Section 111
Service Utilities
111.1 Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a
utility source of energy, fuel, or power to any building or system that is
regulated by the Construction Code, and for which a permit is required, until
authorized by the Code Official.
111.2 Temporary connection. The Code Official shall have the authority to
authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility
source of energy, fuel, or power.
111.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The Code Official shall have
the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building,
structure, or system regulated by the Construction Code in case of emergency
where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The Code
Official shall notify the serving utility and, wherever possible, the owner and
occupant of the building, structure, or service system of the decision to
disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting,
the owner or occupant of the building, structure, or service system shall be
notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter.
111.4 Connection after order to disconnect. A person may not make utility
service or energy source connections to systems regulated by the Construction
Code, which have been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the Code
Official, or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the Code
Official until the Code Official authorizes the reconnection and use of such
systems.
Section 112
Appeals
112.1 General. Final decisions and orders by the Code Official may be appealed
to the Anne Arundel County Board of Appeals, in accordance with Section 602 of
the County Charter and Article 25A of the State Code.
112.2 Limitations on authority. The Board of Appeals may not waive the
requirements of the Construction Code and may not preside over actions that
duplicate existing civil or criminal prosecutions.
Section 113
Violations
113.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct,
alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish, or occupy any building,
structure, or equipment regulated by the Construction Code, or cause same to be
done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the
Construction Code.
   113.1.1 Unrevealed violations. A contractor, builder, or person responsible
for construction under an issued permit shall remain responsible for all
violations of the Construction Code arising out of that permit for a one-year
period of time from the time of final inspection.
113.2 Notice of violation. The Code Official is authorized to serve a notice of
violation on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration,
extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition, or occupancy of a building or
structure in violation of the provisions of the Construction Code, or in
violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the
Construction Code. Such notice of violation shall identify the violations and
direct the discontinuance of any illegal action or condition and the abatement
of the violation.
   113.2.1 Transfer of ownership. When the owner of a dwelling unit or
structure has received a notice of violation, and that notice of violation is
active, the owner shall provide a copy of the notice of violation to a
prospective purchaser or lessee under contract.
113.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with
the Code Official is authorized to request the County Attorney to institute the
appropriate proceeding to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, or to
require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or
structure in violation of the provisions of the Construction Code or of the
notice of violation or direction made pursuant thereto.
113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of the
Construction Code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation
of the approved construction documents or directive of the Code Official, or of
a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the Construction Code,
shall be subject to criminal and civil penalties and enforcement.
113.5 Civil fines. Any violation of any of the provisions of the Construction
Code is punishable by a civil fine as provided by § 9-2-101 of the County Code.
   113.5.1 Piers and bulkheads. It is a Class B civil offense to construct or
replace a pier or bulkhead without a building permit or to exceed construction
allowed by an approved building permit.
   113.5.2 Construction without a building permit. It is a Class C civil
offense to perform work without a required building permit or to perform work
in excess of that approved by a building permit.
   113.5.3 Building Code. It is a Class D civil offense to violate any
provision of the Anne Arundel County Building Code.
   113.5.4 Electrical Code. It is a Class D civil offense to violate any
provision of the Anne Arundel County Electrical Code.
   113.5.5 Fuel Gas Code. It is a Class D civil offense to violate any
provision of the Anne Arundel County Fuel Gas Code.
   113.5.6 Mechanical Code. It is a Class D civil offense to violate any
provision of the Anne Arundel County Mechanical Code.
   113.5.7 Plumbing Code. It is a Class D civil offense to violate any
provision of the Anne Arundel County Plumbing Code.
113.6 Civil fine notice provisions. Except for violations of this Chapter 1 of
the Anne Arundel County Construction Code, written notice shall be given to the
violator 14 days before a civil fine is assessed to allow for correction of the
violation.
113.7 Use or occupancy of building constructed without building permit.
   113.7.1 Certain conditions presumed unsafe. There is a conclusive
presumption that a building or structure constructed, enlarged, altered, or
moved without, or in violation of, a building permit required by the Building
Code for the County as adopted is unsafe and constitutes an immediate hazard to
life and property.
   113.7.2 Use or occupancy prohibited. A building or structure presumed unsafe
under section 113.7.1 may not be used or occupied until a building permit is
issued, the building or structure passes all applicable inspections, including
a final building inspection, and, if necessary, a separate certificate of
occupancy for the building or structure is issued.
   113.7.3 Disconnection from utilities. Upon notice as described in section
113.7.4, the owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a building or
structure presumed unsafe under section 113.7.1 shall disconnect the building
or structure from all utilities, including gas, electric, public water, and
public sewer. If the building or structure was connected to a private well or
to a private sewage disposal system without the approval of the Health Officer,
the owner, occupant, or other person in charge shall disconnect the building or
structure from the private well or private sewage disposal system. The
utilities and the private well or private sewage disposal system may not be
reconnected until approved by the Code Official.
   113.7.4 Notice. The Code Official shall give notice of intent to enforce the
provisions of this section to the owner, occupant, or other person in charge of
the building or structure. The notice may be given by posting a copy on the
building or structure and mailing a copy by first class mail to the owner or
owners of the property on which the building or structure is located as stated
in the assessment records for the County. The notice shall include a
description of the requirements of this section and specify a time for
compliance with the requirements.
   113.7.5 Enforcement. If the owner, occupant, or other person in charge of
the building or structure does not comply with the requirements of this section
within the time specified in the notice, the Code Official may refer the matter
to the County Attorney for enforcement.
   113.7.6 Remedies and penalties. Violations of the requirements of this
section may be punished by a civil penalty imposed by the court in the amount
of $500 per day for each day that the violation continues or criminal penalties
as specified in § 9-1-101 of the County Code, or both. If the owner, occupant,
or other person in charge of the building or structure fails to disconnect the
utilities and a private well and private sewage disposal system as required by
this section, the County may take the action necessary to do so, including
directing utility companies to disconnect service to the building or structure
at the cost of the owner, occupant, or other person in charge of the building
or structure.
   113.7.7 Remedies and penalties cumulative. The remedies and penalties set
forth in this section are in addition to and do not supersede remedies and
penalties that are provided elsewhere in the County Code or that may be imposed
by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   113.7.8 Exceptions. This section may not apply if the work done without or
in violation of a building permit is limited to interior renovations and may
not apply to a separate building or structure that is located on the same
property as the building or structure presumed unsafe under section 113.7.1 but
that was constructed and occupied in compliance with the Building Code for the
County.
113.8. Denial of permits after notice of violation.
   113.8.1 Denial of permit. The County may deny the issuance of permits under
Article 15 of the County Code if it determines that the applicant has been
served with notice of any violation on the property for which the permit is
sought and the violation has not been resolved.
   113.8.2 Notice of intent. The Code Official shall give notice of intent to
enforce this section by including in any notice of violation a provision
stating that the property may be subject to denial of additional permits under
this section until the violation is corrected.
   113.8.3 Remedies and penalties. The remedies and penalties set forth in this
section are in addition to and do not supersede remedies and penalties provided
elsewhere in this Code and in the Supplement as adopted by §
15-1-105 of the County Code or that a court may impose under its contempt
powers.
   113.8.4 No appeal. The applicant may not appeal the denial of additional
permits based on enforcement of this section.
113.9 No liability. The County and any County agency or private company acting
at the direction of the County may not be liable for property damage necessary
to abate an actual or potential safety hazard.
Section 114
Stop Work Order
114.1 Authority. Whenever the Code Official finds any work regulated by the
Construction Code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions
of the Construction Code or dangerous or unsafe, the Code Official is
authorized to issue a stop work order.
114.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to
the owner of the property involved, the owner's agent, or the person doing the
work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately
cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the
conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. The posting
of a written stop work order on the property shall constitute notice to the
owner.
   114.2.1 Emergencies. When an emergency exists, the Code Official shall not
be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.
114.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who continues any work after having been
served with a stop work order, except work that person is directed to perform
to remove a violation or unsafe condition, is liable for a civil fine not to
exceed $1,000.
114.4 Transfer of ownership. When the owner of a dwelling unit or structure has
received a stop work order, and that stop work order is active, the owner shall
provide a copy of the stop work order to the prospective purchaser or lessee.
Section 115
Unsafe Structures, Systems, and Equipment
115.1 Conditions. Structures, systems, or existing equipment that are or become
unsafe, unsanitary, or deficient because of inadequate means of egress
facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire
hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that
involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be
deemed unsafe. Unsafe structures, systems or equipment shall be taken down and
removed or made safe, as the Code Official deems necessary and as provided for
in this section. A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be
deemed unsafe.
115.2 Record. The Code Official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe
condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature
of the unsafe condition.
115.3 Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the Code Official shall serve on
the owner, agent, or person in control of the structure, a written notice that
describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or
improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the
unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall
require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the Code Official
acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.
115.4 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy
thereof is (a) delivered to the owner personally; (b) sent by certified or
registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address with the
return receipt requested; or (c) delivered in any other manner as prescribed by
the Maryland Rules. If the certified or registered letter is returned showing
that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Service of
such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person
responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the
owner.
115.5 Restoration. The structure, system, or equipment determined to be unsafe
by the Code Official is permitted to be restored to a safe condition. To the
extent that repairs, alterations, or additions are made or a change of
occupancy occurs during the restoration of the structure, such repairs,
alterations, additions, or change of occupancy shall comply with the
requirements of this Code.
115.6 Disregard of unsafe notice. On the failure of a person served with an
unsafe notice to comply with the requirements of the notice, the Code Official
may refer the case to the County Attorney for appropriate action to correct the
violation, including repair or demolition at the expense of the owner. The cost
of such actions shall constitute a lien on the land and improvements, and the
costs shall be billed to the property owner and paid within 30 days of the date
of the bill, and any amount unpaid after 30 days of the date of the bill shall
be enforced pursuant to section §
1-8-101 of this Code.
115.7 Revolving Fund. The Controller is authorized to allow the expenditure of
a maximum of $100,000 from the General County Capital Projects Fund on a
revolving fund basis to support the cost of repairs or demolition undertaken by
the County under sections 115.6 and 115.8.4. Interest shall be charged to the
property owner at the same rate applicable to delinquent real property taxes
until the owner has satisfied the bill owing to the County.
   115.7.1 Other revenues. Such other revenues as the County Council may
authorize may be paid into this fund.
   115.7.2 Conditions and grants. All conditions and grants designed to promote
the purposes of this section from public or private sources shall be used for
the purpose intended or, if no purpose is specified, for general purposes of
implementing this section.
115.8 Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the Code Official, there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any part
thereof which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has
fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building or structure,
the Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the
occupants to vacate the same immediately. The Code Official shall post a notice
at each entrance to the structure reading as follows: "This structure is unsafe
and its occupancy has been prohibited by the Code Official." It shall be
unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of
making the required repairs or demolishing the structure.
   115.8.1 Temporary safeguards. When, in the opinion of the Code Official,
there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the Code Official may
cause the necessary work to be done to render such structure temporarily safe,
whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted.
   115.8.2 Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the Code Official
may temporarily close adjacent structures and close, or order the authority
having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways, and other places
adjacent to unsafe structures and prohibit the same from being used.
   115.8.3 Emergency repairs. For the purposes of section 115.8, the Code
Official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform required
emergency work as expeditiously as possible.
   115.8.4 Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work may be paid from available funds on approval of the Code
Official. Legal action may be instituted against the owner of the unsafe
property and may include the costs of repair.
   115.8.5 Unsafe equipment. Equipment deemed unsafe by the Code Official may
not be operated after the date stated in the notice unless the required repairs
or changes have been made and the equipment has been approved, or unless an
extension of time has been secured from the Code Official in writing.
      115.8.5.1 Authority to seal equipment. In the case of an emergency, the
Code Official shall have the authority to seal out of service immediately any
unsafe device or equipment regulated by the Construction Code.
      115.8.5.2 Unlawful to remove seal. Any device or equipment sealed out of
service by the Code Official shall be plainly identified. The identification
may not be tampered with, defaced, or removed except by the Code Official and
shall indicate the reason for such sealing.
(Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 65-12; Bill No. 10-13; Bill No. 83-14; Bill No. 20-15;
Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 10-16; Bill No. 66-16; Bill No. 15-17; Bill No. 19-
17; Bill No. 23-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 91-18; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 8-
21; Bill No. 14-21; Bill No. 61-23; Bill No. 63-23; Bill No. 76-23; Bill No.
25-24; Bill No. 29-25)
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS
 
   The provisions of the 2021 International Building Code are amended, deleted,
or corrected as follows and the following provisions shall supersede the part
of the text of the 2021 International Building Code as indicated:
   (1)   Strike Chapter 1 in its entirety and substitute “Chapter 1 –
Construction Code Administrative Provisions” as set forth in this supplement.
   (2)   In section 202, in the definition of “Building Official”, strike “The
officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Code, or a duly authorized representative” and substitute
“Code Official”.
   (3)   In section 202, after the definition of “Coastal High Hazard Area”
insert:
      “Code Official. The Director of Inspections and Permits, or duly
authorized representative, charged with the administration and enforcement of
this Code.”
   (4)   In section 305.2, strike “five” and substitute “eight”.
   (5)   After section 308.5, insert:
      “Exception: A childcare facility may be classified as I-4 if the facility
is classified as a day care occupancy under the State Fire Prevention Code.”
   (6)   In section 308.6, strike “five” and substitute “eight”.
   (7)   In section 308.6.1, strike “five” and substitute “eight”.
   (8)   Strike section 310.4.1, in its entirety, and substitute:
      “310.4.1 Residential care facilities within a dwelling. Residential board
and care facilities providing services to five (5) or fewer residents in an
existing single family dwelling structure built prior to 2008 are permitted to
comply with the International Residential Code. Residential board and care
facilities providing services to more than five (5) residents in an existing
single family dwelling structure built in or after 2008 shall provide an
automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.3 or
section P2904 of the International Residential Code.”
   (9)   Strike section 411.5, condition 3. in its entirety and substitute:
      “3. All exits and exit access doors from each puzzle room shall be open
and readily available upon activation by the automatic fire alarm system,
automatic sprinkler system, and a manual control at a constantly attended
location, and shall have a readily accessible control located inside each
puzzle room.”
   (10)   Strike section 510.2, condition 4. in its entirety.
   (11)   In section 510.2, condition 7., strike the comma and substitute a
period; and strike “grade plane” and substitute “lowest level of Fire
Department vehicle access”.
   (12)   In section 1004.8, after “telephone call centers,” insert “nail
salons,”.
   (13)   In section 1102.1, after “ICC A117.1.”, insert “All buildings and
portions thereof shall comply with the provisions of the “Maryland
Accessibility Code” (Code of Maryland Regulations 09.12.53). Where conflicts
between the two Codes exist, the stricter requirements shall be followed.”
   (14)   In section 1612.3, insert “Anne Arundel County, Maryland,” in the
space indicated and insert October 16, 2012, revised February 18, 2015” in the
space indicated.
   (15)   In section 1612.4.1.1.1, strike“110.3.3” and substitute “109.3.3”,
and strike “110.3.10.1” and substitute “109.12”, and, after the period, insert:
      “All buildings and structures erected within a flood hazard area other
than Coastal High Hazard Areas and Coastal A zones shall be elevated so that
the lowest floor is located a minimum of one foot above the design flood
elevation. All basement floor surfaces shall be located a minimum of one foot
above the design flood elevation.”
   (16)   In section 1612.4.2.1, strike “110.3.3” and substitute “109.3.3”, and
strike “110.3.10.1” and substitute “109.12”, and, after the period, insert:
      “All buildings and structures erected within Coastal High Hazard Areas
and Coastal A zones shall be elevated so that the lowest structural member is
located a minimum of one foot above the design flood elevation. All basement
floor surfaces shall be located a minimum of one foot above the design flood
elevation.”
   (17)   Strike section 1805.4 in its entirety and substitute:
      “1805.4 Subsoil drainage system. Where a hydrostatic pressure condition
does not exist, damproofing shall be provided. A base shall be installed under
the floor and a subsoil drainage system shall be installed in accordance with
section 1805.4.2.”
   (18)   Strike section 1805.4.2 in its entirety and substitute:
      “1805.4.2 Subsoil drainage systems. Subsoil drains shall be required for
all buildings having basements, cellars, crawl spaces, or floors below grade.
Subsoil drains shall be located inside and outside of the foundation and shall
be installed at or below the area to be protected. Drains shall discharge by
gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage system in accordance with
section 1805.4.3. Drains shall be perforated or open joint approved drain tile
not less than 3 inches in diameter and be placed in gravel, slag, or crushed
rock or other approved material at least one sieve size larger than the tile
joint opening or perforations with a minimum of 4 inches surrounding the drain
tile or pipe on all sides. Exterior drains shall have an approved filter
material placed on top of the required gravel stone or crushed rock.”
   (19)   Strike section 1805.4.3 in its entirety and substitute:
      “1805.4.3 Sump pumps and pits. Where subsoil drains do not discharge by
gravity, the drains shall discharge to an accessible sump pit with an automatic
pump. Sump pit shall be a minimum of 18 inches in diameter, and 24 inches in
depth and be provided with a fitted cover. The sump pump shall have adequate
capacity to discharge all water coming into the sump as it accumulates but in
no case shall the capacity of the pump be less than 15 gallons per minute. The
discharge from the pump shall be a minimum of 1 1/4 inches and shall have a
union in the discharge piping to make the pump accessible for servicing. When
not serving a continuous flowing spring or ground water the sump pump may
discharge onto a splash block not less than 24 inches in length. The discharge
pipe shall be located within 4 inches of the splash block and positioned to
divert the flow parallel to the splash block. Subsoil drains and sump pump
discharge may discharge to a properly graded open area provided the point of
discharge is 5 feet from any lot line. Where a continuous flowing spring or
groundwater is encountered, subsoil and sump pump discharge lines must be piped
to a storm drain or approved water course. When piped to a storm drain all
drainage lines shall be provided with an accessible backwater valve.”
   (20)   After section 1805.4.3, insert:
      “1805.4.4 Areaway drains. All open subsurface space adjacent to a
building serving as an exit or entrance shall be provided with a drain or
drains. All areaway drains shall be solid PVC or equivalent and shall discharge
directly to a sump crock, daylight, or other approved means. No areaway drain
may discharge into a subsoil drain. Drains serving areaways not exceeding 100
square feet shall have a minimum 2-inch diameter pipe. Areaway drains exceeding
100 square feet but not exceeding 1,000 square feet shall have a minimum 3-inch
diameter pipe. Areaway drains exceeding 1,000 square feet shall be sized in
accordance with the 2021 International Plumbing Code.
      1805.4.5 Window well drains. Window well areaways shall have drains. All
window well drains shall be solid PVC or equivalent and shall discharge
directly to a sump pump crock, daylight, or other approved means. No window
well drain may discharge into a subsoil drain. Window well areaways 10 square
feet or less shall have a 2-inch minimum diameter pipe. Drains for window well
areaways greater than 10 square feet shall be installed in accordance with
section 1805.4.4.
      1805.4.6 Foundation weep holes. Where subsoil drains are required by
section 1805.4.2, foundations of hollow core masonry shall have foundation weep
holes. Weep holes shall be placed a maximum of 4 foot O/C intervals and shall
discharge into the aggregate of interior subsoil drainage system.
      1805.4.7 Site grading. The ground immediately adjacent to the foundation
shall be sloped away from the building at a slope of not less than one unit
vertical in 12 units horizontal (1:12) for a minimum distance of 5 feet (914
mm) measured perpendicular to the face of the wall or an approved alternate
method of diverting water away from the foundation shall be used. Consideration
shall be given to the possible additional settlement of the backfill when
establishing the final ground level adjacent to the foundation.
      1805.4.8 Roof drainage. The roof drainage system shall discharge within
four (4) inches of a splash block. The discharge may be to a properly graded
open area provided that the point of discharge is at least five (5) feet from
any property line or, as required by an approved grading and stormwater
management plan, to a swale or device.”
   (21)   In section 1809.4 after “(305 MM).”, insert:
      “For the purposes of the Building Code, the frostline is 30 inches from
the finished grade.”
   (22)   After section 1809.8, insert:
      “1809.8.1 Electrode. In all buildings a concrete-encased electrode shall
be provided prior to placement of concrete in accordance with section 250.52(a)
(3) of the National Electrical Code, 2020 edition.”
   (23)   After section 2801.1, insert:
      “2801.2 Cooperating agencies. Nothing herein contained shall supersede
the provisions of other statutes, ordinances, or regulations of the County or
State governing the operation and maintenance of boilers and other heating
appliances and equipment, or the acceptance of the certificates and labels of
inspection by authoritative national agencies. Provisions of the “Board of
Boiler Rules” of the State shall be followed.
      2801.3 General. Plans and specifications for the installation, repair,
extension, or removal of any mechanical equipment or system shall be submitted
in accordance with Article 15 of the County Code and a permit shall be secured
prior to the commencement of any work.”
   (24)   In section 3109.3 strike “4 feet (1290 mm)” and substitute “6 feet”.
   (25)   After section 3109.1, insert:
      “3109.2 Public pool entrapment avoidance. A public or semi-public
swimming pool or spa shall conform to entrapment requirements as set forth in
COMAR 10.17.01.28.”
   (26)   After section 3113.4, insert:
      “Section 3114
      Driveways
      3114.1 Driveway aprons. Driveway aprons shall extend from street or alley
pavements to the property line, and shall be constructed in accordance with the
provisions of the standard specifications and details issued by the Department
of Public Works.
      3114.2 Location and specifications. Driveways shall extend from the lot
line to the garage, carport, or parking space, and shall measure at least 9
feet in width. The maximum gradient change at vertical transitions shall be
20%. Vertical transitions shall be designed to prevent the undercarriage or
bumper of a standard size car from contacting the driveway surface. Alignment
shall be safe and convenient to back a car out, or an adequate turnaround shall
be provided. No portion of the driveway shall exceed 14% gradient from the
horizontal.
      3114.3 Materials. Driveways shall be constructed of concrete, blacktop,
or other approved material to prevent spalling, erosion, and cracking.
      3114.4 Parking pads. Two off-street parking pads shall be provided for
each detached single-family home as defined by section 101.2.1 of the
Construction Code. The minimum size per parking space is 9 feet in width and 18
feet in length.
      3114.5 Exception. The aforementioned standards do not apply to lots one
acre or larger.”
   (27)   After section 3304.1.4, insert:
      “3304.1.5 Temporary support. The provisions of this section apply to
excavations that are 4 feet or more below the existing grade level. Until
permanent support has been provided, excavations shall be safeguarded and
protected by the person causing the excavation to be made, to avoid danger to
life or limb. Where necessary, the excavation shall be retained by temporary
retaining walls, sheet pilings and bracing, or other approved method to support
the adjoining earth. Temporary support need not be provided if the sides of the
excavation are sloped to an angle of 1.5 to 1 or more away from vertical.”
   (28)   After Chapter 33, insert:
      “Chapter 34
      Grading and Sediment Control
      The Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance in Article 16, Title 3, of the
County Code, is incorporated by reference and made a part of the Building Code.
If a conflict arises between the provisions of the Building Code and Article
16, Title 3, the more restrictive provision shall prevail.”
   (29)   The document entitled “Required Changes to the 2021 International
Building Code to Comply with the A2L Refrigerant Related Code Provisions of the
2024 I-Codes”, published by the International Code Council and dated March 1,
2023, and as amended from time to time, is hereby incorporated by reference.
(Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE AMENDMENTS
 
   The provisions of the 2021 International Residential Code for One- and Two-
Family Dwellings are amended, deleted, or corrected as follows and the
following provisions shall supersede the part of the text of the 2021
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings as indicated:
   (1)   Strike Chapter 1 in its entirety and substitute “Chapter 1 –
Construction Code Administrative Provisions”.
   (2)   In section R202, in the definition of “Building Official”, strike “The
officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Code”, and substitute “Code Official”.
   (3)   In section R202, after the definition of “Closet” insert:
      “Code Official. The Director of Inspections and Permits, or duly
authorized representative, charged with the administration and enforcement of
this Code.”;
and, after the definition of “Sweep”, insert:
      “Swimming Pool. Any structure intended for swimming, recreational
bathing, or wading that contains water over 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This
includes in-ground, above-ground, and on- ground pools; hot tubs; spas; and
fixed-in-place wading pools.”
   (4)   In Table R301.2 (1): Under “Ground snow load”, insert “25”; under
“Speed (mph)”, insert “115”; under “Topographic effects” insert “no”; under
“Special wind region”, insert “no”; under “Wind-borne debris zone”, insert
“no”; under “Seismic design category”, insert “A”; under “Weathering”, insert
“Severe”; under “Frost line depth”, insert “30 inches”; under “Termite”, insert
“Moderate - heavy”; after the column headed “Subject to damage from” add a new
column with the heading “Decay” and under that heading insert “Slight -
moderate”; under “Ice barrier underlayment required”, insert “Yes”; under
“Flood hazards”, insert “originally May 2, 1983, currently October 16, 2012,
revised February 18, 2015”; under “Air freezing index”, insert “>1500”; under
“Mean annual temp”, insert “55 degrees”. For Manual J design criteria, under
“Elevation”, insert “154”; under “Altitude correction factor”, insert “none”;
under “Coincident wet bulb”, insert “74”; under “Indoor winter design dry-bulb
temperature”, insert “70F”; under “Indoor winter design dry-bulb temperature”,
insert “70F”; under “Outdoor winter design dry-bulb temperature”, insert “17F”;
under “Heating temperature difference”, insert “53F”; under “Latitude”, insert
“39”; under “Daily range”, insert “M”; under “Indoor summer design relative
humidity”, insert “50%”; under “Summer design gains”, insert “36”; under
“Indoor summer design dry-bulb temperature”, insert “75F”; under “outdoor
summer design dry-bulb temperature”, insert “91F”; and under “Cooling
temperature difference”, insert “16F”.
   (5)   In section R312.1.1, after “stairs”, insert “, driveways, areaways”.
   (6)   In section R312.1.2, after “stairs”, insert “, driveways, areaways”.
   (7)   In section R313.1, after “townhouses”, insert “and in existing
townhouses where any construction, alteration, enlargement, replacement, or
repair constitutes an increase in habitable square footage, which exceeds 50%
of the existing habitable square footage, including bathrooms, closets,
hallways, storage spaces and utility spaces” and strike the exception in its
entirety.
   (8)   In section R313.1.1, after “NFPA 13D”, insert “NFPA 13R, or NFPA 13”.
   (9)   In section R313.2, after “Dwellings” at the end of the first sentence,
insert “and in existing one- and two-family dwellings where any construction,
alteration, enlargement, replacement, or repair constitutes an increase in
habitable square footage, which exceeds 50% of the existing habitable square
footage, including bathrooms, closets, hallways, storage spaces and utility
spaces. If an existing structure is currently suppressed, any addition,
alteration, enlargement, or replacement to the existing structure must be
suppressed in accordance with R313.2.1.”
   (10)   In section R322.1.6, in the first sentence, after “R322.2).”, insert:
      “All electrical equipment containing overcurrent devices shall be
elevated to a minimum of 3 feet above design flood elevation.”
   (11)   In section R322.2.1.1, strike “to or”.
   (12)   In section R322.2.1.2, strike “to or”.
   (13)   In section R322.3.2.1.1.1, strike “to or”.
   (14)   After section R327, insert:
      “Section R328
      Driveway Aprons and Driveways and Fences
      R328.1 Driveway aprons. Driveway aprons shall extend from street or alley
pavements to the lot line and shall be constructed in accordance with the
provisions of the standard specifications and details issued by the Department
of Public Works.
      R328.2 Driveways. Driveways shall extend from the lot line to the garage,
carport, or parking space, and shall measure at least 9 feet in width. The
maximum gradient change at vertical transitions shall be 20%. Vertical
transitions shall be designed to prevent the undercarriage or bumper of a
standard size car from contacting the driveway surface. Alignment shall be safe
and convenient to back a car out, or an adequate turnaround shall be provided.
No portion of the driveway shall exceed 14% gradient from the horizontal.
      R328.3 Driveway construction. Driveways shall be constructed of concrete,
blacktop, or other approved material to prevent spalling, erosion, and
cracking.
      R328.4 Parking pads. Two off-street parking pads shall be provided for
each detached single-family home as defined by section 101.2.1 of the
Construction Code. The minimum size per parking space is 9 feet in width and 18
feet in length.
      R328.5 Exception. The provisions of this section do not apply to lots one
acre or larger.
      R328.6 Fences. All fences located on corner lots shall maintain a 25-
foot setback from the apex of the intersecting streets.”
   (15)   In section R401.3 strike “The grade shall fall a minimum of 6 inches
(152 mm) within the first 10 feet (3048 mm).” and substitute:
      “The ground immediately adjacent to the foundation shall be sloped away
from the building at a slope of not less than one unit vertical in 12 units
horizontal (1:12) for a minimum distance of 5 feet (914 mm) measured
perpendicular to the face of the wall or an approved alternate method of
diverting water away from the foundation shall be used. Consideration shall be
given to the possible additional settlement of the backfill when establishing
the final ground level adjacent to the foundation.”
   (16)   In the exception to section R401.3, strike “6 inches (152 mm)” and
substitute “5 inches” and strike “10 feet (3048 mm)” and substitute “5 feet”.
   (17)   In section R403.1, after “ACI332.” insert “In all buildings a
concrete-encased electrode shall be provided prior to the placement of concrete
in accordance with section 250.52(a)(3) of the National Electrical Code, 2020
edition.
   (18)   In section R403.1.4.1 Exceptions: 1., strike “600 square feet (56
m2)” and substitute “400 square feet”.
   (19)   In section R405.1.1, strike “R405.1.1” and substitute “R405.1.6” and
strike “either” and, after “interior”, strike “or” and substitute “and”.
   (20)   After section R405.2.3, insert:
      “R405.3 Subsoil drainage systems. Subsoil drains shall be required for
all buildings having basements, cellars, crawl spaces, or floors below grade.
Subsoil drains shall be located inside and outside of the foundation and shall
be installed at or below the area to be protected. Drains shall discharge by
gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage system in accordance with
section R405.3.1. Drains shall be perforated or open joint approved drain tile
not less than 3 inches in diameter and be placed in gravel, slag, or crushed
rock or other approved material at least one sieve size larger than the tile
joint opening or perforations with a minimum of 4 inches surrounding the drain
tile or pipe on all sides. Exterior drains shall have an approved filter
material placed on top of the required gravel stone or crushed rock.
      R405.3.1 Sump pumps and pits. Where subsoil drains do not discharge by
gravity, the drains shall discharge to an accessible sump pit with an automatic
electric pump. The sump pump shall be installed on the interior of the
structure. The sump pit shall be a minimum of 18 inches in diameter and 24
inches in depth, and be provided with a fitted cover. The sump pump shall have
adequate capacity to discharge all water coming into the sump as it accumulates
but in no case shall the capacity of the pump be less than 15 gallons per
minute. The discharge from the pump shall be a minimum of 1 1/4 inches and
shall have a union in the discharge piping to make the pump accessible for
servicing. When not serving a continuous flowing spring or ground water the
sump pump may discharge onto a splash block not less than 24 inches in length.
The discharge pipe shall be located within 4 inches of the splash block and
positioned to divert the flow parallel to the splash block. Subsoil drains and
sump pump discharge may discharge to a properly graded open area provided the
point of discharge is 5 feet from any property line. Where a continuous flowing
spring or groundwater is encountered, subsoil and sump pump discharge lines
must be piped to a storm drain or approved water course. When piped to a storm
drain all drainage lines shall be provided with an accessible backwater valve.
      R405.3.2 Areaway drains. All open subsurface space adjacent to a building
serving as an exit or entrance shall be provided with a drain or drains. All
areaway drains shall be solid PVC or equivalent and shall discharge directly to
a sump crock, daylight, or other approved means. No areaway drain may discharge
into a subsoil drain. Drains serving areaways not exceeding 100 square feet
shall have a minimum 2-inch diameter pipe. Areaway drains exceeding 100 square
feet but not exceeding 1,000 square feet shall be provided with a minimum 3-
inch diameter pipe. Areaway drains exceeding 1,000 square feet shall be sized
in accordance with the 2021 International Plumbing Code.
      R405.3.3 Foundation weep holes. Where subsoil drains are required by
section R405.3, foundations of hollow core masonry shall have foundation weep
holes. Weep holes shall be placed a maximum of 4 foot O/C intervals and shall
discharge into the aggregate of the interior subsoil drainage system.”
   (21)   In section R406.1 after “enclose”, insert “non-habitable and non-
usable”.
   (22)   In section R406.2, strike “In areas where a high water table or other
severe soil-water conditions are known to exist,” and capitalize “exterior”.
   (23)   In section R408.8, strike “In climate zones 1A, 2A and 3A below the
warm-humid line,” and capitalize “A”.
   (24)   In section R801.3, strike “In areas where expansive soils or
collapsible soils are known to exist,”’; and, after the last sentence, insert
“The roof drainage system shall discharge within four (4) inches of a splash
block. The discharge may be to a property graded open area provided that the
point of discharge is at least five (5) feet from any property line or, as
required by an approved grading and stormwater management plan, to a swale or
device.”.
   (25)   In section N1101.13.5, after item 3., insert:
      “4. For buildings complying with section N1102.1.3.1, the structure shall
also comply with the additional energy features in section N1108.3.”
   (26)   After section N1102.1.3, insert:
      “N1102.1.3.1 Maryland alternative R-value. Assemblies with R-value of
insulation materials equal to or greater than that specified in Table
N1102.1.3.1 shall be an alternative to the U-factor in Table N1102.1.2 when
combined with section N1108.3. The provisions of section N1108.2.1 shall be
applied to the base model house to establish the reference base design
establishing energy efficiency.
 
Table N1102.1.3.1
MD Alternative Insulation Minimum R-values and Fenestration Requirements by Component A
                                                         Wood  Mass                        Slab  Crawl
        Fenestration                Glazed               Frame Wall  Floor                 D R-  Space
Climate U-factor B,  Skylight B U- Fenestration Ceiling Wall  R-    R-    Basement C, G  value C, G
Zone    I            factor         SHGC B, E    R-value R-    value value Wall R-value    &     Wall
                                                         value H                           Depth R-
                                                         G                                       value
4                                                        20 or                             10ci, 10ci
except  0.30         0.55           0.40         49      13+5  8/13  19    10ci or 13      4ft   or 13
marine                                                   H
For si: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
ci = continuous insulation.
A. R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums. Where insulation is installed in a cavity
that is less than the label or design thickness of the insulation, the installed R-value of the
insulation shall be not less than the R-value specified in the table.
B. The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column applies to all glazed
fenestrations. Exception: in climate zones 0 through 3, skylights shall be permitted to be excluded
from glazed fenestration SHGC requirements provided that the SHGC for such skylights does not exceed
0.30.
C. “10ci or 13” means R-10 continuous insulation (ci) on the interior or exterior surface of the wall
or R-13 cavity insulation on the interior side of the wall. “15ci or 19 or 13 & 5ci” means R-15
continuous insulation (ci) on the interior or exterior surface of the wall; or R-19 cavity insulation
on the interior side of the wall; or R-13 cavity insulation on the interior of the wall in addition to
R-5 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior surface of the wall.
D. R-5 insulation shall be provided under the full slab area of a heated slab in addition to the
required slab edge insulation R-value for slabs. As indicated in the table. The slab-edge insulation
for heated slabs shall not be required to extend below the slab.
E. There are no SHGC requirements in the marine zone.
F. Basement wall insulation is not required in warm humid locations as defined by Figure R301.1 and
Table R301.1.
G. The first value is cavity insulation; the second value is continuous insulation. Therefore, as an
example, “13 & 5” means R-13 cavity insulation plus R-5 continuous insulation.
H. Mass walls shall be in accordance with section R402.2.5. The second R-value applies where more than
half of the insulation is on the interior of the mass wall.
I. A maximum U-factor of 0.32 shall apply in climate zones 3 through 8 to vertical fenestration
products installed in buildings located either:
1. Above 4,000 feet in elevation, or
2. In windborne debris regions where protection of openings is required by section R301.2.1.2 of the
International Residential Code.
 
   (27)   In section N1102.2.1, after “N1102.1.3”, insert “or section
N1102.1.3.1”.
   (28)   In section N1102.2.2, after “N1102.1.3”, insert “or section
N1102.1.3.1”.
   (29)   After section N1108.2.5, insert:
      “N1108.3 Maryland alternative additional energy efficiency package
options. The provisions of this section shall be applied as part of the
prescriptive compliance path of section N1102.1.3.1. Additional energy
efficiencies from Table N1108.3 must be selected to meet or exceed a minimum
percentage increase of 6%.
Table N1108.3 Additional Energy Features 1
 Energy Feature Percentage Increase for Climate Zone 4
Table N1108.3 Additional Energy Features 1
   Energy Feature                        Percentage Increase for Climate Zone 4
1  ³  2.5% reduction in total UA 5      1%
2  ³ 5% reduction in total UA 5         2%
3  > 7.5% reduction in total UA 5        2%
4  0.22 U-factor windows 5               3%
   High performance cooling system
5  (greater than or equal to 18 SEER and 3%
   14 EER air conditioner) 2
   High performance cooling system
6  (greater than or equal to 16 SEER and 3%
   12 EER air conditioner) 2
   High performance gas furnace (greater
7  than or equal to 96 AFUE natural gas  5%
   furnace) 2
   High performance gas furnace (greater
8  than or equal to 92 AFUE natural gas  4%
   furnace) 2
   High performance heat pump system
9  (greater than or equal to 10 HSPF/18  6%
   SEER air source heat pump.) 2
   High performance heat pump system
10 (greater than or equal to 9 HSPF/16   5%
   SEER air source heat pump.) 2
   Ground source heat pump (greater than
11 or equal to 3.5 COP ground source     6%
   heat pump.) 2
   Fossil fuel service water heating
12 system (greater than or equal to 82   3%
   EF fossil fuel service water-heating
   system.)
   High performance heat pump water
13 heating system option (greater than   8%
   or equal to 2.9 UEF electric service
   water-heating system.)
   High performance heat pump water
14 heating system. (Greater than or      8%
   equal to 3.2 UEF electric service
   water-heating system.)
   Solar hot water heating system
15 (greater than or equal to 0.4 solar   6%
   fraction solar water-heating system.)
   More efficient HVAC distribution
   system. (100 percent of ductless
16 thermal distribution system or        10%
   hydronic thermal distribution system
   located completely inside the
   building thermal envelope.)
   100% of ducts in conditioned space.
   (100 percent of duct thermal
17 distribution system located in        12%
   conditioned space as defined by
   section R403.3.2.)
   Reduced total duct leakage. (When
   ducts are located outside conditioned
   space, the total leakage of the
   ducts, measured in accordance with
   R403.3.5, shall be in accordance with
   one of the following:
18 A. Where air handler is installed at  1%
   the time of testing, 2.0 cubic feet
   per minute per 100 square feet of
   conditioned floor area.
   B. Where air handler is not installed
   at the time of testing, 1.75 cubic
   feet per minute per 100 square feet
   of conditioned floor area.)
   2 ACH50 air leakage rate with ERV or
   HRV installed. (Less than or equal to
19 2.0 ACH50, with either an energy      10%
   recovery ventilator (ERV) or heat
   recovery ventilator (HRV) installed.)
   3
   2 ACH50 air leakage rate with
   balanced ventilation. (Less than or
20 equal to 2.0 ACH50, with balanced     4%
   ventilation as defined in section 202
   of the 2021 International Mechanical
   Code.) 4
   1.5 ACH50 air leakage rate with ERV
21 or HRV installed. (Less than or equal 12%
   to 1.5 ACH50, with either an ERV or
   HRV installed.) 4
   1 ACH50 air leakage rate with ERV or
22 HRV installed. (Less than equal to    14%
   1.0 ACH50, with either an ERV or HRV
   installed.) 4
   Energy efficient appliances (minimum
   3 appliances not to exceed 1 from
   each type with follow efficiencies.
   Refrigerator - ENERGY STAR program
   requirements, product specification
   for consumer refrigeration products,
   version 5.1 (08/05/2021), dishwasher
   - ENERGY STAR program requirements
23 for residential dishwashers, version  7%
   6.0 (01/29/2016), clothes dryer -
   ENERGY STAR program requirements,
   product specification for clothes
   dryers, version 1.1 (05/05/2017) and
   clothes washer - ENERGY STAR program
   requirements, product specification
   for clothes washers, version 8.1 (02/
   05/2018)
24 Renewable energy measure. 4           11%
1. Energy efficiency percentage increases as established by PNNL.
2. For multiple cooling systems, all systems shall meet or exceed the minimum
efficiency requirements in this section and shall be sized to serve 100 percent
of the cooling design load. For multiple heating systems, all systems shall
meet or exceed the minimum efficiency requirements in this section and shall be
sized to serve 100 percent of the heating design load. Increases to minimum
efficiency requirements are limited to one selection.
3. Minimum HRV and ERV requirements, measured at the lowest tested net supply
airflow, shall be greater than or equal to 75 percent sensible recovery
efficiency (SRE), less than or equal to 1.1 cubic feet per minute per watt
(0.03 m3/min/watt) and shall not use recirculation as a defrost strategy. In
addition, the ERV shall be greater than or equal to 50 percent latent recovery/
moisture transfer (LRMT).
4. Renewable energy resources shall be permanently installed that have the
capacity to produce a minimum of 1.0 watt of on-site renewable energy per
square foot of conditioned floor area. The installed capacity shall be in
addition to any onsite renewable energy required by section R404.4. To qualify
for this option, one of the following forms of documentation shall be provided
to the Code Official:
A. Substantiation that the RECS associated with the on-site renewable energy
are owned by, or retired on behalf of, the homeowner.
B. A contract that conveys to the homeowner the RECS associated with the on-
site renewable energy or conveys to the homeowner an equivalent quantity of
RECS associated with other renewable energy.
C. Reduction in total UA from lines 1, 2 or 3 and higher performance windows
from line 4 are limited to a single selection.
 
   (30)   In section M1305.1.2, in the last sentence, after “appliance.”,
insert:
      “Access to the attic opening shall be provided by a permanent or pull
down stairway in all new construction.”
   (31)   In section M1307.5, strike “Chapters 14, 15, 19, 20, and 34 through
43 of this Code” and substitute “the National Electrical Code, 2020 edition”.
   (32)   Strike section G2417.4.1 in its entirety and substitute:
      “G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be
20 psig (138 kpa gauge). A tag shall be affixed to the gauge listing the time
and date the test was started.”
   (33)   After section P2602.2, insert:
      “P2602.3 New dwelling. Every new dwelling utilizing a private well for
water supply shall install a three-valve bypass for future water conditioner
connections and a standpipe with a minimum 1½ inch trap for future water
conditioner discharge.”
   (34)   In section P2603.5, strike “not less than 12 inches (305 mm) deep and
not less than”.
   (35)   In section P2603.5.1, in the third line, strike “[number] inches
(mm)” and substitute “12 inches” and, in the fifth line, strike “[number]
inches (mm)” and substitute “18 inches”.
   (36)   After section P2604.4, insert:
      “P2604.5 Tracer wire. Nonmetallic sanitary sewer and nonmetallic water
supply piping that connects to public systems shall be locatable. An insulated
copper tracer wire, 10 AWG minimum in size and suitable for direct burial or an
equivalent product shall be utilized. The wire shall be installed in the same
trench as the sewer or water supply piping within 12 inches (305 mm) of the
piping and shall be installed from within five feet of the building wall to the
point where the building sewer or water supply system connects with the public
system. At a minimum, one end of the wire shall terminate above grade in an
accessible location that is resistant to physical damage, such as with a
cleanout or at the building wall.”
   (37)   In P2903.4, after “P2903.4.2.”, insert:
      “Thermal expansion shall be provided for all closed potable water
systems.”
   (38)   After section “P2903.4.2” insert:
      “P2903.4.3 Non-pressurized expansion tanks. Non-pressurized expansion
tanks shall be securely fastened to the structure and supported to carry twice
the weight of the tank filled with water. Provisions shall be made for draining
non-pressurized tanks without emptying the system.
      P2903.4.4 Pressurized expansion tanks. Pressurized expansion tanks shall
be consistent with the volume and capacity of the system. Tanks shall be
capable of withstanding a hydrostatic test pressure of two and one-half times
the allowable working pressure of the system.
      P2903.4.5 Minimum capacity. The minimum capacity of expansion tanks shall
be determined from the manufacturer’s specifications.”
   (39)   Strike sections P2904.1 through P2904.8.2 in their entirety and
substitute:
      “P2904.1 Dwelling unit fire sprinkler systems. The design and
installation of residential automatic sprinkler system shall be in accordance
with NFPA 13D.”
   (40)   After section P2906.5, insert:
      “Underground water service piping for public water systems shall be Type
L copper. Private water service piping shall be Type K underground and Type L
for above ground installations.”
   (41)   After section P2906.5, insert:
      “P2906.5.1 Water distribution piping. Inaccessible water distribution
piping under slabs shall be copper water tube minimum Type L for public water
systems and Type K for private water systems, brass, ductile iron pressure
pipe, cross-linked polyethylene/aluminum/cross-linked polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX)
pressure pipe, chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) or polybutylene (PB) or
cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) plastic pipe or tubing, all to be installed
with approved fittings or bends. The minimum pressure rating for plastic pipe
or tubing installed under slabs shall be 100 psi at 180 F (689k Pa at 82 C).”
   (42)   After section P3007.1, insert:
      “P3007.1.1 Dwellings. Dwellings served entirely by pumping systems shall
use simplex pumping equipment with an integral alarm system.”
   (43)   Strike Chapters 34 through 43 in their entirety.
   (44)   Appendix I Chapter 44 under ICC Strike “International Private Sewage
Disposal Code” and substitute “Anne Arundel Private Sewage Code and Well Code”.
   (45)   In section AI101.1, strike “International Private Sewage Disposal
Code” and substitute “the Anne Arundel County Private Sewage Disposal and Well
Code”.
(Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 10-13; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-
24)
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE AMENDMENTS
 
   The provisions of the 2021 International Energy Conservation Code are
amended, deleted, or corrected as follows and the following provisions shall
supersede the part of the text of the 2021 International Energy Conservation
Code as indicated:
   (1)   Strike Chapter 1 in its entirety and substitute “Chapter 1 –
Construction Code Administrative Provisions”.
   (2)   In section 202, in the definition of “Code Official” strike “The
officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Code, or a duly authorized representative.” and substitute
“The Director of Inspections and Permits, or duly authorized representative,
charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code.”.
   (3)   In Section R401.2.5, after item 3., insert:
      “4. For buildings complying with section R402.1.3.1, the structure shall
also comply with the additional energy features in section R408.3.”
   (4)   After section R402.1.3, insert:
      “R402.1.3.1 Maryland alternative R-value. Assemblies with R-value of
insulation materials equal to or greater than that specified in Table
R402.1.3.1 shall be an alternative to the U-factor in Table R402.1.2 when
combined with section R408.3. The provisions of section R408.2.1 shall be
applied to the base model house to establish the reference base design
establishing energy efficiency.
 
Table R402.1.3.1
MD Alternative Insulation Minimum R-values and Fenestration Requirements by Component A
                                                   Wood  Mass                        Slab  Crawl
        Fenestration Skylight Glazed               Frame Wall  Floor                 D R-  Space
Climate U-factor B,  B U-     Fenestration Ceiling Wall  R-    R-    Basement C, G  value C, G
Zone    I            factor   SHGC B, E    R-value R-    value value Wall R-value    &     Wall
                                                   value H                           Depth R-
                                                   G                                       value
4                                                  20 or                             10ci, 10ci
except  0.30         0.55     0.40         49      13+5  8/13  19    10ci or 13      4ft   or 13
marine                                             H
For si: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
ci = continuous insulation.
A. R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums. Where insulation is installed in a
cavity that is less than the label or design thickness of the insulation, the installed R-value
of the insulation shall be not less than the R-value specified in the table.
B. The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column applies to all glazed
fenestrations. Exception: in climate zones 0 through 3, skylights shall be permitted to be
excluded from glazed fenestration SHGC requirements provided that the SHGC for such skylights
does not exceed 0.30.
C. “10ci or 13” means R-10 continuous insulation (ci) on the interior or exterior surface of the
wall or R-13 cavity insulation on the interior side of the wall. “15ci or 19 or 13 & 5ci” means
R-15 continuous insulation (ci) on the interior or exterior surface of the wall; or R-19 cavity
insulation on the interior side of the wall; or R-13 cavity insulation on the interior of the
wall in addition to R-5 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior surface of the wall.
D. R-5 insulation shall be provided under the full slab area of a heated slab in addition to the
required slab edge insulation R-value for slabs. As indicated in the table. The slab-edge
insulation for heated slabs shall not be required to extend below the slab.
E. There are no SHGC requirements in the marine zone.
F. Basement wall insulation is not required in warm humid locations as defined by Figure R301.1
and Table R301.1.
G. The first value is cavity insulation; the second value is continuous insulation. Therefore,
as an example, “13 & 5” means R-13 cavity insulation plus R-5 continuous insulation.
H. Mass walls shall be in accordance with section R402.2.5. The second R-value applies where
more than half of the insulation is on the interior of the mass wall.
I. A maximum U-factor of 0.32 shall apply in climate zones 3 through 8 to vertical fenestration
products installed in buildings located either:
1. Above 4,000 feet in elevation, or
2. In windborne debris regions where protection of openings is required by section R301.2.1.2 of
the International Residential Code.
 
   (5)   In section R402.2.1, after “R402.1.3”, insert “or section R402.1.3.1”.
   (6)   In section R402.2.2, after “R402.1.3”, insert “or section R402.1.3.1”.
   (7)   After section R408.2.5, insert:
      “R408.3 Maryland alternative additional energy efficiency package
options. The provisions of this section shall be applied as part of the
prescriptive compliance path of section R402.1.3.1. Additional energy
efficiencies from Table R408.3 must be selected to meet or exceed a minimum
percentage increase of 6%.
Table R408.3 Additional Energy Features 1
 Energy Feature Percentage Increase for Climate Zone 4
Table R408.3 Additional Energy Features 1
   Energy Feature                        Percentage Increase for Climate Zone 4
1  ³  2.5% reduction in total UA 5      1%
2  ³  5% reduction in total UA 5        2%
3  > 7.5% reduction in total UA 5        2%
4  0.22 U-factor windows 5               3%
   High performance cooling system
5  (greater than or equal to 18 SEER and 3%
   14 EER air conditioner) 2
   High performance cooling system
6  (greater than or equal to 16 SEER and 3%
   12 EER air conditioner) 2
   High performance gas furnace (greater
7  than or equal to 96 AFUE natural gas  5%
   furnace) 2
   High performance gas furnace (greater
8  than or equal to 92 AFUE natural gas  4%
   furnace) 2
   High performance heat pump system
9  (greater than or equal to 10 HSPF/18  6%
   SEER air source heat pump.) 2
   High performance heat pump system
10 (greater than or equal to 9 HSPF/16   5%
   SEER air source heat pump.) 2
   Ground source heat pump (greater than
11 or equal to 3.5 COP ground source     6%
   heat pump.) 2
   Fossil fuel service water heating
12 system (greater than or equal to 82   3%
   EF fossil fuel service water-heating
   system.)
   High performance heat pump water
13 heating system option (greater than   8%
   or equal to 2.9 UEF electric service
   water-heating system.)
   High performance heat pump water
14 heating system. (Greater than or      8%
   equal to 3.2 UEF electric service
   water-heating system.)
   Solar hot water heating system
15 (greater than or equal to 0.4 solar   6%
   fraction solar water-heating system.)
   More efficient HVAC distribution
   system. (100 percent of ductless
16 thermal distribution system or        10%
   hydronic thermal distribution system
   located completely inside the
   building thermal envelope.)
   100% of ducts in conditioned space.
   (100 percent of duct thermal
17 distribution system located in        12%
   conditioned space as defined by
   section R403.3.2.)
   Reduced total duct leakage. (When
   ducts are located outside conditioned
   space, the total leakage of the
   ducts, measured in accordance with
   R403.3.5, shall be in accordance with
   one of the following:
18 A. Where air handler is installed at  1%
   the time of testing, 2.0 cubic feet
   per minute per 100 square feet of
   conditioned floor area.
   B. Where air handler is not installed
   at the time of testing, 1.75 cubic
   feet per minute per 100 square feet
   of conditioned floor area.)
   2 ACH50 air leakage rate with ERV or
   HRV installed. (Less than or equal to
19 2.0 ACH50, with either an energy      10%
   recovery ventilator (ERV) or heat
   recovery ventilator (HRV) installed.)
   3
   2 ACH50 air leakage rate with
   balanced ventilation. (Less than or
20 equal to 2.0 ACH50, with balanced     4%
   ventilation as defined in section 202
   of the 2021 International Mechanical
   Code.) 4
   1.5 ACH50 air leakage rate with ERV
21 or HRV installed. (Less than or equal 12%
   to 1.5 ACH50, with either an ERV or
   HRV installed.) 4
   1 ACH50 air leakage rate with ERV or
22 HRV installed. (Less than equal to    14%
   1.0 ACH50, with either an ERV or HRV
   installed.) 4
   Energy efficient appliances (minimum
   3 appliances not to exceed 1 from
   each type with follow efficiencies.
   Refrigerator - ENERGY STAR program
   requirements, product specification
   for consumer refrigeration products,
   version 5.1 (08/05/2021), dishwasher
   - ENERGY STAR program requirements
23 for residential dishwashers, version  7%
   6.0 (01/29/2016), clothes dryer -
   ENERGY STAR program requirements,
   product specification for clothes
   dryers, version 1.1 (05/05/2017) and
   clothes washer - ENERGY STAR program
   requirements, product specification
   for clothes washers, version 8.1 (02/
   05/2018)
24 Renewable energy measure. 4           11%
1. Energy efficiency percentage increases as established by PNNL.
2. For multiple cooling systems, all systems shall meet or exceed the minimum
efficiency requirements in this section and shall be sized to serve 100 percent
of the cooling design load. For multiple heating systems, all systems shall
meet or exceed the minimum efficiency requirements in this section and shall be
sized to serve 100 percent of the heating design load. Increases to minimum
efficiency requirements are limited to one selection.
3. Minimum HRV and ERV requirements, measured at the lowest tested net supply
airflow, shall be greater than or equal to 75 percent sensible recovery
efficiency (SRE), less than or equal to 1.1 cubic feet per minute per watt
(0.03 m3/min/watt) and shall not use recirculation as a defrost strategy. In
addition, the ERV shall be greater than or equal to 50 percent latent recovery/
moisture transfer (LRMT).
4. Renewable energy resources shall be permanently installed that have the
capacity to produce a minimum of 1.0 watt of on-site renewable energy per
square foot of conditioned floor area. The installed capacity shall be in
addition to any onsite renewable energy required by section R404.4. To qualify
for this option, one of the following forms of documentation shall be provided
to the Code Official:
A. Substantiation that the RECS associated with the on-site renewable energy
are owned by, or retired on behalf of, the homeowner.
B. A contract that conveys to the homeowner the RECS associated with the on-
site renewable energy or conveys to the homeowner an equivalent quantity of
RECS associated with other renewable energy.
C. Reduction in total UA from lines 1, 2 or 3 and higher performance windows
from line 4 are limited to a single selection.
 
(Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS
 
   The provisions of the International Existing Building Code, 2021 edition,
are amended, deleted, or corrected as follows, and the following provisions
shall supersede the part of the text of the International Existing Building
Code, 2021 edition, as indicated:
   (1)   Strike Chapter 1 in its entirety and substitute “Chapter 1 -
Construction Code Administrative Provisions”.
   (2)   In section 202, in the definition of “Code Official”, strike “the
officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Code, or a duly authorized representative” and substitute
“the Director of Inspections and Permits, or duly authorized representative,
charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code”.
(Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE AMENDMENTS
 
   The provisions of the National Electrical Code, 2020 edition, are amended,
deleted, or corrected as follows and the following provisions shall supersede
the part of the text of the National Electrical Code, 2020 edition, as
indicated:
   (1)   Create Article 80 and insert: “Chapter 1 – Construction Code
Administrative Provisions” of the Construction Code.
   (2)   In Article 100, strike the definition of “Authority Having
Jurisdiction (AHJ)” and substitute “The Director of Inspections and Permits, or
duly authorized representative, charged with the administration and enforcement
of this Code.”
   (3)   Strike section 210.52(c)(2) in its entirety and substitute:
      “210.52(c)(2) Island and peninsular countertops and work surfaces.
Receptacle outlets, if installed to serve an island or peninsular countertop or
work surface, shall be installed in accordance with 210.52(c)(3). If a
receptacle outlet is not provided to serve an island or peninsular countertop
or work surface, provisions shall be provided at the island or peninsula for
future addition of a receptacle outlet to serve the island or peninsular
countertop or work surface.”
   (4)   Strike section 210.52(c)(3) in its entirety and substitute:
      “210.52(c)(3) Receptacle outlet location. Receptacle outlets shall be
located in one or more of the following:
         (1)   On or above, but not more than 500 mm (20 in.) above, a
countertop or work surface;
         (2)   In a countertop using receptacle outlet assemblies listed for
use in countertops; or
         (3)   In a work surface using receptacle outlet assemblies listed for
use in work surfaces or listed for use in countertops.
      Receptacle outlets rendered not readily accessible by appliances fastened
in place, appliance garages, sinks, or rangetops as covered in section 210.52
(c)(1), Exception no. 1, or appliances occupying assigned spaces shall not be
considered as these required outlets.”
   (5)   After section 225.40, insert:
      “225.41 Emergency disconnects. For one- and two-family dwelling units, an
emergency disconnecting means shall be installed.
         225.41(a) General.
            225.41(a)(1) Location. The disconnecting means shall be installed
in a readily accessible outdoor location on or within sight of the dwelling
unit.
            225.41(a)(2) Rating. The disconnecting means shall have a short-
circuit current rating equal to or greater than the available fault current.
            225.41(a)(3) Grouping. If more than one disconnecting means is
provided, they shall be grouped.
         225.41(b) Identification of other isolation disconnects. Where
equipment for isolation of other energy source systems is not located adjacent
to the emergency disconnect required by this section, a plaque or directory
identifying the location of all equipment for isolation of other energy sources
shall be located adjacent to the disconnecting means required by this section.
         225.41(c) Marking. The disconnecting means shall be marked as
emergency disconnect. Markings shall comply with section 110.21(b) and all of
the following:
            (1)   The marking or labels shall be located on the outside front
of the disconnect enclosure with red background and white text.
            (2)   The letters shall be least 13 mm (1/2 inch) high.”
   (6)   After section 230.71(b)(4), insert:
      “Exception to (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6): Existing service equipment,
installed in compliance with previous editions of this Code that permitted
multiple service disconnecting means in a single enclosure, section, or
compartment, shall be permitted to contain a maximum of six service
disconnecting means.”
   (7)   In section 250.50, before “all grounding electrodes”, insert “a
grounding electrode as described in 250.52(a)(3) shall be installed. Any
alternate methods shall be approved by the Code Official.”
   (8)   In section 310.3(a), strike “12 AWG aluminum or copper-clad aluminum”
and substitute “8 AWG aluminum or 12 AWG copper-clad aluminum”.
   (9)   In section 408.43, after “panelboards”, insert “shall be installed so
that all available circuit breaker pole spaces are located in accordance with
section 240.24(a) and”.
   (10)   After section 422.13, insert:
      “422.14 Sump pumps and sewer ejector pumps. Sump pumps shall be supplied
by an individual branch circuit. Sewage ejector pumps shall be supplied by an
individual branch circuit.”
   (11)   In section 424.11, after “supply conductors.”, insert “all conductors
entering equipment covered under the scope of this article shall be copper.”
   (12)   In section 440.31, after “Exception no. 1.”, insert:
      “All conductors entering equipment covered under the scope of this
article shall be copper.”
   (13)   After section 702.2, insert:
      “702.3 County owned and maintained sewage ejector or grinder pumps. A
County owned and maintained sewage ejector or grinder pump shall be permitted
to be connected to an optional standby system provided all of the following
conditions are met:
         (1)   6500 watts shall be included for pump load calculations in
accordance with article 220.
         (2)   The installation is in accordance with any applicable design
criteria required by the County.”
(Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 103-13; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-
24)
INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE AMENDMENTS
 
   The provisions of the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code are amended, deleted,
or corrected as follows and the following provisions shall supersede the part
of the text of the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code as indicated:
   (1)   Strike Chapter 1 in its entirety and substitute “Chapter 1 –
Construction Code Administrative Provisions”.
   (2)   In section 202 (IFGC), in the definition of “Code Official” strike
“The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Code, or a duly authorized representative” and substitute
“The Director of Inspections and Permits, or duly authorized representative,
charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code”.
   (3)   Strike section 406.4.1 in its entirety and substitute:
      “406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be 20 PSIG
(138 KPA gauge). A tag shall be affixed to the gauge listing the time and date
the text was started.”
(Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-40; Bill No. 25-24)
INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE AMENDMENTS
 
   The provisions of the 2021 International Mechanical Code are amended,
deleted, or corrected as follows and the following provisions shall supersede
the part of the text of the 2021 International Mechanical Code as indicated:
   (1)   Strike Chapter 1 in its entirety and substitute "Chapter 1 –
Construction Code Administrative Provisions".
   (2)   In section 202 in the definition of "Code Official" strike "The
officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Code, or a duly authorized representative" and substitute
"The Director of Inspections and Permits, or duly authorized representative,
charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code".
   (3)   In section 202, after the definition of "Cooking Appliance" insert:
      "Cooling System. A system in which heat is removed from air, surrounding
surfaces, or both."
   (4)   In section 202, after the definition of "Discrete Product", insert:
      "Domestic Refrigeration. A refrigeration system having a rating of less
than five horsepower."
   (5)   In section 202, after the definition of "Electric Heating Appliance",
insert:
      "Electric Resistance Heat. Electric resistance heat includes baseboard
heat, electric heat in room ceilings, electric heat in sidewalks and driveways,
convective radiant heaters, and applications of heat developed by resistance
elements. Electric resistance heat does not include duct work."
   (6)   In section 202, after the definition of "Heat Exchanger", insert:
      "Heating System. A system in which heat is transmitted by radiation,
conduction, or convection, or a combination of any of these, to air,
surrounding surfaces, or both, except fireplaces and wood burning stoves not
incorporated into or used as a primary heating system."
   (7)   In section 202, after the definition of "Hood", insert:
      "Hydraulic System. A heating and cooling system using liquids to transmit
or remove heat."
   (8)   In section 202, after the definition of "Purge", insert:
      "Pursuit of the Mechanical Trade or Business. The act of installing,
maintaining, or repairing air conditioning, heating, or refrigeration systems,
excluding the transport of materials and equipment to the job site, the act of
rigging for placement of equipment, the act of insulating components of the
system, and the act of manufacturing and assembling such systems in a shop or
manufacturing environment not on the job site."
   (9)   In section 306.3, after the last sentence and before the exceptions,
insert:
      "Access to the attic opening shall be provided by a permanent or pull
down stairway in all new construction."
   (10)   In section 306.3, strike the exceptions in their entirety and
substitute:
      "Exception: In existing installations, portable ladders shall be
acceptable."
   (11)   After section 312.1, insert:
      “312.2 Outdoor design temperature. For the purposes of this Code the
outdoor design temperatures shall be based upon 17 degrees F for heating and 91
degrees F for cooling.”
   (12)   The document entitled “Required Changes to the 2021 International
Mechanical Code to Comply with the A2L Refrigerant Related Code Provisions of
the 2024 I-Codes”, published by the International Code Council and dated March
1, 2023, and as amended from time to time, is hereby incorporated by reference.
(Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENTS
 
   The provisions of the 2021 International Plumbing Code are amended, deleted,
or corrected as follows and the following provisions shall supersede the part
of the text of the 2021 International Plumbing Code as indicated:
   (1)   Strike Chapter 1 in its entirety and substitute “Chapter 1 –
Construction Code Administrative Provisions”.
   (2)   In section 202 in the definition of “Code Official” strike “The
officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative” and substitute
“The Director of Inspections and Permits, or duly authorized representative,
charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code”.
   (3)   In section 202, in the definition of “water dispenser”, after
“premises”, insert:
      “This definition includes a freestanding apparatus for the same purpose
that is not connected to the potable water distribution system and that is
supplied with potable water from a container, bottle or reservoir.”
   (4)   After section 301.3, insert:
      “301.3.1 Abandonment of cesspools, septic tanks, and privies. No
cesspool, septic tank, privy, or other means of private sewage disposal shall
be permitted wherever a sewer under public ownership adjoins the property in
question, and each and every existing cesspool, privy, or other means of
private disposal shall be eliminated or left in a condition satisfactory to the
County Department of Health. Abandonment shall be completed in accordance with
the County Private Sewage Disposal and Well Code.”
   (5)   After section 301.4, insert:
      “301.4.1 Private well abandonment. Whenever a public water connection is
provided for a property previously served by a well, the property owner shall
be responsible for abandoning and closing the well in accord with the
requirements of COMAR, 26.04.04.11. No well for household use shall be
constructed on a property accessible to a public water main.”
   (6)   After section 303.1, insert:
      “303.1.1 Piping system identification. In commercial buildings or
structures with multiple piping systems, all wastewater, stormwater, and grease
lines shall be identified using stenciling or commercially available pipe
labels. The labels shall indicate the pipe contents and the direction of flow.
The interval of identification markings shall not exceed 25 feet.”
   (7)   In section 305.4, strike “and not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below
grade”.
   (8)   In section 305.4.1, in the first sentence, strike “[Number] inches
(mm)” and substitute “12 inches” and, in the second sentence, strike “[number]
inches (mm)” and substitute “18 inches”.
   (9)   After section 306.4, insert:
      “306.5 Tracer wire. Nonmetallic sanitary sewer and nonmetallic water
supply piping that connects to public systems shall be locatable. An insulated
copper tracer wire, 10 AWG minimum in size and suitable for direct burial or an
equivalent product shall be utilized. The wire shall be installed in the same
trench as the sewer or water supply piping within 12 inches (305 mm) of the
piping and shall be installed from within five feet of the building wall to the
point where the building sewer or water supply system connects with the public
system. At a minimum, one end of the wire shall terminate above grade in an
accessible location that is resistant to physical damage, such as with a
cleanout or at the building wall.”
   (10)   In section 309.2, strike “3. Covers on potable water wells shall be
sealed, except where the top of the casing well or pipe sleeve is elevated to
at least 1 foot (305 mm) above the design flood elevation.”
   (11)   After section 403.6, insert:
      “403.7 Public swimming pools and spas. Public swimming pools and spas
shall conform to this Code and the requirements set forth in COMAR, 10.17.01
and Article 11, Title 14, of the County Code.”
   (12)   In section 410.4, delete “three or more” and “not more than 50
percent of”.
   (13)   After section 504.7.2, insert:
      “504.8 Thermal expansion. Thermal expansion shall be provided for all
closed potable water systems.
         504.8.1 Non-pressurized expansion tanks. Non-pressurized expansion
tanks shall be securely fastened to the structure and supported to carry twice
the weight of the tank filled with water. Provisions shall be made for draining
non-pressurized tanks without emptying the system.
         504.8.2 Pressurized expansion tanks. Pressurized expansion tanks shall
be consistent with the volume and capacity of the system. Tanks shall be
capable of withstanding a hydrostatic test pressure of 2 ½ times the allowable
working pressure of the system.
         504.8.3 Minimum capacity. The minimum capacity of expansion tanks
shall be determined from the manufacturer’s specifications.”
   (14)   In section 602.3.3, strike “connection to the plumbing system” and
substitute “the issuance of the certificate of occupancy”.
   (15)   After section 603.2.1, insert:
      “Protection of public water supply. Public water supply shall be
protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. Such assembly shall be
located after the water meter and prior to the water distribution pipe.”
   (16)   After section 605.3, insert:
      “Underground water service piping for public water systems shall be Type
L copper. Private water service piping shall be Type K underground and Type L
for above ground installations.”
   (17)   After section 605.4, insert:
      “Section 605.4.1 Under concrete slabs. Inaccessible water distribution
piping under slabs shall be copper water tube minimum Type L for public water
systems and Type K for private water systems, brass, ductile iron pressure
pipe, galvanized steel pipe, chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) or
crosslinked polyethylene (PEX) plastic pipe or tubing - all to be installed
with approved fittings or bends. The minimum pressure rating for plastic pipe
or tubing installed under slabs shall be 100 PSI at 180°F (689 KPA at 82°C).”
   (18)   Strike section 608.18 in its entirety.
   (19)   In section 701.2, strike “International Private Sewage Disposal Code”
and substitute “the Anne Arundel County Private Sewage Disposal and Well Code”.
   (20)   After section 712.4.2, insert:
      “712.4.3 Structures. Structures served entirely by pumping systems shall
use alternating duplex pumping equipment with an integral alarm system.”
   (21)   In section 903.1.1 insert “6” in the space indicated and strike “
(mm)”.
   (22)   After section 1003.3.8, insert:
      “1003.3.9 Location. All grease interceptors shall be located outside the
building served and shall be accessible for servicing unless an alternate
location is approved by the Code Official.”
(Bill No. 1-12; Bill No. 123-15; Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE AMENDMENTS
   The provisions of the 2021 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code are
amended, deleted, or corrected as follows and the following provisions shall
supersede the part of the text of the 2021 International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code as indicated:
   (1)   Strike Chapter 1, in its entirety, and substitute “Chapter 1 –
Construction Code Administrative Provisions”.
   (2)   In section 202, in the definition of “Code Official”, strike “the
officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative”, and substitute
“the Director of Inspections and Permits, or duly authorized representative,
charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code”.
   (3)   In section 305.2, in the last sentence, after “305.7.”, insert
“barriers shall be permanent and nonremovable.”
   (4)   In section 305.2.1, in the first sentence, after “(1219 mm)”, insert
“for residential pools, and 72 inches (1828 mm) for public pools”.
   (5)   Strike section 305.2.4 in its entirety.
   (6)   Strike section 305.2.4.1 in its entirety.
(Bill No. 60-20; Bill No. 25-24)
FIRE PREVENTION CODE AMENDMENTS
NFPA 1 UNIFORM FIRE CODE AMENDMENTS
   The provisions of the NFPA 1 Uniform Fire Code, 2018 Edition, are amended,
deleted or corrected as follows and the following provisions shall supersede
the part of the text of the NFPA 1 Uniform Fire Code, 2018 Edition, as
indicated:
   (1)   At the end of section 1.7.12.2, insert the following: "The AHJ shall
be authorized to require plans to bear the stamp of a registered design
professional."
   (2)   Strike section 1.10 in its entirety.
   (3)   Strike section 1.11.3 in its entirety.
   (4)   After section 1.12.1, insert:
      "1.12.1.1 Permits, certificates, notices, approvals, or orders required
by this Code shall be governed by the policies and procedures of the AHJ.
      1.12.1.1.1 Permits. All County permits shall comply with this Code.
Before any fire protection system, automatic fire suppression system, fire
sprinkler system, fire pump, fire alarm and detection system, or standpipe
system, or any related equipment or appurtenance is installed, modified,
replaced, or removed, a permit shall be obtained from the County Department of
Inspections and Permits. No work may begin prior to the issuance of any
required permit."
   (5)   In section 1.12.6.13, after "permits", strike "shall" and substitute
"may".
   (6)   In section 1.12.8, after "permits", strike "shall" and substitute
"may".
   (7)   In section 1.13.2, strike "mandatory."; and strike "shall" and
substitute "may".
   (8)   Strike section 1.13.12.4 in its entirety.
   (9)   Strike section 1.16.4.2 in its entirety.
   (10)   After section 1.16.5, insert:
      "1.16.6 Application for extension. An application for an extension of
time to correct any violation shall be deemed to be an admission that the
notice of violation is factually and procedurally correct and that the
violation or violations do or did exist."
   (11)   In sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2, before "compliance", insert "where
permitted by the AHJ".
   (12)   In section 2.2, strike "NFPA 5000, Building Construction and Safety
Code, 2018 Edition" and substitute "Anne Arundel County Building Code";
wherever NFPA 5000 is referenced, other than for extracted text, substitute
"Anne Arundel County Building Code"; and strike "NFPA 150, Standard on Fire and
Life Safety in Animal Housing Facilities, 2016 Edition" and substitute "NFPA
1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of
Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 Edition".
   (13)   After section 3.3.14.2, insert:
      "3.3.14.13 Consumer fireworks retail sales area. The portion of a
consumer fireworks retail sales facility or store, including the immediately
adjacent aisles, where consumer fireworks are located for the purpose of retail
display and sale to the public.".
   (14)   At the end of sections 3.3.130 and 3.3.130.1, insert "and as
referenced in § 10-101 of the Public Safety Article of the State Code".
   (15)   In section 3.3.192.6, strike "more than 3 but".
   (16)   In section 3.3.192.7, strike "four or more".
   (17)   In section 3.3.192.25, strike "three" and substitute "five"; and
strike "if any, accommodated in rented rooms".
   (18)   In section 3.3.192.28, strike "four" and substitute "six".
   (19)   In section 4.5.8.1, strike "for compliance with the provisions of
this Code".
   (20)   In section 4.5.8.3, strike "by the Code".
   (21)   In section 6.1.4.1, strike "four or more".
   (22)   In section 6.1.8.1.1, strike "three" and substitute "five"; and
strike "if any, accommodated in rented rooms".
   (23)   In section 6.1.9.1, strike "four" and substitute "six".
   (24)   In section 10.1.2, after "NFPA 101", insert ", except as amended by
COMAR 29.06.01.07, COMAR 29.06.01.08, and COMAR 29.06.01.09".
   (25)   After section 10.3.3, insert:
      "10.3.3.1 Occupancy of buildings or structures. Any new building under
construction; or that portion of any existing building undergoing renovations;
or any building or structure posted or otherwise determined to be unsafe by the
authority having jurisdiction, shall not be occupied at any time, in whole or
in part, except by those persons directly and actively involved in construction
activities or in the abatement, correction, or inspection of deficiencies. No
building, structure or portion thereof shall be occupied without prior approval
by the AHJ.
      10.3.3.2 Stocking, and/or temporary or partial occupancy shall require,
at a minimum, full compliance with all applicable NFPA 101, Life Safety Code
requirements relating to means of egress, and final acceptance by the authority
having jurisdiction of all required fire protection systems.
      10.3.3.3 Use and occupancy of buildings and structures shall be in
accordance with the Anne Arundel County Building Code".
   (26)   In sections 10.4.1 and 10.4.2, after "AHJ", insert "or incident
commander".
   (27)   In section 10.4.3, after the first "building", insert "and additional
persons shall not enter the building"; and at the end of section 10.4.3 insert
"building re-entry shall not occur until authorized by the Fire Department
incident commander.".
   (28)   Strike section 10.6.1.1 in its entirety and substitute:
      "10.6.1.1 The person discovering any unwanted fire, regardless of
magnitude, or other hazardous condition, such as, but not limited to, flammable
gas leaks, hazardous materials spills or releases, or suspicious packages,
shall take the following actions:
         (1)   immediately notify the owner, manager, or any person in control
of such building or premises, and all occupants in the immediate vicinity of
the emergency. If the building is equipped with a manually activated fire alarm
system, it shall be the duty of any person who has knowledge of an emergency to
ensure the manual alarm system is activated; and
         (2)   notify the Fire Department without delay.".
   (29)   In section 10.6.1.4, after the first "fire", insert "or other
hazardous condition".
   (30)   In section 10.10, after "open fires", insert "ignition sources,".
   (31)   After section 10.10.4, insert:
      "All open burning shall be in compliance with Article 11, Title 5 of the
County Code. Open fire licenses shall be obtained from the County Health
Department and shall be kept at the burning site during burning operations.
Open burning operations judged to be in violation of the approved license, or
that are judged to constitute a public safety hazard or public nuisance shall
be cause for suspension or revocation of the license and the fire shall be
extinguished when so ordered by the incident commander or authority having
jurisdiction.".
   (32)   After section 10.10.5.2, insert:
      "10.10.5.3 A readily accessible means of notifying the Fire Department
shall be provided at all times.".
   (33)   In section 10.10.6.1, after "hibachi," insert "gas-fired grill,
charcoal"; and strike "10 ft (3 m)" and substitute "15 ft (4.6 m)".
   (34)   In section 10.10.6.2, after "hibachi," insert "gas-fired grill,
charcoal".
   (35)   After section 10.10.10, insert:
      "10.10.11 Ignition sources.
      10.10.11.1 Clearance or shielding from ignition sources. Clearance or
shielding with approved thermal barriers shall be maintained in an approved
manner between combustible materials and any ignition source, such as light
fixtures, fixed heating equipment, portable heating appliances, flame-producing
devices, and other appliances or equipment where heat is produced as a by-
product of its operation. Proper clearance or shielding may be determined from
equipment or appliance manufacturer's specifications or as determined by the
authority having jurisdiction.
      10.10.11.2 Hot ashes and spontaneous ignition sources. Hot ashes,
cinders, smoldering coals, or greasy or oily materials subject to spontaneous
ignition shall not be deposited in a combustible receptacle, within 10 feet
(3048 mm) of other combustible material including combustible walls and
partitions or within two (2) feet (610 mm) of openings to buildings.
         Exception: The minimum required separation distance to other
combustible materials shall be two feet (610 mm) where the material is
deposited in a covered, noncombustible receptacle placed on a noncombustible
floor, ground surface, or stand.".
   (36)   At the end of section 10.11.1.1, after "property.", insert "Premises
identification shall be in accordance with § 12-5-101 of the County Code.".
   (37)   After section 10.11.1.1, insert:
      "10.11.1.1.1 Individual suites within structures and rear exterior
entrances to individual tenant suites and/or access from service corridors
shall be identified by clearly legible numbers and/or alphabet letters as
necessary for Fire Department identification. Numbers or letters shall be at
least 1 inch in height for interior suite doors and 3 inches in height for rear
exterior doors.".
   (38)   After section 10.11.1.8, insert:
      "10.11.1.9 Where required by the AHJ, symbols in compliance with NFPA 170
Standard for Fire Safety and Emergency Symbols shall be used. Fire Department
connections to standpipes, automatic sprinkler systems, fire suppression water
supplies, and other fire protection equipment, shall be marked such that the
sign or other approved marking is readily visible by approaching fire
apparatus. NFPA 170 symbols shall be on minimum 12 inch square signs unless
otherwise approved.
      10.11.1.10 Equipment and controls marking. Fire protection equipment
shall be identified in an approved manner. Rooms containing controls for HVAC
systems, sprinkler risers and valves, or other fire detection, suppression, or
control elements shall be identified for the use of the Fire Department.
Approved signs required to identify fire protection equipment and equipment
location shall be constructed of durable materials, permanently installed and
readily visible.
      10.11.1.11 Street or road signs. Streets and roads shall be identified
with approved signs. Temporary signs shall be installed at each street
intersection when construction of new roadways allows passage by vehicles.
Signs shall be of an approved size and weather resistant, and shall be
maintained until replaced by permanent signs.".
   (39)   In section 10.13.1.1, before "Christmas", insert "unless otherwise
approved by the AHJ,".
   (40)   After section 10.13.1.1, insert:
      "10.13.1.2 The AHJ shall:
         (1)   approve the placement of a natural cut or balled tree;
         (2)   limit the number of natural cut or balled trees displayed; and
         (3)   order the removal of any tree if the tree poses a hazard to life
or safety.".
   (41)   In section 10.13.3.1, strike "by the manufacturer" and substitute "by
a testing laboratory recognized by the Office of the State Fire Marshal".
   (42)   In section 10.13.9.1, strike "½ in. (13 mm)" and substitute "2 in.
(50 mm)"; and at the end of the section, after "water.", insert "A natural cut
tree shall not exceed 10 ft (3m) in height, excluding the tree stand.".
   (43)   In section 10.14.2, after "vehicles", insert "egress to a public
way".
   (44)   In section 10.14.11.2.6, after "vehicles" insert ", buildings,".
   (45)   In section 10.15.1, strike "10 ft (3m)" and substitute "15 ft (4.6
m)"; and after "line" insert "building, or adjacent pile of combustible
material. The separation distance shall be allowed to be increased where the
AHJ determines that a higher hazard to the adjoining property exists".
   (46)   In section 10.15.5, after "height" insert "and shall not exceed
10,000 ft2 in area".
   (47)   After section 10.15.5, insert:
      "10.15.6 The authority having jurisdiction shall have the authority to
require that outdoor storage of any combustible material be enclosed by an
approved fence or other protective enclosure to prevent unauthorized access.".
   (48)   In section 10.18.7, after "repaired" insert "on any balcony, under
any overhanging portion, or".
   (49)   After the title "Chapter 11 Building Services", and before section
11.1, insert:
      "11.0 Wiring and electrical equipment definitions. The following terms in
section 11.1 have the meanings indicated:
         (1)   Appliance, portable, is a device operated by electricity that is
capable of being hand-carried or is easily moved from one place to another in
normal use.
         (2)   Appliance, stationary, is a device operated by electricity,
which is not affixed to a structure and which is not easily moved from one
place to another.
         (3)   Extension cord is a portable flexible cord of any length which
has one male connector on one end and one or more female connectors on the
other, and no built-in over-current protection.
         (4)   Flexible cord is multi-conductor flexible sheathed cable which
is used for extension cords, as the connection means for appliances, and for
permanent use by connecting pieces of equipment or devices to each other or to
the premises wiring system where flexibility or portability is required.
         (5)   Multi-plug adapter is a device that plugs into a receptacle and
allows that receptacle to supply power to more appliances or fixtures than that
for which it was originally designed, such as cube adapters, strip plugs, and
multi-plug extension cords.
         (6)   Panel board, electrical, is a single panel, or group of panel
units designed for assembly in the form of a single panel, with automatic over-
current devices and with or without switches for the control of light, heat, or
power circuits, and designed to be placed in a cabinet or cutout box placed in
or against a wall or partition and accessible only from the front. See
switchboard, electrical.
         (7)   Permanent wiring is wiring affixed to a structure in accordance
with the Electrical Code.
         (8)   Power tap is a device for outdoor use consisting of an
attachment plug on one end of a flexible cord and two or more receptacles on
the opposite end, and has over-current protection.
         (9)   Receptacle is an electrical outlet designed for use with a plug
or connector for the purpose of supplying electrical power to an appliance.
         (10)   Switchboard, electrical, is a large floor-mounted single panel,
frame or assembly of panels on which are mounted, on the face or back or both,
switches, over-current and other protective devices, buses and usually
instruments. Most modern switchboards, even though totally enclosed, are
generally accessible from the rear as well as from the front, and are not
intended to be installed in cabinets. See panel board, electrical."
   (50)   After section 11.1.3.2, insert:
      "11.1.3.3 Multi-plug adapters. Approved multi-plug adapters and strip
plug devices shall be plugged directly into permanently installed
receptacles.".
   (51)   After section 11.1.7.3.1 insert:
      "11.1.7.3.2 Doors to electrical control panel rooms shall be marked with
a plainly visible and legible sign stating electrical room or similar approved
wording in contrasting letters not less than 1 in. (25 mm) high and not less
than 1/4 in. (6.4 mm) in stroke width.".
   (52)   After section 11.1.8, insert:
      "11.1.9 Clearance. A clear space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in
width, 36 inches (914 mm) in depth, and 78 inches (1981 mm) in height shall be
provided in front of electrical service equipment. Where the electrical service
equipment is wider than 30 inches (762 mm), the clear space shall not be less
than the width of the equipment. No storage of any materials shall be located
within the designated clear space.
         Exception: Where other specialized dimensions are required or
permitted by NFPA 70.
      11.1.10 Illumination. Normal and emergency lighting shall be provided for
all service equipment areas, motor control centers, and electrical switchboards
and panel boards.
      11.1.11 Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, or other equipment that
have been installed without required permits and inspections, or approved
wiring, devices, or other equipment that have been modified, damaged, or
otherwise constitutes an electrical shock or fire hazard shall not be used.
Appliances shall not be used in a manner that will create a fire hazard.
      11.1.12 Electrical listing requirements. Electrical appliances, devices,
and fixtures shall be tested and listed for their intended use and bear the
mark or seal of a testing laboratory which is listed, approved, or otherwise
recognized by any one or more of the following: U.S. Department of Labor,
Occupational Safety and Health Administration; National Volunteer Laboratories
Accreditation Program; International Accreditation Service, Inc.; International
Code Council; or American Association For Laboratory Accreditation (A2LA).
      11.1.13 Electrical motors. Electrical motors shall be maintained in a
manner free from accumulations of oil, dirt, waste, and other debris which will
interfere with required motor ventilation or otherwise create a fire hazard.".
   (53)   After section 11.2.1, insert:
      "11.2.1.1 HVAC duct smoke detectors. Activation of HVAC duct smoke
detectors shall transmit a supervisory signal rather than an alarm signal."
   (54)   At the end of section 11.3.6.1, insert "keys for new elevators shall
be cut to a uniform key code to comply with the Maryland State Elevator Code.".
   (55)   After section 11.5.1.7, insert:
      "11.5.1.7.1 Gasoline stoves. Use of gasoline stoves or other similar
devices or appliances using Class I liquids as defined by NFPA 30, Flammable
and Combustible Liquids Code (2018 Edition) for heating or cooking within
structures or buildings, or under tents or canopies is prohibited."
   (56)   In the title of section 11.5.2, strike "and" and substitute a comma;
and after "stoves", insert
", and unvented portable kerosene-fired heaters".
   (57)   After section 11.5.2.3, insert:
      "11.5.2.3.1 Kerosene heaters shall only be used as permitted under COMAR
29.06.01.14B., Commercial Law Article, § 14-1310, of the State Code, and this
Code."
   (58)   Renumber section 11.8.1 to be section 11.8.1.1.
   (59)   After the section title "11.8. Smoke control", and before renumbered
section 11.8.1.1, insert:
      "11.8.1 Acceptance testing methods and protocols for smoke control
systems shall be submitted to the authority having jurisdiction for approval
prior to the issuance of a permit."
   (60)   In section 11.9.1, strike "approved by the Fire Department", and
substitute "approved by the AHJ".
   (61)   In section 13.1.3, before "in Chapters 11 through 43", insert "by the
AHJ and".
   (62)   After section 13.1.7, insert:
      "13.1.7.1 Defective alarm systems. An alarm system is presumed to be
defective and in violation of this Code and subject to civil fines in
accordance with Title 5 of Article 15 of the County Code if:
         (1)   more than three (3) unnecessary alarms or requests for
assistance occur within a 30-day period; or
         (2)   eight (8) or more unnecessary alarms or requests for assistance
occur within a 12-month period.
      13.1.7.1.1 Unnecessary alarms means an alarm activation or request for
assistance to the Fire Department. Unnecessary alarms include negligently or
accidentally activated alarms, alarm activations due to faulty, malfunctioning,
or improperly installed or maintained equipment and an activation that is
purposely initiated in a nonemergency situation.
      13.1.7.1.2 Unnecessary alarms do not include alarms activated due to
unusually severe weather conditions or other conditions or causes beyond the
control of the user or occupant.
      13.1.7.2 Upon written notice from the authority having jurisdiction, an
alarm user who has responsibility for a defective alarm system shall:
         (1)   have the alarm system inspected within thirty (30) days by a
qualified alarm system contractor, or user if qualified.
         (2)   within fifteen (15) days after the inspection, file a written
report with the authority having jurisdiction containing the following
information:
            (A)   the results of the alarm system contractor or alarm user's
inspection;
            (B)   the probable cause of the unnecessary alarms; and
            (C)   actions taken or recommendations for eliminating unnecessary
alarms.
      13.1.7.3 An alarm user who continues the operation of a defective alarm
system is in violation of this Code and subject to a civil fine as provided in
this Article."
   (63)   After section 13.1.13, insert:
      "13.1.14 Materials and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment, appliances,
or devices for fire protection systems shall not be reused or reinstalled
unless such elements have been reconditioned, tested, and placed in good and
proper working condition and approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
      13.1.15 Fusible links or elements. Any fusible link or fusible element
that is a part of any fire protection system found to be painted, corroded,
damaged, or loaded with foreign material shall be replaced.
      13.1.16 Kitchen hood fire suppression systems and non-water based fixed
fire extinguishing systems. A license shall be obtained from the State Fire
Marshal's office by every individual, firm, or corporation commercially
installing, servicing, or repairing kitchen hood fire suppression systems or
non-water based fixed fire extinguishing systems.
      13.1.17 Building Code application. Fire protection systems shall be
required, installed, repaired, operated and maintained in accordance with this
Code and with the Building Code for Anne Arundel County.
      13.1.18 Appearance of equipment. The AHJ shall be permitted to prohibit
any device that has the physical appearance of a life safety or fire protection
function but does not perform that life safety or fire protection function.".
   (64)   After section 13.3.1.1, insert:
      "13.3.1.1.1 A fire sprinkler contractor license shall be obtained from
the State Fire Marshal's office to inspect, test, perform maintenance on,
install, modify, or lay out fire sprinkler systems in any residential or
commercial building as required in COMAR 29.06.05."
   (65)   After section 13.3.1.2, insert:
      "13.3.1.2.1 For new ceiling installations, drop-out ceilings as
referenced in NFPA 13, section 8.15.14 shall be prohibited.".
   (66)   After section 13.3.1.8.2.2, insert:
      "13.3.1.8.3 Sprinkler system supervision, monitoring, and alarms shall be
in accordance with the International Building Code as adopted by Anne Arundel
County.".
   (67)   After section 13.3.1.9, insert:
      "13.3.1.10 Occupant notification of sprinkler activation. Where a fire
alarm system is installed, activation of the automatic sprinkler system shall
activate the building fire alarm system. Where no fire alarm system is present,
the automatic sprinkler system shall activate, at a minimum, one audiovisual
device within the protected premises in a normally occupied area, to provide
occupant notification of sprinkler system activation. Additional audiovisual
devices may be required as determined by the authority having jurisdiction.".
   (68)   After section 13.3.2.1, insert:
      "13.3.2.1.1 All new buildings shall be equipped with an automatic
sprinkler system or other automatic fire suppression system where required by
the International Building Code as adopted by the Anne Arundel County Building
Code.".
   (69)   After section 13.3.2.17.8, insert:
      "13.3.2.17.9 Sprinkler zone/address coordination. Apartment buildings
protected with sprinkler systems designed and installed in accordance with NFPA
13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, or NFPA 13R, Standard
for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and
Including Four Stories in Height, shall be zoned such that each entrance
stairwell shall be served by a separate sprinkler zone, regardless of fire
separation between buildings or dwelling units. Each entrance stairwell zone
shall be identified by the appropriate building address for system monitoring
and emergency forces notification purposes.".
   (70)   In section 13.3.3.1, strike "installed in accordance with this Code".
   (71)   In section 13.3.3.2., strike "installed in accordance with this
Code".
   (72)   At the end of section 13.3.3.4.1.8, after "identified.", insert:
"Valve and riser rooms shall have direct access from the building exterior
unless an alternative location and access has been approved by the AHJ."
   (73)   After section 13.4.1.1, insert:
      "13.4.1.1.1 Pits or vaults. No fire pump component, including the pump,
driver, or controller, shall be permitted to be installed in below-ground
vaults or pits, unless otherwise approved by the AHJ."
   (74)   In section 13.6.1.2, after "Chapter 2", insert "unless otherwise
permitted by the authority having jurisdiction".
   (75)   After section 13.6.4.1.1, insert:
      "13.6.4.1.1.1 License to service or repair portable fire extinguishers. A
license shall be obtained from the State Fire Marshal's office by every
individual, firm, or corporation commercially servicing, repairing, filling, or
refilling portable fire extinguishers, except Fire Departments.".
   (76)   In section 13.6.4.1.2.1, strike "certified", and substitute "licensed
as required by the AHJ".
   (77)   Strike in their entirety sections 13.6.4.1.2.1.1 through
13.6.4.1.2.1.6.
   (78)   In section 13.6.4.1.2.3, strike "certified", and substitute
"licensed".
   (79)   After section 13.7.1.8.7, insert:
      "13.7.1.8.7.1 Smoke detector power supply - general. Where automatic fire
or smoke alarms are required by other sections of this Code, and are required
or permitted to be powered by the building electrical system, the circuit
supplying power to the smoke alarms shall be protected by circuit breaker locks
or other means approved by the authority having jurisdiction to prevent
interruption of power to the smoke alarms.".
   (80)   In section 13.7.2.28.1.2, after "occupancies", insert "less than
three stories".
   (81)   In section 13.7.2.28.1.3, after "occupancies", insert "less than
three stories".
   (82)   In section 14.13.1.2, in the second line, strike "only" and
substitute ", but not be limited to,".
   (83)   After section 18.2.1, insert:
      "18.2.1.1 Area modifications - Fire Department access requirements.
Whenever there have been area modifications applied in accordance with the
County Building Code, an approved fire apparatus access road in accordance with
section 18.2 shall be required along the perimeter where the frontage increase
is calculated. This requirement is in addition to Building Code requirements
for open or unoccupied space.".
   (84)   After section 18.2.2.3, insert:
      "18.2.2.3.1 Maintenance of exterior doors and openings. Exterior doors or
their functions shall not be eliminated without prior approval by the authority
having jurisdiction. Exterior doors which have been rendered nonfunctional and
which retain a functional door exterior appearance shall have a sign affixed to
the exterior side of such door stating, "This door is blocked." The sign shall
consist of letters having a principal stroke of not less than 3/4 inch (19.1
mm) wide and at least 6 inches (152.4 m) high on a contrasting background.
      18.2.2.3.2 Access to building openings. Exterior doors and openings
required by this Code shall be maintained readily accessible for emergency
access by the Fire Department. An approved access walkway leading from fire
apparatus access roads or fire lanes to exterior openings required by this Code
shall be provided as determined by the authority having jurisdiction."
   (85)   In section 18.2.3.2.1, after "door" insert "acceptable to the AHJ".
   (86)   In section 18.2.3.2.2.1, strike "increased to 450 ft (137 m)" and
substitute "modified by the AHJ".
   (87)   After section 18.2.3.5.1.1.2, insert:
      "18.2.3.5.1.1.3 Setback requirements. Fire Department access roads shall
be located a minimum of 10 feet from the outermost projection of the protected
structure.".
   (88)   In section 18.2.3.5.2, strike "the imposed loads of fire apparatus"
and substitute "a minimum of 40 tons"; and after "surface", insert "consisting
of concrete, asphalt, compacted gravel, or other approved surfaces. Grass
covered surfaces are prohibited.".
   (89)   In section 18.2.3.5.3.1, strike "as approved by the AHJ" and
substitute "a minimum of 47 feet outside radius and 38 feet inside radius".
   (90)   After section 18.2.3.5.6.1, insert:
      "18.2.3.5.6.1.1 Maximum grades for Fire Department access roads are as
follows:
         (1)   Concrete surfaces - 15%
         (2)   Asphalt surfaces - 12%
         (3)   Other approved surfaces - 5%
         (4)   Cross grade - 5%."
   (91)   At the end of section 18.3.1, after "18.4.", insert "Lakes, streams,
creeks, rivers, bays or other similar open sources are not approved water
sources.".
   (92)   In section 18.3.1.1, strike "approved reservoirs, pressure tanks,
elevated tanks, Fire Department tanker shuttles, or".
   (93)   After section 18.3.1.1, insert:
      "18.3.1.1.1 Water allowance. The total required water supply calculated
in accordance with NFPA 1142, Standard on Water Supplies for Suburban and Rural
Fire Fighting, may be reduced by up to 9,000 gallons in consideration of the
amount of water transported to the scene by Fire Department apparatus.
      18.3.2 Multiple structures on a single site. Multiple structures on a
single site or property shall be permitted to use a single, approved water
source to protect all structures on the property provided all of the following
requirements are met:
         (1)   The water source is owned by or under the legal control of the
property owner. Written, properly executed and legally-binding access rights to
a water supply, in perpetuity, shall be permitted;
         (2)   The water source is sized to provide an adequate water supply
for the most demanding building on site, plus exposure protection as required
by NFPA 1142;
         (3)   The water source is within 1,000 feet of the most remote point
of any building being protected; and
         (4)   There is unobstructed access between the water source and all
protected buildings that would prevent or unnecessarily delay Fire Department
units from accessing the water supply, or extending hose lines from the water
supply to any protected building on the property.
      18.3.3 Underground fire suppression water storage tanks. Fire apparatus
connections to required underground fire suppression water storage tanks shall
be located at least 40 feet from any structure on the site at a location
approved by the authority having jurisdiction. Minimum tank size shall be
10,000 gallons.
      18.3.4 Fire Department water supplies. No person shall damage, tamper
with, operate, use, disturb, or obstruct in any manner any public or private
fire hydrant, or other approved water supply required to be installed or
maintained under the provisions of this Code.
         Exception No. 1: Lawful uses allowed by special permit from the
Department of Public Works.
         Exception No. 2: Use of private hydrants with the express permission
of the owner of such hydrant.
         Exception No. 3: Use by the Fire Department or the Department of
Public Works in the performance of official duties.".
   (94)   After section 18.4.5.4, insert:
      "18.4.5.5 Fire flow tests.
      18.4.5.5.1 A fire flow test report shall be provided to the authority
having jurisdiction prior to final approval of the fire suppression water
supply. Fire flow tests shall be conducted and fire flow test reports provided
by the County Department of Public Works. Under certain conditions, the
authority having jurisdiction may require a fire flow test to be conducted and
witnessed by a representative of the Fire Marshal Division.
      18.4.5.5.2 Fire flow tests - validity. Fire flow test reports shall be
considered valid for a period of twelve (12) months after the date performed.
Reports older than twelve (12) months shall not be recognized as supporting
documentation for hydraulic calculations for water-based fire protection
systems.".
   (95)   After section 18.5.1.6, insert:
      "18.5.1.7 Hydrants shall be located at street intersections whenever
possible.
      Hydrants not located at intersections shall be located in relation to
property lines in order to avoid interference with future driveways.
      18.5.1.8 Hydrant spacing is to be measured linearly along an improved
roadway or Fire Department access road; radial measurements are not
appropriate.
      18.5.1.9 Where fire hydrants cannot be located 40 feet or greater from a
building, spacing for that hydrant to at least one adjacent hydrant shall be
reduced 50 percent.
      18.5.1.10 Wall hydrants. Wall hydrants shall not be permitted in place of
required standard fire hydrants to meet hydrant coverage requirements.
         Exception: As may be approved by the authority having jurisdiction
after a review of unique or special circumstances.
      18.5.1.11 Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 24 and
Anne Arundel County Department of Public Works requirements.".
   (96)   In section 18.5.6, after "Department" insert "under all weather
conditions. Access to all water supplies shall be by a paved street or road, or
an approved fire lane or Fire Department access road. All approved drafting
locations shall be provided with a paved fire apparatus access apron per the
County Department of Public Works Detail I-64 and I-64A".
   (97)   After section 18.5.6, insert:
      "18.5.6.1 Fire hydrants and connections to other approved water supplies
shall be kept unobstructed at all times for a distance of not less than 15 feet
as measured linearly along the road edge.".
   (98)   After section 18.5.10.3, insert:
      "18.6 Fire Department connections.
      18.6.1 Fire Department connections to building fire sprinkler and
standpipe systems shall be located within 100 feet of a paved fire department
access road. Fire Department connections shall be within 100 feet of a fire
hydrant.
      18.6.1.1 Fire Department connections for pier standpipe systems shall be
placed so that they are within 100 feet of an approved fire access road.
      18.6.1.2 Fire Department connections shall be on the main entrance side
of the building unless otherwise approved by the AHJ.
      18.6.1.3 Fire Department connections shall be visible, accessible, and
unobstructed.
      18.6.1.4 Unless otherwise determined by the AHJ, one 5" Storz Fire
Department inlet with cap and chain shall be used.".
   (99)   In sections 20.3.4.1.1 and 20.3.4.1.2, strike "more than 3, but"; and
after "12", strike the comma.
   (100)   In section 25.2.2.1, after "NFPA701", insert "or other approved
testing standard approved by the State Fire Marshal".
   (101)   After section 26.1.6.1, insert:
      "26.1.6.2 When requested by the AHJ, a hazard assessment shall be
conducted by a technically qualified person acceptable to the AHJ.
      26.1.6.3 When requested by the AHJ, a list of hazardous materials used in
each laboratory shall be provided. The list shall specify the chemical name,
quantity, and hazard class.
      26.1.6.4 New laboratories or laboratories for which the NFPA 45
laboratory hazard classification changes shall post an information placard near
the main entrance to the laboratory. The placard shall state the building name
or address, room number, NFPA 56 laboratory hazard classification, edition of
NFPA 45, maximum allowable quantities of flammable liquids inside a storage
cabinet and in open use, and maximum quantities of flammable gases permitted
within the laboratory.".
   (102)   After section 26.2, insert:
      "26.3 Construction.
      26.3.1 All laboratories, laboratory suites, or laboratory units within
the scope of NFPA 45, regardless of the NFPA 45 laboratory hazard
classification, shall be separated by at least one-hour fire resistance-rated
construction from non-laboratory areas. If a higher fire resistance rating is
required by Table 5.1.1 in NFPA 45 or the Building Code, the higher fire
resistance rating shall be used. Rooms that are an incidental use to the
laboratory shall be considered part of the laboratory for the purpose of this
requirement and shall not require additional separation.".
   (103)   In section 28.1.2.3.3, strike "28.1.2.3.7" and substitute
"28.1.2.3.9.1".
   (104)   Strike section 28.1.2.3.5 in its entirety and substitute:
      "28.1.2.3.5 Minimum pipe size and flow. Minimum pipe size shall be 2
inches. The pipe shall be hydraulically calculated such that no less than 300
gpm can be delivered at the farthest outlet with no more than 15 psi per 100
feet friction loss.".
   (105)   After section 28.1.2.3.7, insert:
      "28.1.2.3.8 Fire Department connection. Unless otherwise determined by
the AHJ, one 5" Storz Fire Department inlet with cap and chain shall be located
on the shoreline at the beginning of the pier or wharf within 100 feet of
closest fire apparatus access via an approved fire lane or fire apparatus
access road.
      28.1.2.3.8.1 Fire department connection access. The areas immediately
surrounding and/or adjacent to these connections, as determined by the
authority having jurisdiction, are to be designated and marked as fire lanes.
Vehicle parking, boat storage, and all other obstructions to the movement of
fire apparatus and Fire Department personnel in these areas shall be
prohibited.
      28.1.2.3.9 Standpipe outlets. One 2 ½- inch national standard threaded
male outlet with shut-off valve shall be located on the pier every 100 feet or
fraction thereof as measured from the beginning of the pier. An outlet shall
also be provided at the beginning of the pier if the distance from fire
apparatus access to the pier exceeds 100 feet. All outlets shall be provided
with caps secured by chains.
      28.1.2.3.9.1 Outlet height. Each 2 ½ inch outlet shall be mounted no less
than 18 inches or more than 24 inches above the pier decking.".
   (106)   In section 31.3.6.2.2, after item (8), insert:
      "(9)   Piles containing leaves and other extraneous or hogged material,
such as whole tree chip piles, shall be turned or reclaimed at least every 3
months."
   (107)   Strike section 31.3.6.3.1 in its entirety and substitute:
      "31.3.6.3.1 Piles shall not exceed 18 feet in height, 50 feet in width,
and 350 feet in length. Piles shall be subdivided by fire lanes having at least
30 feet of clear space at the base of piles.".
   (108)   Strike section 31.3.6.3.2 in its entirety.
   (109)   Strike Chapter 35, "Animal Housing Facilities", it its entirety.
   (110)   In section 42.7.5.5, after "AHJ.", insert "The following information
shall be conspicuously posted in this area:
      (1)   the exact address of the unattended self-service facility; and
      (2)   the telephone number of the owner or operator of the unattended
self-service facility.".
   (111)   After section 42.7.5.6, insert:
      "42.7.5.7 Owners , managers, or employees of the unattended self-service
facility shall conduct daily site visits to ensure that all equipment is
operating properly.
      42.7.5.8 Regular equipment inspection and maintenance at the unattended
self-service facility shall be conducted.
      42.7.5.9 Fuel-dispensing equipment shall comply with one of the
following:
         (1)   the amount of fuel being dispensed is limited in quantity by
preprogrammed card; or
         (2)   dispensing devices shall be programmed or set to limit
uninterrupted fuel delivery of not more than 25 gallons and shall require a
manual action to resume continued delivery.".
   (112)   After section 50.2.1.9, insert:
      "50.2.1.10 Commercial outdoor cooking operations. These requirements
apply to commercial cooking operations that typically take place under a
canopy, tent-type structure, vendor stands or other normally uninhabited
structures, at fairs, festivals, and carnivals and intended for temporary use.
Use includes, but is not limited to, deep frying, sauteing, and grilling
operations and similar uses producing smoke or grease-laden vapors.
      50.2.1.10.1 Tent and canopy requirements.
      50.2.1.10.1.1 Temporary tents, canopies or other normally unused
structures where cooking equipment that is not protected in accordance with
NFPA 96 is located shall not be occupied by the public and shall be separated
from other tents, canopies, structures, or vehicles by a minimum of 10 ft
unless otherwise approved by the AHJ.
      50.2.1.10.1.2 All tent and canopy material shall comply with the flame
resistance requirements of section 25.2.2.
      50.2.1.10.2.5 All lp gas equipment shall be properly maintained and
comply with applicable requirements of NFPA 58.
      50.2.1.10.2.6 Regulators. Single-stage regulators may not supply
equipment that is rated more than 100,000 btu/hr. Two-stage regulators shall be
used with equipment that is rated more than 100,000 btu/hr.
      50.2.1.10.3 General safety requirements.
      50.2.1.10.3.1 All electrical cords shall be maintained in a safe
condition and shall be secured to prevent damage.
      50.2.1.10.3.2 Movable cooking equipment shall have wheels removed or
shall be placed on blocks or otherwise secured to prevent movement of the
appliance during operation.
      50.2.1.10.3.3 Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided in accordance
with NFPA 1, section 50.4.12.".
   (113)   After section 50.5.2.8.1, insert:
      "50.5.2.9 Servicing of non-compliant fire extinguishing systems. An
inspection tag that indicates compliance shall not be attached to any fire
extinguishing system if that system is not in full compliance with all
applicable sections of the Code unless the system or condition was previously
approved by the AHJ. Written notice of a non-compliant fire extinguishing
system shall be provided to the AHJ by the service company within 30 days of
the service.
      50.5.2.9.1 Modifications - permits required. Fire extinguishing systems
not in compliance with this Code shall be modified to bring them into
compliance after obtaining any required permits.".
   (114)   In section 50.7.2.3.4, strike "an approved company", and substitute
"a gas fitter certified by the Maryland Department of Labor, Licensing, and
Regulation", and, at the end of section 50.7.2.3.4, insert:
      "The certification documentation shall include: (1) the name of the gas
fitter; (2) the number of the license or certification that the gas fitter is
approved to install, inspect, and maintain lp gas systems; (3) the corporate
name of the mobile food service business; (4) the identifying name on the side
of the mobile food vehicle; (5) the date of inspection; (6) the vehicle tag
number and VIN; and (7) a signed statement by the certified gas fitter that
reads, "the lp-gas system has been inspected for compliance with the current
edition of NFPA 58 and found to be in compliance. In addition, leak detection
has been conducted on the lp-gas system piping, and the piping has been found
to maintain integrity." In addition, leak detection has been conducted on the
lp-gas system piping, and the piping has been found to maintain integrity.".
   (115)   In section 60.5.1.9.2(5), after "tank" insert "and not less than the
height of the poles plus 12 inches".
   (116)   At the end of sections 65.2.3, 65.3.3, and 65.4.2, insert:
      "Permits shall be obtained from the Maryland State Fire Marshal for the
following:
         (1)   fireworks displays;
         (2)   pyrotechnics before a proximate audience; and
         (3)   flame effects before an audience.".
   (117)   At the end of section 65.2.2, insert ", the Code for the
Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and
Pyrotechnic Articles, 2017 edition.".
   (118)   At the end of section 65.5.2, insert ", the Code for the
Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and
Pyrotechnic Articles, 2017 edition.".
   (119)   After section 65.5.2, insert:
      "65.5.3 Sparklers. Sale or use of sparklers and fireworks shall comply
with the following:
         (1)   Before the sale, offering for sale, or use of any sparkler
within the State, every manufacturer of sparklers shall submit sufficient
samples for inspection to the State Fire Marshal, with a laboratory report from
a certified testing laboratory affirming that the analysis of these sparklers
showed that they contain no chlorates or perchlorates.
         (2)   All sparklers sold in the State shall be sold in boxes, and each
box shall be clearly marked that the sparklers contain no chlorates or
perchlorates.
         (3)   The manufacturer shall furnish the State Fire Marshal with a
current list of wholesalers, jobbers, retailers, or retail outlets handling or
supplying sparklers, or shall maintain a list of wholesalers, jobbers,
retailers, or retail outlets subject to inspection by the State Fire Marshal.
      65.5.4 Manufacture of fireworks.
         (1)   A building containing hazardous mixes or items may not be
located closer than 20 feet to the property line.
         (2)   In this section, the following terms have the meanings
indicated:
            (A)   "Trainees" means employees undergoing initial training in a
specific process for a period not to exceed 24 consecutive work hours.
            (B)   "Transients" means:
               (i)   supervisors not regularly assigned to the area;
               (ii)   bona fide government agency personnel engaged in official
business; and
               (Iii)   material-handling personnel actively engaged in the
transfer of materials into or out of the area.
         (3)   The maximum number of workers, excluding one trainee and three
transients, permitted in a building at one time shall be limited to one person
per 100 square feet gross floor area or one person in buildings of less than
100 square feet gross floor area.
         (4)   The total amount of explosives or pyrotechnic composition,
including raw materials, material being processed, and finished products,
permitted in any building at a given time shall be determined by the
enforcement agency based upon the American Table of Distances for Storage of
Explosives, without recognition for barricades. Location of fireworks mixing
and storage facilities shall be in accordance with the requirements of § 10-204
(a) of the Public Safety Article of the State Code. The amount of explosives or
other pyrotechnic composition may not exceed the amount necessary for
production for 4 hours.
         (5)   Before beginning work, all fireworks plants shall submit for
approval accurate scale plot plans of their premises to the State Fire Marshal,
as well as plans for all proposed changes of location for any of the
structures, fences, and gates.".
   (120)   In section 65.9.1, after "NFPA 495", insert "(except as set forth
herein)", and, at the end of section 65.9.1, insert:
      "In NFPA 495:
         (1)   delete sections 11.2 and 11.3;
         (2)   amend section 3.3 to define "demolition" as "the explosive
razing of any manmade structure or any part thereof that cannot be covered with
overburden or blasting mats"; and
         (3)   amend section 4.4 by adding: ‘4.4.7 each applicant for a
demolition Class D permit shall possess 5 years of experience in the field of
demolition and shall pass the demolition examination as approved by the Office
of the State Fire Marshal.'".
   (121)   After section 65.9.2.2, insert:
      "65.10 Sale, handling, and storage of consumer fireworks.
      65.10.1 Section 65.10, from the 2012 edition of NFPA 1 is adopted in its
entirety and incorporated by reference.
      65.10.2 Ground based sparkling device displays shall comply with COMAR
29.06.07.".
   (122)   After section 69.2.1.1.11, insert:
      "69.2.1.1.12 Containers shall be protected from vehicular impact in
accordance with section 60.5.1.9.".
   (123)   After section 69.2.1.4.5.2, insert:
      "69.2.1.4.6 Emergency telephone numbers. Every container with an
aggregate water capacity of 100 pounds or more (10 gallon lp-gas capacity, 43 ½
lb cylinder) shall bear a placard or other suitable permanent sign that
displays 24-hour emergency telephone number(s) of the gas supplier or a
qualified representative capable of responding at any time in the event of an
emergency involving the container. The sign or placard shall be designed so as
to be capable of being read at a distance of not less than 100 feet, but in no
case shall contain lettering less than 2 inches in height with a 3/8 inch wide
stroke.".
   (124)   In section 69.5.4.2.2, after "location", insert "and in accordance
with section 60.5.1.9".
(Bill No. 75-13; Bill No. 20-18; Bill No. 95-20)
NFPA 101, LIFE SAFETY CODE AMENDMENTS
   The provisions of the NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2018 Edition, are amended,
deleted, or corrected as follows and the following provisions shall supersede
the part of the text of the NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2018 Edition, as
indicated:
   (1)   At the end of section 2.2, insert "NFPA 1124, Manufacture,
Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic
Articles, 2017 edition.".
   (2)   In section 2.2, strike "NFPA 150, Standard on Fire and Life Safety in
Animal Housing Facilities, 2016 edition.".
   (3)   In section 2.4, strike "NFPA 150, Standard on Fire and Life Safety in
Animal Housing Facilities, 2016 edition." and "NFPA 5000, Building Construction
and Safety Code, 2018 edition.". Wherever "NFPA 5000" is referenced, other than
for extracted text, substitute "the Building Code adopted by the AHJ".
   (4)   After section 3.3.64.2, insert:
      "3.3.64.3 Bulkhead door. A type of door assembly covering an opening in
the ground providing direct access to a basement, the floor of which is not
more than 8 feet below ground level. The door consists of a single rigid leaf
or two overlapping rigid leaves or covers which need to be pushed or lifted
upwards in order to be opened. A person, after opening the door, can walk up a
series of steps to escape to the outside.".
   (5)   In section 3.3.148.1, strike "more than 3 but".
   (6)   In section 3.3.196.4, strike "four or more".
   (7)   In section 3.3.196.12, strike "four" and substitute "six".
   (8)   In section 4.5.8, strike "for compliance with the provisions of this
Code".
   (9)   In section 4.6.11, after "4.6.7.", insert "A building permit for a
change in use or occupancy shall be obtained from the Anne Arundel County
Department of Inspections and Permits.".
   (10)   At the end of section 4.6.11, insert "a building permit for a change
in use or occupancy shall be obtained from the Anne Arundel County Department
of Inspections and Permits.".
   (11)   In section 4.6.12.1, strike "for compliance with the provisions of
this Code".
   (12)   In section 4.6.12.3, strike "by the Code".
   (13)   After section 4.8.2.3, insert:
      "4.8.2.4 Emergency action plans shall be maintained in a location
approved by the authority having jurisdiction.".
   (14)   In section 6.1.4.1, strike "four or more".
   (15)   In section 6.1.9.1, strike "four" and substitute "six".
   (16)   In section 7.2.1.5.12, strike "required" and replace with "provided".
   (17)   After section 7.2.1.5.12, insert:
      "7.2.1.5.13 Slide bolt locks. Slide bolt locks shall not be permitted at
any time."
   (18)   In section 7.2.1.6.3, in the first line, after "permitted", strike
"in" and substitute "by the AHJ and".
   (19)   In section 7.2.1.7.1, in the first sentence, strike "required to be".
   (20)   In section 7.2.1.7.3, strike "required panic" and substitute "panic".
   (21)   In Table 7.3.1.2, after "storage use" and in the subsection titled
"In Storage Occupancies", strike the first "NA" and substitute "500", and
strike the second "NA" and substitute "46.5".
   (22)   In Table 7.3.1.2, after the section titled "Storage Use", insert
"Accessory Storage Areas and Mechanical Equipment Rooms" in the use column, and
in the column titled "(ft2 per person)", insert "300", and in the column titled
"(m2 per person)", insert "27.9".
   (23)   In section 7.9.1.2, strike the first "only" and substitute ", but not
be limited to,".
   (24)   In section 9.6.1.3, strike "required by this Code".
   (25)   At the end of section 9.6.2.6, insert "This paragraph does not permit
the omission of manual fire alarm boxes in accordance with other provisions of
this subsection unless specifically permitted by Chapters 11 through 43.".
   (26)   Strike section 9.6.3.2.2 in its entirety and substitute:
      "9.6.3.2.2 Smoke detectors used solely for closing dampers or heating,
ventilating, and air-conditioning system shutdown shall not activate the
building evacuation alarm. The power supply and installation wiring to the
detectors shall be monitored by the building fire alarm system, and the
activation of the detectors shall initiate a supervisory signal at a constantly
attended location.".
   (27)   After section 9.7.1.1, insert:
      "9.7.1.1.1 For new ceiling installations, drop-out ceilings as referenced
in NFPA 13, section 8.15.15 shall be prohibited."
   (28)   In section 9.11.1, strike "required by this Code".
   (29)   In sections 9.11.4.1 and 9.14.1.1, before "Chapters 11 through 43",
insert "the AJH and".
   (30)   In section 11.8.3.1, after the last sentence, insert "High-rise
buildings do not include a building used exclusively for open parking."
   (31)   In section 11.11.2.1, after "NFPA 701", insert "or other approved
testing standard approved by the State Fire Marshal".
   (32)   Strike sections 11.12.2, 12.2.1.2, 14.2.1.5, 16.2.1.1, 16.6.2.1.2,
26.2.4, 28.2.1.4, 30.2.1.3, 32.2.2.7, 32.3.2.1.3, 36.2.1.6, 38.2.1.5, 40.2.1.3,
and 42.2.1.3 in their entirety.
   (33)   In section 12.2.4.1, after "12.2.4.4.", insert:
      "(1)   Not less than two separate exits shall be provided on every story.
      (2)   Not less than two separate exits shall be accessible from every
part of every story."
   (34)   In section 12.3.4.2.1(1), after "by", insert "the AHJ and".
   (35)   In section 12.3.4.2.2, at the beginning of the sentence insert: "When
required by the AHJ," and change "The" to lower case.
   (36)   In section 12.3.4.3.3, after "of", insert "automatically
transmitted", and after "9.6.3.9", insert "or where required or approved by the
AHJ,".
   (37)   In section, 13.2.4.1, after "13.2.4.3.", insert:
      "(1)   Not less than two separate exits shall be provided on every story.
      (2)   Not less than two separate exits shall be accessible from every
part of every story."
   (38)   Strike section 14.7.2.3 in its entirety, and substitute:
      "Fire emergency egress drills shall be conducted as follows:
      (1)   Not less than one fire emergency egress drill shall be conducted
every month the facility is in session, unless the following criteria are met:
         (A)   in climates where the weather is severe, the monthly fire
emergency egress drills shall be permitted to be deferred; and
         (B)   in educational occupancies which are:
            (i)   fully protected by an automatic sprinkler system, the total
number of annual fire emergency egress drills shall be five, with a least two
of the required drills conducted in the first four months of the school year;
or
            (ii)   not fully protected by an automatic sprinkler system, the
total number of annual fire emergency egress drills shall be eight, with at
least three of the required drills conducted in the first four months of the
school year.
      (2)   All occupants of the building shall participate in the fire
emergency egress drill.
      (3)   One fire emergency egress drill, other than for educational
occupancies that are open on a year-round basis, shall be required within the
first 30 days of operation.".
   (39)   Strike section 15.7.2.3 in its entirety, and substitute:
      "Fire emergency egress drills shall be conducted as follows:
      (1)   Not less than one fire emergency egress drill shall be conducted
every month the facility is in session, unless the following criteria are met:
         (A)   in climates where the weather is severe, the monthly fire
emergency egress drills shall be permitted to be deferred; and
         (B)   in educational occupancies which are:
            (i)   fully protected by an automatic sprinkler system, the total
number of annual fire emergency egress drills shall be five, with a least two
of the required drills conducted in the first four months of the school year;
or
            (ii)   not fully protected by an automatic sprinkler system, the
total number of annual fire emergency egress drills shall be eight, with at
least three of the required drills conducted in the first four months of the
school year.
      (2)   All occupants of the building shall participate in the fire
emergency egress drill.
      (3)   One fire emergency egress drill, other than for educational
occupancies that are open on a year-round basis, shall be required within the
first 30 days of operation.".
   (40)   At the end of section 15.2.2.2.4, after item (9), insert:
      "(10)   Two releasing operations shall be permitted for hardware on an
existing door leaf provided that releasing does not require simultaneous
operations and the locking device is of a type that is readily distinguishable
as locked.".
   (41)   After section 16.1.1.9, insert:
      "16.1.1.10 Day-care centers providing day care for school-age children
before or after school hours in a building which is in use as a public or
private school are not required to meet the provisions of this chapter, but
shall meet the provisions for educational occupancies.".
   (42)   At the end of section 16.2.11.1.1 after item (3), insert:
      "(4)   For windows at grade, the minimum net clear opening shall be
permitted to be 5.0 square feet."
   (43)   In section 16.6.1.1.2, strike "more than 3, but", and after "12",
strike the comma.
   (44)   In section 16.6.1.4.1.1, strike "more than three, but,", and strike
"seven," and substitute "nine".
   (45)   In section 16.6.1.4.1.2, strike "7" and substitute "9".
   (46)   In section 16.6.1.7.1, strike "both" and substitute "all", and strike
items (1) and (2) in their entirety and substitute:
      "(1)   The minimum staff-to-client ratio shall be not less than one staff
for up to eight clients, including the caretaker's own children incapable of
self-preservation.
      (2)   There shall be not more than four clients incapable of self-
preservation, including the caretaker's own children incapable of self-
preservation.
      (3)   A staff-to-client ratio of at least one staff to every two clients
incapable of self-preservation shall be maintained at all times.
      (4)   The staff-to-client ratio shall be permitted to be modified by the
authority having jurisdiction where safeguards in addition to those specified
in this section are provided.".
   (47)   In section 16.6.2.1, after "24.2.", insert "Bulkhead doors may not
serve as a primary means of escape.".
   (48)   In section 16.6.2.2, strike "Reserved." and substitute:
      "Sliding door. For family day-care homes, a sliding door used as a
required means of escape shall comply with the following conditions:
         (1)   The sliding door shall have not more than one, easily operated,
locking device that does not require special knowledge, effort, or tools to
operate;
         (2)   There may not be draperies, screens, or storm doors that could
impede egress;
         (3)   The sill or track height may not exceed ½ inch above the
interior finish floor;
         (4)   The surface onto which exit is made shall be an all weather
surface such as a deck, patio, or sidewalk;
         (5)   The floor level outside the door may be one step lower than the
inside, but not more than 8 inches lower;
         (6)   The sliding door shall open to a clear open width of at least 28
inches;
         (7)   Before day-care use each day, the sliding door shall be unlocked
and tested to the full required width to be sure it is operating properly, and
the door shall be nonbinding and slide easily; and
         (8)   During periods of snow or freezing rain, door tracks shall be
cleared out and the door opened periodically throughout the day in order to
ensure proper operation."
   (49)   In section 16.6.2.3, strike "Reserved." and substitute:
      "Special means of escape requirements. For family day-care homes,
deadbolt locks shall be provided with approved interior latches, or these locks
shall be of a captured key design from which the key cannot be removed from the
interior side of the lock when the lock is in the locked position."
   (50)   In sections 16.6.2.4.5 and 17.5.2.4.5, strike item (3) in its
entirety.
   (51)   After section 17.1.1.9, insert:
      "17.1.1.10 Day-care centers providing day care for school-age children
before or after school hours in a building which is in use as a public or
private school are not required to meet the provisions of this chapter, but
shall meet the provisions for educational occupancies.".
   (52)   After section 17.2.11.1.1(3), insert:
      "(4)   For windows at grade, the minimum net clear opening shall be
permitted to be 5.0 square feet."
   (53)   In section 17.6.1.1.2, strike "more than 3, but", and after "12"
strike the comma.
   (54)   In section 17.6.1.4.1.1, strike "more than three, but", and strike
"seven," and substitute "nine".
   (55)   In section 17.6.1.4.1.2, strike "7" and substitute "9".
   (56)   In section, 17.6.1.7.1, strike "both" and substitute "all", and
strike items (1) and (2) in their entirety and substitute the following:
      "(1)   The minimum staff-to-client ratio shall be not less than one staff
for up to eight clients, including the caretaker's own children incapable of
self-preservation.
      (2)   There shall be not more than four clients incapable of self-
preservation, including the caretaker's own children incapable of self-
preservation.
      (3)   A staff-to-client ratio of at least one staff to every two clients
incapable of self-preservation shall be maintained at all times.
      (4)   The staff-to-client ratio shall be permitted to be modified by the
authority having jurisdiction where safeguards in addition to those specified
in this section are provided.".
   (57)   In section 17.6.2.1, after "24.2.", insert "Bulkhead doors may not
serve as a primary means of escape.".
   (58)   In section 17.6.2.2, strike "Reserved." and substitute:
      "Sliding door. For family day-care homes, a sliding door used as a
required means of escape shall comply with the following conditions:
         (1)   The sliding door shall have not more than one, easily operated,
locking device that does not require special knowledge, effort, or tools to
operate;
         (2)   There may not be draperies, screens, or storm doors that could
impede egress;
         (3)   The sill or track height may not exceed ½ inch above the
interior finish floor;
         (4)   The surface onto which exit is made shall be an all weather
surface such as a deck, patio, or sidewalk;
         (5)   The floor level outside the door may be one step lower than the
inside, but not more than 8 inches lower;
         (6)   The sliding door shall open to a clear open width of at least 28
inches;
         (7)   Before day-care use each day, the sliding door shall be unlocked
and tested to the full required width to be sure it is operating properly, and
the door shall be nonbinding and slide easily; and
         (8)   During periods of snow or freezing rain, door tracks shall be
cleared out and the door opened periodically throughout the day in order to
ensure proper operation."
   (59)   In section 17.6.2.3, strike "Reserved." and substitute:
      "Special means of escape requirements. For family day-care homes,
deadbolt locks shall be provided with approved interior latches, or these locks
shall be of a captured key design from which the key cannot be removed from the
interior side of the lock when the lock is in the locked position."
   (60)   At the end of 17.6.2.4.5(3), insert "(Bulkhead doors may not serve as
a primary means of escape.)".
   (61)   In section 17.6.3.4.5, strike "existing", and strike "battery" and
substitute "battery, and smoke alarm".
   (62)   In section 22.4.5.1.3, strike "or 22.4.5.1.5".
   (63)   In section 22.4.5.1.4, in subsection (1), strike "2 minutes" and
substitute "30 seconds", and in subsection (2), strike "2-minute" and
substitute "30-second".
   (64)   Strike section 22.4.5.1.5 in its entirety.
   (65)   Strike section 22.4.5.2 in its entirety.
   (66)   In section 23.4.5.1.3, strike "or 23.4.5.1.5".
   (67)   In section 23.4.5.1.4, in subsection (1), strike "2 minutes" and
substitute "30 seconds", and in subsection (2), strike "2-minute" and
substitute "30-second".
   (68)   Strike section 23.4.5.1.5 in its entirety.
   (69)   Strike section 23.4.5.2 in its entirety.
   (70)   In section 24.1.1.2, strike "three" and substitute "five", and strike
", if any, accommodated in rented rooms".
   (71)   In section 24.2.2.3.3, after "(0.53 m2)" insert ", or not less than
5.0 ft2 for grade floor windows".
   (72)   In section 26.1.1.1, after "buildings", insert "that do not qualify
as one- and two-family dwellings".
   (73)   After section 30.3.5.1, insert:
      "30.3.5.1.1 Sprinkler zone/address coordination. Apartment buildings
protected with sprinkler systems designed and installed in accordance with NFPA
13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, or NFPA13R, Standard
for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Low-Rise Residential Occupancies,
shall be zoned such that each entrance stairwell shall be served by a separate
sprinkler zone, regardless of fire separation between buildings or dwelling
units. Each entrance stairwell zone shall be identified by the appropriate
building address for monitoring and emergency forces notification purposes.".
   (74)   In section 32.2.2.3.1(3), after "(0.53 m2)", insert "or not less than
5 ft2 for grade floor windows".
   (75)   In section 33.2.2.3.1(3), after "(0.53 m2),", insert ", or not less
than 5.0 square feet for grade floor windows".
   (76)   In section 33.3.3.4.8.1, strike "33.3.3.4.8.2 and".
   (77)   Strike section 33.3.3.4.8.2 in its entirety.
   (78)   In section 38.2.4.4(3)(a), after "stories" insert "and have no
openings therein".
   (79)   In section 39.2.4.4(3)(a), after "stories" insert "and have no
openings therein".
   (80)   In Table 42.2.5, in the row under "Common Path of Travel, titled "Not
Protected Throughout By an Approved, Supervised Automatic Sprinkler System in
Accordance with 9.7.1.1(1)", strike "50" and substitute "75", and strike "15"
and substitute "23".
   (81)   In section 42.3.4.1.2, after "occupancies", insert "less than three
stories".
   (82)   In section 42.3.4.1.3, after "occupancies', insert "less than three
stories".
   (83)   In section 42.8.3.4.1.1, strike "parking structures" and substitute
"parking structures less than three stories.".
   (84)   In section 42.8.3.4.1.3, strike "parking structures" and substitute
"parking structures less than three stories.".
(Bill No. 75-13; Bill No. 95-20)
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND WELL CODE

   The provisions of the "Anne Arundel County Plumbing Code, 1993" are amended,
deleted, or corrected as follows and the following provisions shall supersede
the part of the text of the "Anne Arundel County Plumbing Code, 1993"
indicated:
   (1)   In section 1600, after "26.04.03.", insert:
      "Wherever a sewer main for public use exists in the road right of way of
any street or alley which directly adjoins or abuts a property within 50 feet,
or within 100 feet of a property in the critical area, the owner of all
buildings intended for human habitation, occupancy, or use shall connect any
new or substantially improved building or any existing system requiring repair
or replacement to the public sewer main except that, in the case of a repair or
replacement system, extension of the public sewer is not required.
      Repair defined. For purposes of this section, any alteration, change, or
addition to an existing septic system that requires a permit under section
106.6.2 of the Anne Arundel County Plumbing Code shall be considered a repair.
The repair or replacement of piping due to clogged or broken lines does not
constitute a repair.
      Substantial improvement defined. For purposes of this section,
substantial improvement shall have the meaning as defined in §
16-1-101 of the Anne Arundel County Code.
      Distance calculation. For purposes of this section, when determining and
calculating the 50 foot or 100 foot distance from the public sewer main to the
adjoining or abutting property, the measurement shall commence from the
terminus of the public sewer main and extend along the centerline of the road,
street, or alley containing the public sewer main and extend to the nearest
side property line of the subject parcel."
   (2)   In section 1600.1.e., strike "Or into a sand mound system".
   (3)   In section 1600.1.e., in the second sentence, strike "Underground" and
substitute "Conventional sewage" and strike "or sand mound" and strike
"innovative or alternative" and substitute "non- conventional".
   (4)   In section 1600.1.e., after "individual sewage disposal system.",
insert:
"It shall be the owner's responsibility to maintain a private sewage disposal
system as installed and to avoid creation of a public health nuisance."
   (5)   In section 1600.1.g., before "it", insert:
"No cesspool, septic tank, privy, or other means of private sewage disposal
shall be permitted wherever a sewer under public ownership adjoins the property
in question, and each and every existing cesspool, privy, or other means of
private sewage disposal must be eliminated and abandoned."
   (6)   In section 1600.1.h, after "code.", insert:
"The adequacy of the sewage disposal system shall be determined based on soil
permeability rate, amount of usable soils, water table depth, use of the
property and maximum sewage flow as outlined in this Code."
   (7)   In section 1600.1.i, after the first sentence, insert:
"Onsite sewage disposal systems serving existing structures for which
additions, alterations, or changes in use are proposed shall be determined by
the approving authority to be capable of handling existing and foreseeable
increases in sewage flow based on the provisions of this Code."
   (8)   In section 1600.1.i.(iii), after "all", insert "Existing and proposed"
and, after "systems", insert "on the property and" and, after "line.", insert
"replacement of existing wells may be required if necessary to identify an area
for sewage disposal and future replacement systems."
   (9)   In section 1600.1.i.(v), after "system and", strike "replacements" and
substitute "future replacement areas".
   (10)   In section 1600.1.k., after "chapter", insert:
"The approving authority may adopt minimum standards for the design and
construction of private sewage disposal systems in the implementation of this
Code."
   (11)   In section 1600.1.l., in the first sentence, after "chapter", insert
"And the 2003 International Plumbing Code", and strike "Chapter III of this
Code" and substitute "the 2003 International Plumbing Code" and strike the last
sentence in its entirety.
   (12)   In section 1600.1.m., after "installation of", insert:
"Conventional speculative and".
   (13)   After section 1600.1.n., insert:
"O.   The separation to the ground water shall be maximized for the
installation of a private sewage disposal system and shallow system designs
shall be required where feasible."
   (14)   In section 1600.2.c.(iv) strike "Inspected and given final written"
and in the second sentence, after "approving authority", insert "has been
granted".
   (15)   In section 1600.3.3, after "swimming pool", insert "Or water
treatment equipment" and, in the second sentence, after "system.", insert
"separate sewage disposal systems may be required for backwash effluent from
water conditioning equipment where water quality or wastewater flows may
adversely impact a new or existing sewage disposal system. Existing disposal
systems may be used as a means of sewage disposal for backwash effluent from
water treatment equipment where systems are found in compliance with the
provisions of this Code."
   (16)   Strike section 1600.3.6 in its entirety and substitute:
"Table 1600.3.6 establishes the minimum design criteria for determining sewage
flows according to type of establishment."
   (17)   Strike table 1600.3.6 in its entirety and substitute:
"Table 1600.3.6
Wastewater flow criteria for designing large onsite sewage disposal systems
Wastewater flows shall be determined based on the square footage of the
building and the existing or proposed use. All uses shall be considered in
determining wastewater flows.
Establishment GPD* per unit
Establishment                              GPD* per unit
Airport
   Per employee                         15
   Per passenger                        5
   (Add for food service facility)
Animal shelter/kennels
   Per run                              25
   Add per employee/shift               15
Banks                                      .04 **
Beauty/barber shops
   Per station                          350
Bowling alley
   Per employee                         15
   Per lane, no bar/food                75
   Per lane, bar only                   125
   Per lane, bar and food               200
Car wash                                   Per equipment specs
Community colleges
   Per employee and student             15
   (Add for food service)
Church/assembly hall
   Per seat                             3
   (Add for food service)
Country club
   Per resident member per room         100
   Per nonresident                      25
Department store                           .04 **
   With lunch counter                   .08 **
Dinner theater                             20/seat
Dance hall/night club                      5/seat
   (add for food service)
Day care
   Family                               20/child
   Group                                25/child
Dentist office
   Per chair                            450
   Low water use equipment              .09 **
Drive in theater
   Per car space                        5
   Drug stores                          .13**
Dry goods store                            .05 **
Factory (manufacturing plant)
   Per employee/per shift               15
   Add for showers per employee         10
Fairground
   Per person                           5
Golf course (public)
   Per 18 holes                         3500
Homes for the aged                         100/bed
Hospital                                   350/bed
Laundry (coin operated)
   Per machine/per 24 hours             400
Marinas
   Per slip, < 25 feet                  10
   Per slip, 25-35 feet                 25
   Per slip, > 35 feet                  75
   Boatels (per slip/space) divide by 3 15
   Pump out station (per slip)          35
   (Storage volume only)
Medical office building                    .62 **
Mobile home parks
   Per lot, minimum                     300
Motel or hotel
   Per unit (no food, no kitchen)       125
   Per unit (with food/kitchen/efficienc200
Nursing home                               200/bed
Office buildings                           .09 **
Parks
   Per person (with toilets provided)   10
   Add for showers                      10
   Visitor center per parking space     45
Prison/jail
   Per bed space                        125
   Per employee/shift                   15
Residential apartments or condominiums     150/bedroom
Rooming/boarding                           75/bedroom
Restaurants/food service
   24-hour operation or fast food       75/seat
   Interstate/major highway             150/seat
   12-hour operation                    50/seat
   Bar/tavern/pub                       25/seat
   Banquet rooms                        5/seat
   Carryout service                     600
   Deli/convenience store               600
Retail stores                              .05 **
Schools (per student)
   No food or showers                   15
   Add for food                         5
   Add for showers                      10
   Boarding                             100
Service stations                           .18 **
State highway rest area (mini station)     2000
Shopping centers                           .18 **
Spas/saunas/jacuzzi                        20% of volume
Sports arena                               5/seat
   (Add for food service)
Supermarkets                               .02**
Swimming pools
   Per swimmer                          10
   Per employee                         15
Theater/arena
   Per seat, no food                    5
   (Add for food service)
Travel trailer park/camps
   Per space                            150
   Per space with sewer/service building175
   Children's camp                      50/person
   Labor camp                           50/person
   Luxury camp                          100/person
   Day camp (no meals)                  15/person
Warehouse                                  .03 **
 
*Gallons per day
**Gallons per day per square foot
   (18)   In table 1600.4.3, after "drainfield", insert "**" and after "dry
well" insert "*" and after "storm drain" insert "***" and at the bottom of the
table insert:
"* Drywells must be separated from each other by a distance of three times the
diameter of the well edge to edge. Thus an 8-foot well would have a separation
of 24 feet from its neighbor.
** Standard drainfield trenches are 3 feet wide and are separated one from the
another by 9 feet. All drainfield trenches are of equal length. No trench may
exceed 100 feet. The approving authority will stipulate separation between deep
drainfield trenches.
*** For storm drainage facilities other than those incorporating solid conduits
(i.e., swales, storm water infiltration pits, and the like) a 25-foot minimum
distance is required. Areas with a slope of greater than 25% cannot be utilized
for individual sewage disposal system."
   (19)   In section 1600.5.1.c., strike "systems" and substitute "and
conventional alternative systems".
   (20)   In section 1600.5.1.f, in the second sentence, after "groundwater",
insert "or where seasonal fluctuations occur".
   (21)   In table 1600.5.4, strike "3.12" and substitute "1.56", strike "2.5"
and substitute "1.25", strike "2.22" and substitute "1.11", strike "2.0" and
substitute "1.0", strike "1.78" and substitute ".89", strike "1.58" and
substitute ".79", strike "1.54" and substitute ".77", strike "1.38" and
substitute ".69", strike "1.34" and substitute ".67", strike "1.18" and
substitute ".59", strike "1.10" and substitute ".55", strike "1.84" and
substitute ".52", strike ".96" and substitute ".49", strike ".92" and
substitute ".46", strike ".72" and substitute ".36", and strike ".60" and
substitute ".30".
   (22)   In 1600.6.1, strike "1600.3.7" and substitute "1600.3.6".
   (23)   In the footnote to table 1600.6.2, strike ", 6 inches".
   (24)   In section 1600.6.4, in the first sentence, after "tanks", insert:
"Including concrete, plastic, and fiberglass" and strike "submitted to" and
substitute "approved by" and strike "for approval" and substitute "prior to
installation".
   (25)   In section 1600.6.4, in the third sentence, after "septic tanks shall
be", insert "watertight and", and strike "sound durable" and ", not subject"
and after "to" insert "prevent" and strike "and shall be water tight".
   (26)   In section 1600.6.4., in the fifth sentence, strike "approved" and
"as submitted and".
   (27)   In section 1600.6.4, strike the seventh and eight sentences in their
entirety and substitute:
"Every septic tank must be a two-compartment tank with a top construction seam.
There shall be no less than 2 inches between the invert inlet pipe and the
invert outlet pipe."
   (28)   In section 1600.6.6 a., in the first and second sentences, strike
"baffles" and substitute "tees" and in the third sentence strike "when" and
strike "are used in the place of baffles, they".
   (29)   In section 1600.6.6 b., after the second sentence, insert:
"Manholes not extended to grade must have a pipe at ground surface marking the
location of the manhole lid. Manholes extending above the ground surface shall
be designed in a manner acceptable to the approving authority."
   (30)   In section 1600.6.6 c., strike "3" and substitute "4 or an equivalent
design acceptable to the approving authority".
   (31)   Strike section 1600.6.6 i. In its entirety.
   (32)   In section 1600.6.6 j., strike "neoprene".
   (33)   In section 1606.6, after subsection l., insert:
"m.   The internal wall must contain a slot of a minimum height of 2 inches and
be located in the center of the liquid depth of the septic tank and shall
extend 4 feet in length."
   (34)   After section 1600.6.8, insert:
"1600.6.9 Holding tanks
Sewage holding tanks may be used to resolve existing onsite sewage disposal
system failures when community sewer facilities are not available and an onsite
repair is not possible.
a.   Holding tanks must be of watertight construction and installed in such a
manner as to minimize their potential for being impacted by ground or surface
water. Where ground and surface waters exist, additional sealing methods for
holding tanks, joints, or pipe connections may be required as necessary by the
approving authority.
b.   Holding tanks must be sized to accommodate 7 days of sewage flow. Larger
holding tank capacities may be required when such use, flow or additional
capacities are needed to maintain sanitary conditions.
c.   The minimum capacity of a holding tank system serving a single residential
dwelling shall be no less than 3,000 gallons.
d.   Two or more holding tanks may be connected in series to reach the required
storage capacity needed for existing use.
e.   Holding tanks shall be equipped with a high water level alarm and shall
provide an audible or visual signal and be installed in or on the building
structure served by the holding tank system. The floats or other devices for
the alarm shall be designed to activate when a minimum holding capacity
equivalent to a 24-hour sewage flow is reached.
f.   Each compartment of a holding tank system must have a manhole constructed
to grade to allow access for system maintenance."
   (35)   In section 1600.10, in the second line, strike "will" and substitute
"shall" and, after "followed:", insert "a. Grease interceptors shall be
required for all food establishments where food preparation, food processing,
or waste from food operations occur." and strike "a." and substitute "b."
   (36)   In section 1600.10 b., strike "b." and substitute "c." and strike "
(metal or concrete)" and strike "approved" and strike "submitted to and" and,
after "authority", insert "interior grease recovery units and metal grease
interceptors shall not be permitted for use."
   (37)   In section 1600.10 c., strike "c." and substitute "d." and strike
"30" and substitute "500".
   (38)   In section 1600.12, in the title, strike ": sand filters" and
substitute "and non-conventional systems" and, in the first sentence, strike
"sand filter and innovative/alternative" and substitute "non- conventional".
   (39)   In section 1600.13 b., after "application.", insert:
"The pump pit must be located after the septic tank and only septic tank
effluent shall enter the pump pit unless otherwise authorized by the approving
authority."
   (40)   In section 1600.13 c., after "grade", insert "with a 20-inch minimum
manhole" and, after "sufficient", insert "for the existing or proposed use.
Concrete components must have their only construction seam located above the
inlet to the pump."
   (41)   After section 1600.13 g., insert:
"h.   All pump pits serving nonresidential uses must have duplex pumping
equipment."
   (42)   In section 1700.1 a., in the second sentence, after "chapter.",
insert:
"The approving authority may adopt minimum standards for potable water supply
and distribution systems in the implementation of this Code."
   (43)   In section 1700.1 b., strike "regulations of the Maryland State Board
of Health And Mental Hygiene" and substitute "COMAR, 26.04.04".
   (44)   After section 1700.1 c., insert:
"d.   When the approving authority finds there to be insufficient lot area or
yield for an adequate potable water supply system for the building or land use
proposed, no building permit shall be issued and no potable water supply system
shall be permitted. Potable water supply systems serving existing structures
for which additions, alterations, or a change in use is proposed, shall be
determined by the approving authority as structurally adequate, potable, and
capable of handling existing and foreseeable increases in water demand. A
susceptibility analysis to existing or potential sources of contamination and
additional water quality tests may be required at the discretion of the
approving authority. Before a building permit is issued, site plans
satisfactory to the approving authority must be submitted and approved.
The required site plan must contain the following:
1.   detailed plans showing the location of the proposed structure to be served
by the potable water supply system, and any existing or proposed structure
within 30 feet of the property line.
2.   Location of all existing and proposed wells and water lines on the
property and within 100 feet of the property line.
3.   Location of all existing and proposed septic systems, building sewer
lines, and public sewer facilities on the property and within 100 feet of the
property line.
e.   A minimum separation of 30 feet must be maintained between a proposed
structure and an existing water supply well."
   (45)   Strike sections 1700.2, 1700.2.1., 1700.2.2, 1700.2.3, 1700.2.4,
1700.3, 1700.4.1, 1700.4.2, and 1700.4.5 in their entirety.
   (46)   In section 1700.5.1 (f), strike "as required in subsection 1003.2.3".
   (47)   Renumber section 1700.6 to be 1700.2.
   (48)   Strike section 1700.7 in its entirety.
   (49)   Renumber section 1700.8 to be 1700.3.
   (50)   Strike sections 1700.9, 1700.9.1, 1700.9.2, 1700.9.3, 1700.9.4,
1700.9.4.1, 1700.9.4.2, 1700.9.4.3, 1700.10, 1700.11, 1700.12, and 1700.13 in
their entirety.
   (51)   Renumber sections 1700.14, 1700.15, and 1700.16 to be sections
1700.4, 1700.6, and 1700.7, respectively.
   (52)   After section 1700.7, insert:
"1700.8 Connection to public water system required
1700.8.1 Where required
a.   Wherever a water main for public use exists in any street or alley and is
within 50 feet of a property, the owner of all buildings intended for human
habitation, occupancy, or use shall connect to the public water main."
b.   Where an adequate public water system exists within 300 feet of an
existing lot of record and is located within a water quality problem area as
designated in the Anne Arundel County Master Plan for water supply and sewerage
systems, connection shall be made to the public water system.
c.   No well for potable use shall be constructed on a property accessible to
an adequate public water supply.
1700.9 Private wells to be abandoned
Wherever a replacement well is installed, it shall be the owner's
responsibility to abandon and seal a previously existing water supply in a
manner satisfactory to the approving authority.
1700.10 Potability requirements
Any well intended to serve a building for human use or habitation shall meet
the potability requirements of COMAR, 26.04.01 and 26.04.04, prior to
occupancy."
(1985 Code, Art. 20, § 6-302) (Bill No. 46-03; Bill No. 27-12)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE AMENDMENTS
   The provisions of the 2003 International Property Maintenance Code are
amended, deleted, or corrected as follows and the following provisions shall
supersede the part of the text of the 2003 International Property Maintenance
Code as indicated:
   (1)   In section 101.1, insert "Anne Arundel County, Maryland," in the space
indicated.
   (2)   In section 101.2, in line 2, strike "and nonresidential" and, in line
6, strike "fire and".
   (3)   In section 101.3, strike "International Existing Building Code"" and
substitute "Anne Arundel County Building Code".
   (4)   In section 102.3, strike "International Existing Building Code" and
substitute "Anne Arundel County Building Code" and strike "International Zoning
Code" and substitute "Anne Arundel County Zoning Code".
   (5)   Strike section 102.6 in its entirety.
   (6)   Strike section 102.7 in its entirety.
   (7)   Strike section 103.1 in its entirety and substitute:
"103.1 General. This Code shall be administered by the Health Department and,
for purposes of administering this Code, the Health Officer shall be known as
the Code Official."
   (8)   Strike section 103.2 in its entirety.
   (9)   Strike 103.3 in its entirety.
   (10)   Strike section 103.5 in its entirety.
   (11)   Strike section 104.2 in its entirety and substitute:
"104.2 Rule-making authority. The Health Officer shall have authority as
necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to
adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; to interpret and implement the
provisions of this Code; and to collect and disseminate information concerning
techniques of maintenance, repair, and sanitation in housing and concerning the
requirements of this title."
   (12)   Strike section 104.4 in its entirety.
   (13)   Strike section 104.7 in its entirety.
   (14)   Strike section 105 in its entirety.
   (15)   Strike section 106 in its entirety.
   (16)   Strike section 107 in its entirety.
   (17)   In section 108.1 in the first line, strike "or equipment".
   (18)   In section 108.1.1, strike "to protect or warn occupant in the event
of fire".
   (19)   Strike section 108.1.2 in its entirety.
   (20)   In section 108.1.4, strike "occupied by more persons than permitted
under this Code, or was".
   (21)   In section 108.2, in lines 2 and 3, strike "post a placard of
condemnation on the premises and"; in line 5, strike "so as not to be an
attractive nuisance"; and, in line 9, after "persons", strike "and the cost
thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any
other legal resource".
   (22)   In section 108.3, in line 2, strike "or equipment" and in line 5,
strike from "or" through the end of the section.
   (23)   Strike section 108.4 in its entirety.
   (24)   Strike section 108.5 in its entirety.
   (25)   Strike section 109 in its entirety.
   (26)   Strike section 110 in its entirety.
   (27)   Strike section 111 in its entirety.
   (28)   In section 201.3, strike all "International" code references and
substitute "Anne Arundel County Code".
   (29)   In section 202, strike the definition of "dwelling unit"and
substitute:
"Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities
for at least one person, including permanent provisions for sanitation,
cooking, eating, sleeping, and other activities associated with daily life. A
dwelling unit does not include a tent, trailer, recreational vehicle, mobile
manufactured home, truck body, camper, boat, or other enclosure or structure
used for human shelter that is designed to be transportable ."
   (30)   In section 202, strike the definition of "garbage" in its entirety.
   (31)   In section 202, insert:
"Multiple dwelling. A structure containing more than two dwelling units or a
non-owner occupied dwelling containing two or more dwelling units."
   (32)   In section 301.2, at the end of the second sentence, insert "and with
applicable State and County law."
   (33)   Strike section 302.4 in its entirety.
   (34)   Strike section 302.8 in its entirety.
   (35)   Strike section 302.9 in its entirety.
   (36)   Strike section 303.2 in its entirety.
   (37)   Strike section 304.3 in its entirety.
   (38)   Strike section 304.4 in its entirety.
   (39)   Strike section 304.8 in its entirety.
   (40)   Strike section 304.9 in its entirety.
   (41)   In section 304.10, strike "structurally sound" and strike ", with
proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads".
   (42)   Strike section 304.11 in its entirety.
   (43)   In section 304.14, strike "during the period from [date] to [date],"
and strike "food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where
products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged or stored," and strike the exception in its
entirety.
   (44)   Strike section 304.15 in its entirety and substitute:
"304.15 Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies, and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. All doors shall have minimum headroom of 6 1/
2 feet and shall have an approved means of egress leading to safe and open
space at ground level. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units
and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door."
   (45)   Strike section 304.18.1 in its entirety.
   (46)   Strike section 304.18.2 in its entirety.
   (47)   Strike section 304.18.3 in its entirety.
   (48)   In section 305.1 in the sixth sentence, after "dormitory,", insert
"or" and, in the next line, strike "or two or more nonresidential occupancies".
   (49)   Strike section 305.2 in its entirety.
   (50)   After section 305.6, insert:
"305.7 Bed linens. The operator of each rooming house shall change supplied bed
linen and towels in the rooming house at least once a week and before the
letting of a room to an occupant and maintain supplied bedding in a clean and
sanitary manner.
305.8 Smoke alarms. Smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained:
         1.   Outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of
the bedrooms and
         2.   In each room used for sleeping purposes; and
         3.   On each additional story of the dwelling, including basements but
not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics."
   (51)   Strike section 307.3.1 in its entirety and substitute:
"307.3.1 Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply a
sufficient number of leakproof, covered, outside garbage containers."
   (52)   Strike section 307.3.2 in its entirety.
   (53)   Strike section 308.4 and substitute:
"308.4 Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more
dwelling units or a rooming house shall be responsible for extermination in the
public or shared areas of the property."
   (54)   After section 308.5 insert:
"308.6 Prevention. Each dwelling, multiple dwelling, rooming house, or
accessory structure and each premises shall be maintained in a manner that will
prevent and eliminate pest, insect and rodent harborage or infestation."
   (55)   In section 401.3, strike "International Building Code" and substitute
"Anne Arundel County Building Code".
   (56)   In section 402.2, strike the last sentence.
   (57)   In section 403.3 strike "unless approved through the certificate of
occupancy,".
   (58)   In section 403.5, strike "manufacturer's instructions" and substitute
"Anne Arundel County Building Code".
   (59)   Strike section 404.5 in its entirety.
   (60)   After section 404.7, insert:
"404.8 Floor surface. Every kitchen and food preparation floor shall be
maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to
be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition."
   (61)   Strike section 502.3 in its entirety.
   (62)   Strike section 502.4 in its entirety.
   (63)   Strike section 503.3 in its entirety.
   (64)   In section 505.1, strike "International Plumbing Code" and substitute
"Anne Arundel County Plumbing Code".
   (65)   In section 506.1, after "an approved" insert "properly functioning".
   (66)   Strike section 507.1 in its entirety.
   (67)   In section 602.2, strike "based on the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the International
Plumbing Code".
   (68)   Strike section 602.3 in its entirety and substitute:
"602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases
or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming units, dormitories or guestrooms on
terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof
shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65ºF (18ºC) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms."
   (69)   Strike section 602.4 in its entirety.
   (70)   In section 604.2, strike "ICC Electrical Code" and substitute the
"Anne Arundel County Electrical Code".
   (71)   Strike Chapter 7 in its entirety.
   (72)   Strike Chapter 8 in its entirety.
REFERENCE TABLE

This table shows the location of State Law references, 1985 Code Sections, and
Bills contained in the Construction and Property Maintenance Codes Supplement.
State Law Cite Location
State Law Cite            Location
Commercial Law Article
§14-1310                 Fire Prevention Code (57)
Natural Resources Article
§ 8-1808(c)(4)        Construction Code Administrative Provisions
Public Safety Article
§ 10-101                 Fire Prevention Code (14)
§ 10-204(a)              Fire Prevention Code (119)
COMAR
09.12.53                  International Building Code Amendments (13)
10.17.01                  Plumbing Code Amendments (11)
10.17.01.28               International Building Code Amendments (25)
26.04.01                  Private Sewage Disposal and Well Code (52)
26.04.03                  Private Sewage Disposal and Well Code (1)
26.04.04                  Private Sewage Disposal and Well Code (43), (52)
26.04.04.11               Plumbing Code Amendments (5)
29.06.01.07               Fire Prevention Code (24)
29.06.01.08               Fire Prevention Code (24)
29.06.01.09               Fire Prevention Code (24)
29.06.01.14B.             Fire Prevention Code (57)
29.06.05                  Fire Prevention Code (64)
29.06.07                  Fire Prevention Code (121)
 
 
1985 Code Section Disposition
Art. 20, § 6-302 Private Sewage Disposal and Well Code
 
Bill Number Disposition
Bill Number Disposition
46-03       Private Sewage Disposal and Well Code
68-06       Property Maintenance Code
            Construction Code,
            International Building Code Amendments,
1-12        International Residential Code Amendments, Energy Conservation Code
            Amendments, Electrical Code Amendments, Fuel Gas Code Amendments,
            Mechanical Code Amendments, Plumbing Code Amendments
27-12       Private Sewage Disposal and Well Code
65-12       Construction Code
10-13       Construction Code,
            International Residential Code Amendments
75-13       Fire Prevention Code Amendments
103-13      Electrical Code Amendments
83-14       Construction Code
20-15       Construction Code
            Construction Code,
            International Building Code Amendments,
            International Residential Code Amendments, Energy Conservation Code
123-15      Amendments,
            International Existing Building Code Amendments, Electrical Code
            Amendments, Fuel Gas Code Amendments, Mechanical Code Amendments,
            Plumbing Code Amendments
10-16       Construction Code
51-16       Construction Code
66-16       Construction Code
15-17       Construction Code
19-17       Construction Code
23-17       Construction Code
67-17       Construction Code
20-18       Fire Prevention Code Amendments
91-18       Construction Code
            Construction Code,
            International Building Code,
            International Residential Code,
            International Energy Conservation Code,
60-20       International Existing Building Code,
            National Electrical Code,
            International Fuel Gas Code,
            International Mechanical Code,
            International Plumbing Code,
            International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
95-20       Fire Prevention Code Amendments
8-21        Construction Code
14-21       Construction Code
61-23       Construction Code
63-23       Construction Code
76-23       Construction Code
            Construction Code,
            International Building Code,
            International Residential Code,
            International Energy Conservation Code,
25-24       National Electrical Code,
            International Fuel Gas Code,
            International Mechanical Code,
            International Plumbing Code,
            International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
44-24       Construction Code
29-25       Construction Code
            
 
ARTICLE 16. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL, AND STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT
   Title
      
1.   DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
3.   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
      
4.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
5.   VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES
TITLE 1. DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
16-1-101.   Definitions.
   
16-1-102.   Scope.
   
16-1-103.   Conflict of laws.
   
16-1-104.   Compliance with other law.
   
16-1-105.   Federal and State permits.
   
16-1-106.   Right of entry.
   
16-1-107.   Liability for damages.
   
16-1-108.   Unit prices.
   
16-1-109.   Denial of permits after notice of violation.
   
16-1-110.   Coal tar pavement productProhibition.
§ 16-1-101. Definitions.
   In this article, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Accessory" has the meaning stated in
Article 18 of this Code.
      (2)   "Adequate outfall" means an outfall that has adequate capacity and
stability as determined in the County Procedures Manual.
      (3)   "Administration" for the purpose of
Title 4 means the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), Water
Management Administration (WMA).
      (4)   "Administrative waiver" for the purpose of
Title 4 means a decision by the Anne Arundel County Office of Planning and
Zoning to allow construction of a development to be governed by the stormwater
management document in effect as of May 4, 2009, and is distinct from a
modification granted pursuant to this article or
Article 17 of this Code.
      (5)   "Agricultural land management practices" means those methods and
procedures used in the cultivation of land in order to further crop and
livestock production and conservation of related soil and water resources.
Import and export of fill material, logging and timber removal operations, or
the conversion of forest to pasture or cropland are not part of this
definition.
      (6)   "As-built plan" means a plan drawn to the same scale as the
approved plans which shows that the location, dimensions, elevations, and
status of the resulting grading, drainage structures, drainage systems, and
erosion and sediment control practices are in substantial conformance with the
previously approved plans, noting any substantial deviations.
      (7)   "Basement" means that portion of a structure having its lowest
floor below ground or grade elevation on all four sides.
      (8)   "Best management practice (BMP)" has the meaning stated in COMAR
26.17.02.02.
      (9)   "Buffer management plan" has the meaning stated in
Article 17 of this Code.
      (10)   "Certificate of occupancy" means an official form issued by the
Director certifying that a structure has been built in accordance with approved
plans and providing that the structure may be inhabited or used for the
intended purpose.
      (11)   "Certification" means a statement signed and sealed by a design
professional that specific construction, inspections, or tests have been
performed and that they comply with the applicable requirements of this
article.
      (12)   "Channel protection storage volume (CPv)" has the meaning stated
in COMAR 26.17.02.02.
      (13)   "Clearing" has the meaning stated in
Article 17 of this Code.
      (14)   "Concept plan" has the same meaning as COMAR 26.17.02.02.
      (15)   "County Procedures Manual" means the Anne Arundel County
Stormwater Management Practices and Procedures Manual.
      (16)   "Critical area" has the meaning stated in
Article 18 of this Code.
      (17)   "Department" means the Department of Inspections and Permits.
      (18)   "Design Manual" has the meaning stated in COMAR 26.17.02.02.
      (19)   "Design professional" means a professional engineer, professional
land surveyor, or professional landscape architect licensed by the State.
      (20)   "Developed woodlands" has the meaning stated in
Article 17 of this Code.
      (21)   "Developer" has the meaning stated in COMAR 26.04.03.01-1.
      (22)   "Development" has the meaning stated in
Article 17 of this Code, except that as used in Title 1 and Title 2 of this
article, "development" also includes farming, gardening, yard maintenance, and
storage of equipment or materials..
      (23)   "Direct discharge" has the meaning stated in COMAR 26.17.02.02.
      (24)   "Director" means the Director of the Department of Inspections and
Permits or the Director's designee.
      (25)   "Disturbance" has the meaning stated in
Article 17 of this Code.
      (26)   "DPW Design Manual" means the Department of Public Works Design
Manual and the Standards and Specifications for Construction.
      (27)   "Drainage area" has the meaning stated in COMAR 26.17.02.02.
      (28)   "Easement" has the meaning stated in
Article 17 of this Code.
      (29)   "Elevation certificate" means an official FEMA form used to
certify the elevation of a structure that is prepared by a design professional
authorized to certify elevations.
      (30)   "Environmental site design (ESD)" has the meaning stated in COMAR
26.17.02.02.
      (31)   "Erosion" has the meaning stated in COMAR 26.17.01.01.
      (32)   "Estimated cost" means the total cost estimated by the Department
based on unit prices adopted by the Director.
      (33)   "Exemption" means those land development activities that are not
subject to the stormwater management requirements contained in Title 4 of this
article.
      (34)   "Extreme flood volume (Qf)" has the meaning stated in COMAR
26.17.02.02.
      (35)   "Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)" means the federal
agency responsible for floodplain management.
      (36)   "Fill" means a deposit of soil, rock, or other materials placed by
humans.
      (37)   "Final stormwater management plan" has the meaning stated in COMAR
26.17.02.02.
      (38)   "Flood" means a temporary inundation of normally dry land.
      (39)   "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to Anne Arundel
County.
      (40)   "Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map,
the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, the water surface elevations of the base
flood, and supporting technical data.
      (41)   "Flooding" means stormwater runoff from a natural or human-made
stormwater runoff conveyance system that inundates an existing structure or
that overflows onto land that lies outside of floodplain easements, drainage
easements, or areas shown on federal insurance rate maps as flood-prone areas.
      (42)   "Floodplain" means an area that after total development of the
watershed in accordance with applicable zoning would be inundated by water from
any source as determined by the County Procedures Manual.
      (43)   "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural or
nonstructural changes, adjustments, or actions, which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to a structure, contents, utilities, and equipment.
      (44)   "Floodproofing certificate" means an official FEMA form prepared
by a design professional and used to certify that a nonresidential structure
has been designed and constructed to be floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
      (45)   "Flood protection elevation" means the elevation of the 100-year
flood plus one foot freeboard.
      (46)   "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-
year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot in height.
      (47)   "Forest" has the meaning stated in
Article 17 of this Code.
      (48)   "Forest management plan" has the meaning stated in
Article 17 of this Code.
      (49)   "Freeboard" means an additional height used as a factor of safety
in determining the elevation of a structure or floodproofing to compensate for
factors that may increase the flood heights.
      (50)   "Grading" means to cause the disturbance of the earth, and the
term includes clearing, excavating, filling, including hydraulic fill,
stockpiling of earth materials, grubbing, rootmat or top soil disturbance, or a
combination of any of these operations, including logging and timber removal
operations.
      (51)    "Grading permit" means a permit issued to authorize grading to be
performed in accordance with this article.
      (52)   "Grading unit" means the maximum contiguous area allowed to be
disturbed at any one time and may not exceed 20 acres.
      (53)   "Highly erodible soils" has the meaning stated in
Article 17 of this Code.
      (54)   "Historic structure" means a structure that is listed on the
Maryland Inventory of Historic Properties, the National Register of Historic
Places, or the National Historic Landmarks, except that as used in
Title 1 and
Title 2 of this article, "historic structure" means a structure that is listed
on the Maryland Register of Historic Properties, the National Register of
Historic Places, or the National Historic Landmarks.
      (55)   "Impervious surface" means a human-made surface through which
water does not penetrate, including hot bituminous asphaltic pavement, cold mix
asphaltic pavement, compacted gravel surfacing, and portland cement concrete
used for roads, sidewalks, driveways, curb and gutter, patios, porches,
swimming pools, tennis courts, parking areas, and principal and accessory
structure coverage areas but does not include surfaces covered by pervious
concrete.
      (56)   "Individual lot development" means development on a site for which
subdivision approval is not required.
      (57)   "Infiltration" means the passage or movement of water into the
soil surface.
      (58)   "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
including basements, except that an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure
used solely for parking, building access, or storage may not be considered the
lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements.
      (59)   "Manufactured home" means a structure transportable in one or more
sections that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and the term includes manufactured homes, trailers, and other
similar vehicles placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
      (60)   "Maximum extent practicable (MEP)" has the meaning stated in COMAR
26.17.02.02.
      (61)   "Mean high-water line" has the meaning stated in
Article 18 of this Code.
      (62)   "New construction" means structures for which construction
commenced on or after May 2, 1983.
      (63)   "New development" means development on a site where subdivision,
site development plan, or permit approval is required.
      (64)   “Nonstructural stormwater management practice” means those
practices set forth in COMAR 26.17.02.08B.
      (65)   "Offsite stormwater management" means the design and construction
of a facility necessary to control stormwater from more than one development
site.
      (66)   "One-hundred year flood" means a flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in a given year.
      (67)   "Onsite stormwater management" means the design and construction
of systems necessary to control stormwater within an immediate development
site.
      (68)   "Outfall" means the point at which a proposed stormwater
conveyance system carrying stormwater runoff from a site discharges into an
existing stormwater conveyance system.
      (69)   "Overbank flood protection volume (Qp)" has the meaning stated in
COMAR 26.17.02.02.
      (70)   "Planning and Zoning Officer" means the Planning and Zoning
Officer or the Officer's designee.
      (71)   "Planning techniques" has the meaning stated in COMAR 26.17.02.02.
      (72)   "Point of investigation" means the point located downstream from a
site discharge where the post-development runoff is less than or equal to 10 %
of the total runoff to that point. All runoff computations shall be based on
the 10-year storm, curve number and time of concentration based on ultimate
development and no peak management for the total runoff to that point.
      (73)   "Private stormwater management" means the ESD planning techniques,
treatment practices, and structural stormwater measures used to satisfy the
minimum control requirements of
Title 4 of this article that are not considered public stormwater management.
      (74)   "Public stormwater management" means the ESD planning techniques,
treatment practices, and structural stormwater measures used to satisfy the
Minimum Control requirements of
Title 4 of this article for projects where the stormwater management system is
owned or maintained by the Department of Public Works, the Department of
Recreation and Parks, the Department of Central Services, or any other County
agency or department.
      (75)   "Recharge volume (REv)" has the meaning stated in COMAR
26.17.02.02.
      (76)   "Redevelopment" has the meaning stated in COMAR 26.17.02.02.
      (77)   "Regenerative step pool conveyance system" has the meaning stated
in the County Procedures Manual.
      (78)   “Responsible personnel” has the meaning stated in COMAR
26.17.01.01.
      (79)   “Retrofitting” has the meaning stated in COMAR 26.17.02.02.
      (80)   “Sediment” has the meaning stated in COMAR 26.17.01.01.
      (81)   “Site” has the meaning stated in COMAR 26.17.02.02.
      (82)   “Site improvement” means storm drains, roads, curbs and gutters,
concrete work, stabilization, stormwater management facilities, and other
structural improvements.
      (83)   “Slope” means an inclined surface of a fill, excavation, or
natural terrain.
      (84)   “Stabilization” means the prevention of soil movement by
vegetative or structural means.
      (85)   “Standard grading plan” means a plan that may be used in lieu of a
grading permit only for certain minor grading and earth disturbance associated
with minor commercial and residential construction, and, if necessary, may
include soil and erosion control plans.
      (86)   “Steep slope” has the meaning stated in
Article 17.
      (87)   “Stormwater” has the meaning stated in COMAR 26.17.02.02.
      (88)   “Stormwater management system” has the meaning stated in COMAR
26.17.02.02.
      (89)   “Stormwater management site development plan” has the same meaning
as “site development plan” as defined in COMAR 27.17.02.02.
      (90)   “Structural stormwater management practice” means those practices
set forth in COMAR 26.17.02.08C.
      (91)   “Structure” has the meaning stated in
Article 18 of this Code.
      (92)   “Subdivision” has the meaning stated in
Article 17 of this Code.
      (93)   “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or other improvement to a structure other than an
historic structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the State’s
assessed value of the structure or, an appraisal performed by a professional
real estate appraiser of the market value of the structure (less land value)
before commencement of the reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred, but the term does not include the minimum repairs needed
to correct violations of State or County health, safety, or sanitary codes.
      (94)   “Tributary streams” has the meaning stated in
Article 17.
      (95)   (i)   “Water quality improvement project” means a project that is:
            (1)   designed to reduce pollutants to local waterways, including a
stream or wetland restoration project or stormwater outfall enhancement
project; and
            (2)   implemented to meet the water quality goals associated with
the County’s national pollutant discharge elimination system municipal separate
storm sewer system permit or Chesapeake Bay total maximum daily load.
         (ii)   “Water quality improvement project” does not include stormwater
management required for development under Article 17 of this Code, except for
an element of a project that corrects pre-existing site and downstream
deficiencies, such as unstable stormwater outfall points and conveyances.
      (96)   “Water quality volume (WQv)” has the meaning stated in COMAR
26.17.02.02.
      (97)   “Watercourse” means any natural or artificial stream, river,
creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine,
or wash in which water flows continuously or intermittently, and the term
includes any adjacent area that is subject to inundation from overflow or
floodwater.
      (98)   “Watershed” has the meaning stated in COMAR 26.17.02.02.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 74-11; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 9-15; Bill No. 83-15;
Bill No. 66-16; Bill No. 15-17; Bill No. 10-23)
§ 16-1-102. Scope.
   The provisions of this article are minimum requirements that apply in
addition to other requirements of this Code and other law and regulations.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-1-103. Conflict of laws.
   If any provision of this article conflicts with other County law, the
provision that establishes the higher standard for protection of the natural
environment shall prevail.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-1-104. Compliance with other law.
   Except as otherwise provided by this article, all development, grading, and
other activity under this article shall comply with all applicable federal,
State, and County law and regulations, the County Procedures Manual, and the
DPW Design Manual.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-1-105. Federal and State permits.
   The County may issue a permit conditioned on the applicant having obtained
all necessary permits from all applicable State and federal agencies. The
issuance of federal or State permits does not exempt development from
compliance with this article.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-1-106. Right of entry.
   It is a condition of a permit applied for or issued under this article that
officers and employees of the County and, for purposes of
Title 4, the Administration may enter onto the site to inspect for compliance
with the provisions of this article.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-1-107. Liability for damages.
   The issuance of a permit under this article or compliance with this article
does not relieve a person from responsibility for damage to persons or property
otherwise imposed by law or impose liability on the County for damages.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-1-108. Unit prices.
   The Director shall adopt unit prices to be used by applicants in connection
with the submission of cost estimates required by this article.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-1-109. Denial of permits after notice of violation.
   (a)   Denial of permit. The County may deny the issuance of permits under
this article if it determines that the applicant has been served with notice of
any violation on the property for which the permit is sought and the violation
has not been resolved.
   (b)   Notice of intent. The Director of Inspection and Permits shall give
notice of intent to enforce this section by including in any notice of
violation a provision stating that the property may be subject to denial of
additional permits under this section until the violation is corrected.
   (c)   Remedies and penalties. The remedies and penalties set forth in this
section are in addition to and do not supersede remedies and penalties provided
in
Title 5 of this article or elsewhere in this Code or imposed by a court.
   (d)   No appeal. The applicant may not appeal the denial of additional
permits based on enforcement of this section.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-1-110. Coal tar pavement productProhibition.
   (a)   Definition. "Coal tar pavement product" means a material that contains
coal tar or polycyclic aromatic hyrocarbons and is used for an asphalt or
concrete surface.
   (b)   Applicability. This section applies to all public and private uses of
coal tar pavement product.
   (c)   Use and sale prohibited. A person may not sell, offer for sale, use,
or permit the use of a coal tar pavement product in the County. A property
owner who knowingly permits the application of a product containing coal tar
pavement product on their property is in violation of this section and may be
cited, in addition to the applicator of the product, pursuant to subsection
(e).
   (d)   Alternatives. The Director shall publish a list of alternative
products for use on asphalt and concrete that does not contain a coal tar
pavement product.
   (e)   Remediation and penalties. Violators shall be required to remediate
the surface of the coal tar pavement product. A violation of this section is a
Class B civil offense pursuant to §
9-2-101 of this Code. Each day that the violation occurs shall be considered a
separate offense. The penalties set forth in this section are in addition to
any other remedies and penalties provided under federal, State or County law.
(Bill No. 104-15)
TITLE 2. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
Subtitle 1. General Provisions
   
16-2-101.   Scope; overlay.
   
16-2-102.   Disclaimer of County's liability.
   
16-2-103.   Establishment of floodplain district and subdistricts.
   
16-2-104.   Amendments.
   
16-2-105.   Unsafe structures.
Subtitle 2. Development
   
16-2-201.   Required information.
   
16-2-202.   Development requirements.
   
16-2-203.   Attached garages; accessory structures.
   
16-2-204.   Relocation, alteration, or modification of a watercourse or stream.
   
16-2-205.   Certificate of occupancy.
   
16-2-206.   Record of permit actions; tracking.
Subtitle 3. Modifications
   
16-2-301.   Modifications.
SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 16-2-101. Scope; overlay.
   (a)   Scope. Except as provided in subsection (b), this title applies to all
development, new construction and substantial improvements to existing
structures in a floodplain district. An application for subdivision or for a
building or grading permit is an application for development under this title.
   (b)   Exception. This title does not apply to a water quality improvement
project if an engineering study, provided by a design professional and approved
by the Department, evaluates the effects of any construction using the
applicable FEMA 100-year flood and floodway data and includes a certification
that the flood-carrying capacity within the watercourse or stream will not be
affected, or that flood-carrying capacity changes are approved by FEMA.
   (c)   Overlay. This title is an overlay that applies to all land located in
the County.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 10-23)
§ 16-2-102. Disclaimer of County's liability.
   The degree of flood protection provided by this title is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering experience and
scientific methods of study. Nothing in this title means that land outside the
areas of special flood hazard or development within those areas will be free
from flooding or flood damage. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions, and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. The
issuance of a permit or the grant of any other approval is not a
representation, guarantee, or warranty and does not create liability on the
part of the County, its officials, or employees.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-2-103. Establishment of floodplain district and subdistricts.
   (a)   Establishment of floodplain district. A floodplain district is
established. It includes the areas in the County subject to inundation by the
waters of the 100-year flood as determined and delineated by:
      (1)   the Flood Insurance Study for Anne Arundel County, Maryland and
Incorporated Areas revised February 18, 2015, with accompanying flood insurance
rate and floodway maps by FEMA and all subsequent revisions; or
      (2)   more restrictive floodplain studies or data approved in connection
with an application for a building or grading permit or for subdivision.
   (b)   Subdistricts. The floodplain district consists of the following
subdistricts:
      (1)   Zone A: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the 1-
percent annual chance (100-year) flood; base flood elevations are not
determined.
      (2)   Zone AE and Zone A1-30: Special flood hazard areas subject to
inundation by the 1-percent annual chance (100-year) flood; base flood
elevations are determined; floodways may or may not be determined. In areas
subject to tidal flooding, the limit of moderate wave action may or may not be
delineated.
      (3)   Zone AH and Zone AO: Areas of shallow flooding, with flood depths
of 1 to 3 feet (usually areas of ponding or sheet flow on sloping terrain),
with or without base flood elevations or designated flood depths.
      (4)   Zone B and Zone X (shaded): Areas subject to inundation by the 0.2-
percent annual chance (500-year) flood; areas subject to the 1-percent annual
chance (100-year) flood with average depths of less than 1 foot or with
contributing drainage area less than 1 square mile; and areas protected from
the base flood by levees.
      (5)   Zone C and Zone X (unshaded): Areas outside of zones designated A,
AE, A1-30, AO, VE, V1-30, B and X (shaded).
      (6)   Zone VE and Zone V1-30: Special flood hazard areas subject to
inundation by the 1-percent annual chance (100-year) flood and subject to high
velocity wave action (also see coastal high hazard area).
   (c)   Revisions to floodplain district. The floodplain district boundaries
may vary periodically as revisions to the flood insurance study and flood
insurance rate maps are made and, upon receipt of changes by the Office of the
County Executive, the changes automatically constitute changes to the
boundaries of the floodplain district. The Office of Planning and Zoning may
revise the delineation of the floodplain district only in compliance with the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and the requirements of the State and
only when there are changes through natural or other causes as indicated by
analyses of detailed hydrologic and hydraulic studies. Changes to the
delineation of the floodplain district shall be submitted to FEMA within six
months after such data and information becomes available if the analyses
indicate changes in base flood elevations or boundaries and shall be subject to
the review and approval of FEMA and the State, except that approval is not
required and elevations shall be used if there is a conflict between map
boundaries and elevations plotted on a topographic map.
   (d)   Request for map amendment. A developer or owner who believes that
property has been erroneously included in a designated floodplain district on
the flood insurance rate maps may submit scientific or technical information to
FEMA for review for a possible map amendment. Any development in a floodway
that may result in an increase in water surface elevations or a change to the
floodway shall be submitted to FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision.
   (e)   Boundary disputes in approximated floodplain. As promptly as possible
after receipt of written notice of a dispute concerning a district boundary in
an approximated floodplain, the Planning and Zoning Officer shall make an
interpretation and render a decision in writing.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 9-15)
§ 16-2-104. Amendments.
   This title and all amendments to it are subject to the approval of FEMA and
the State.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-2-105. Unsafe structures.
   The Department shall declare a structure that is constructed, enlarged,
altered, or relocated in violation of this title to be an unsafe structure and
abatable as an unsafe structure under §§
15-2-101 and
15-1-105 of this Code and shall immediately notify FEMA and the Water
Management Administration, Maryland Department of the Environment, in writing
of any structure or property in violation of this title.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 74-11)
SUBTITLE 2. DEVELOPMENT
§ 16-2-201. Required information.
   (a)   Application for a building or grading permit. An application for a
building or grading permit for land located in a floodplain district shall
contain or be accompanied by the following information:
      (1)   a demonstration that new structures cannot be located outside the
floodplain and that encroachments into the floodplain are minimized;
      (2)   the elevations of the proposed final grading; the lowest floor
levels; the floor area below the lowest floor; the existing ground contours;
the 100-year flood elevation; and the high-velocity water and wave action
elevation, including its relation to a stream channel, shoreline, floodplain
district, and floodplain subdistrict, as certified by a design professional;
      (3)   the method of elevating a proposed structure, including details of
proposed fills, pile structures, retaining walls, foundations, and erosion
protection measures, as prepared by a design professional;
      (4)   the methods used to protect electrical, plumbing, and mechanical
systems and utilities from flooding;
      (5)   for a substantial improvement to an existing structure, the State's
assessed value or, at the developer's option, a current "as is" appraisal
performed by a professional real estate appraiser of the market value of the
structure, excluding land value;
      (6)   for a relocation, alteration, or modification of all or part of a
watercourse or stream, evidence that notice has been sent as required by §
16-2-204 and an engineering study prepared by a design professional that
analyzes all reasonable alternatives and fully evaluates the effects of the
construction, using applicable 100-year flood and floodway data prepared by
FEMA, and that includes a certification that the flood-carrying capacity within
the watercourse or stream will not be affected;
      (7)   an acknowledgment that flood insurance for a structure not elevated
or floodproofed in conformance with this title may be available only at
prohibitive rates or not at all and that construction below the level of the
100-year flood increases risk to life and property; and
      (8)   for accessory structures, a statement on the building plans that
reads as follows: "No conversion of this area to habitable space is to occur
unless the lowest floor is elevated to one foot above the 100-year flood
elevation. At this site the 100-year flood elevation is ___________."
   (b)   Application for subdivision. An application for subdivision on land
that includes areas within a floodplain district shall include:
      (1)   a delineation of the 100-year flood elevation if determined by the
flood insurance study or watershed studies conducted by the County; and
      (2)   if the 100-year floodplain elevation has not been determined, the
developer shall determine the 100-year floodplain elevation in accordance with
the County Procedures Manual and delineate the elevation on the proposed plans.
Plans shall be certified by a design professional.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-2-202. Development requirements.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to piers or structures for the wet
storage of watercraft if the piers or storage structures do not contain
habitable space.
   (b)   Generally. Development may not occur in the floodplain if an
alternative location for the development exists. All development shall be
consistent with applicable flood hazard and watershed management plans and
shall be undertaken in a manner that minimizes adverse impact on aquatic or
terrestrial habitats and related flora and fauna. Grading, necessary provisions
for drainage, erosion, and sediment control, and vegetative establishments may
not increase flooding. Structures shall be constructed and placed on the lot so
as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow and height of floodwater.
Materials that are hazardous, buoyant, flammable, or explosive, or that in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, are
prohibited below the flood protection elevation. Basements are prohibited.
Reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of a historic structure may not
cause an increase in the elevation of the 100-year flood level. If a proposed
building, structure or substantial improvement is sited in two different
subdistricts or in a subdistrict with two different 100-year elevations, the
more restrictive regulations or the higher flood elevation shall prevail.
   (c)   Elevation to flood protection elevation; exceptions. All structures,
new construction, substantial improvements, and new habitable space shall have
the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation, except that:
      (1)   an expansion that increases the footprint of a structure is not
required to have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection elevation if
the expansion is the minimum necessary to correct violations of State or County
health, safety, or sanitary codes;
      (2)   an accessory structure or attached garage is not required to have
the enclosed area below the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection
elevation if the provisions of this section and § 16-2-203 are met; and
      (3)   new construction of or substantial improvements to nonresidential
structures may be floodproofed in lieu of having the lowest floor elevated to
the flood protection elevation if:
         (i)   the floodproofing designs ensure that areas below the flood
protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy for flooding to the
flood protection elevation; and
         (ii)   a FEMA floodproofing certificate is provided.
   (d)   Water equalizing vents. New construction of or substantial
improvements to a lowest floor or enclosed area below the lowest floor that is
not required under this section to be elevated to the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed with water equalizing vents in accordance with
the requirements of the Building Code adopted by
Article 15, Title 2, of this Code.
   (e)   Electrical, plumbing, and mechanical systems; utilities. Electrical,
plumbing, and mechanical systems shall be installed in accordance with §
15-2-101 of this Code for commercial structures and §
15-2-102 of this Code for residential structures. New or replacement water and
sewer connections shall be designed and floodproofed to eliminate or minimize
the potential for flood damage, including infiltration of floodwater into the
connections and discharges from the connections into floodwater. Onsite waste
disposal connections shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Gas, electrical, and other facility
and utility connections shall be located, constructed, and floodproofed to
eliminate or minimize potential for flood damage. New storm drainage facilities
within or leading to or from a floodplain shall be adequately designed,
floodproofed, and installed to eliminate or minimize potential for property
damage from the floodwaters of the 100-year flood and to minimize adverse
environmental impact of their installation and use.
   (f)   Coastal high hazard areas. Manufactured homes and the placement of
fill are prohibited in coastal high hazard areas. New construction of or a
substantial improvement to a structure in a coastal high hazard area is
prohibited unless the construction or improvement is in accordance with the
Federal Emergency Management Agency's Coastal Construction Manual (FEMA 55),
Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas (FEMA 85), Flood Resistant
Design and Construction (ASCE 24-05) and NFIP Technical Bulletin 5 and 9.
   (g)   Floodways. All residential development, manufactured homes and the
placement of fill are prohibited in a floodway. New construction of or a
substantial improvement to a structure in a floodway is prohibited unless
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses based on floodway models and performed in
accordance with standard engineering practices demonstrate that the
construction or improvement will not cause an increase in downstream or
upstream flooding or erosion. Structures and fences, except two-wire fences,
that impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, that catch
or collect debris carried by water, or that are placed where the natural flow
of the stream or floodwaters will carry debris downstream are prohibited.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-2-203. Attached garages; accessory structures.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to attached garages and to all accessory
structures, including detached garages, of less than 600 square feet, except
that it does not apply to piers or structures for the wet storage of watercraft
if the piers or storage structures do not contain habitable space.
   (b)   One-story structures of 300 square feet or less. A one-story accessory
structure of 300 square feet or less may be constructed below the flood
protection elevation if:
      (1)   the structure is used for parking, storage, or building access
only;
      (2)   the floor elevation is at or above existing grade and does not
qualify as a basement and is equipped with flood equalization vents in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the International Building Code or
the International Residential Code as required by
Article 15 of this Code;
      (3)   the structure is constructed and located so as to minimize flood
damage; and
      (4)   the structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
   (c)   Other accessory structures and garages; non-conversion agreement. The
developer of a two-story accessory structure, an attached garage, or an
accessory structure that has more than 300 square feet shall comply with the
requirements of subsection (b) and execute a non-conversion agreement provided
by the County that prohibits conversion of the area to habitable space unless
elevated to the flood protection elevation. The agreement shall be recorded
among the land records.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-2-204. Relocation, alteration, or modification of a watercourse or stream.
   (a)   Prohibition. Relocation, alteration, or modification of a watercourse
or stream in a floodplain district is prohibited.
   (b)   Notice. If a modification granted under this title allows development
that includes the relocation, alteration, restoration, or modification of a
watercourse or stream, the developer shall maintain the flood carrying capacity
of the altered, relocated, or restored watercourse. The developer shall provide
notice of the relocation, alteration, restoration, or modification by certified
mail to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, to the State, and to all
communities adjacent to the watercourse or stream to be relocated or altered.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 9-15)
§ 16-2-205. Certificate of occupancy.
   A certificate of occupancy may not be issued in a floodplain district until
the Director has been provided with a completed FEMA elevation certificate that
verifies the as-built elevation of the construction.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-2-206. Record of permit actions; tracking.
   (a)   Record. The Department shall maintain a record of all floodplain
district permit actions and shall make the record available on request by FEMA
or by the State. The record shall include the date the permit was issued, the
as-built lowest floor elevation of all new construction or substantial
improvement, the issuance date of a certificate of occupancy, a copy of the
completed elevation certificate, and any map amendments issued by FEMA.
   (b)   Tracking. All permits subject to this title shall be tracked by
property location to determine if the cumulative value of improvements over a
three-year period constitutes a substantial improvement of the structure.
(Bill No. 58-10)
SUBTITLE 3. MODIFICATIONS
§ 16-2-301. Modifications.
   (a)   Where application is filed. An application for a modification from the
requirements of this title shall be filed with the Office of Planning and
Zoning if it relates to roads, utilities, storm drains, stormwater structures,
stream restoration, or other infrastructure proposed in the subdivision
process. Otherwise, the application shall be filed with the Department.
   (b)   Contents. An application for a modification to Planning and Zoning
shall be done in accordance with §
17-2-108 of this Code. A modification application to the Department shall:
      (1)   set forth good cause accompanied by an engineering analysis;
      (2)   demonstrate that no reasonable alternative exists outside the
floodplain district;
      (3)   explain the non-economic hardship to the applicant if relief is not
granted; and
      (4)   demonstrate that the grant of a modification will not result in
increased flood heights.
   (c)   Determination. The County may not grant a modification until it has
received comments and a copy of any required modification or variance from the
State. The County may grant a modification, with or without conditions, if it
determines that:
      (1)   the applicant has demonstrated good cause;
      (2)   no reasonable alternative exists outside the floodplain district;
      (3)   a failure to grant the modification would result in non-economic
hardship to the applicant;
      (4)   the granting of the modification will not result in increased flood
heights, a threat to public safety, extraordinary public expense, a nuisance, a
fraud on or victimization of the public, or a conflict with State or County
law; and
      (5)   the modification is consistent with sound management and is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (d)   Prohibited modifications. A modification to the provisions contained
in §
16-2-202(f) and (g) relating to development in coastal high hazard areas and
floodways is prohibited. A modification to the requirement that the lowest
floor of a new or substantially improved residential structure be elevated to
the flood protection elevation is prohibited.
TITLE 3. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Section
Subtitle 1. General Provisions
   
16-3-101.   Scope.
   
16-3-102.   Repair or restoration.
   
16-3-103.   Maintenance of protective measures.
   
16-3-104.   Enclosure of sediment basins and traps.
   
16-3-105.   Revolving fund.
   
16-3-106.   Stay pending appeal.
Subtitle 2. Grading Permit
   
16-3-201.   Approval required; exceptions.
   
16-3-202.   Standard grading plan.
   
16-3-203.   Application.
   
16-3-204.   Erosion and sediment control plan.
   
16-3-205.   Erosion control monitoring device.
   
16-3-206.   Criteria for issuance.
   
16-3-207.   Fees; refunds.
   
16-3-208.   Security.
   
16-3-209.   Revisions.
   
16-3-210.   Posting.
   
16-3-211.   When application abandoned.
   
16-3-212.   Expiration of issued permit.
   
16-3-213.   Renewal of expired grading permit.
Subtitle 3. Inspections and Completion of Work
   
16-3-301.   Pre-construction meeting.
   
16-3-302.   Requests for inspections.
   
16-3-303.   Inspections.
   
16-3-304.   Supervision of inspections and tests.
   
16-3-305.   Records.
   
16-3-306.   Notification of completion.
   
16-3-307.   Certificate of completion.
   
16-3-308.   Complaints.
Subtitle 4. Modifications
   
16-3-401.   Modifications.
SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 16-3-101. Scope.
   This title applies to all clearing and grading in the County. The 1994
Maryland Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control or
any superseding document adopted by the State shall control erosion and
sediment control principles, methods, and practices. This includes adherence to
COMAR 26.17.01 and all Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District policies for
site development.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 74-11)
§ 16-3-102. Repair or restoration.
   Erosion, sediment deposition, disturbance of vegetative cover, or other
damage that occurs as a result of development or a violation of this title
shall be repaired and restored to meet the requirements of this title.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-3-103. Maintenance of protective measures.
   (a)   Protective measures required. A permittee shall conduct or provide for
daily inspections and shall maintain continually in effective operational
condition all surfaces, erosion control measures, vegetative covers, and other
protective measures in accordance with the approved grading permit plans or
standard grading plan until removed with the permission of the Department. Any
measures that are disturbed or destroyed in the course of operations shall be
immediately repaired. Any failure of a sediment control device shall be
reported immediately to the Department and the device repaired and restored
before development work on the site is resumed.
   (b)   Inspections. For the purpose of compliance with this section the
permittee shall conduct:
      (1)   daily monitoring inspections of the approved erosion and sediment
controls for each day any construction activity is underway;
      (2)   weekly inspections of the approved erosion and sediment controls
for sites where no construction activities are taking place; and
      (3)   monitoring inspections of the approved erosion and sediment
controls the next day after a rainfall event that results in runoff.
   (c)   Reports. During construction, the permittee shall maintain at the site
written reports of all monitoring inspections and reports shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   the date and time of the inspection;
      (2)   the name of the individual who performed the inspection;
      (3)   the certificate of training number of the individual who performed
the inspection;
      (4)   an assessment of the conditions of the approved erosion and
sediment controls;
      (5)   a description of any erosion and sediment control implementation
and maintenance performed; and
      (6)   a description of the present phase of construction.
   (d)   Availability of reports. At any time during the construction the
written reports must be made available to the Department for review and
evaluation or submitted to the Department as may be required.
(Bill 58-10)
§ 16-3-104. Enclosure of sediment basins and traps.
   (a)   Sediment basins. A sediment basin located in a residential zoning
district shall be enclosed with a chain link fence that is not less than six
feet above the ground. Gates shall be securely closed so that only authorized
personnel can gain access. Other types of enclosures may be used only with the
approval of the Department before installation. The Department also may require
that a sediment basin located in a zoning district other than a residential
zoning district is enclosed if the basin is located within 500 feet of a
residential use.
   (b)   Sediment traps. The Department may require a sediment trap to be
enclosed if the Department determines that enclosure is necessary to ensure
public safety.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-3-105. Revolving fund.
   There is a revolving fund to support the cost of work done by the County
after an owner or permittee fails, neglects, or refuses to do the required
work. The Controller shall allow an expenditure from the general County capital
projects fund on a revolving basis to support the cost of the work.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-3-106. Stay pending appeal.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to an appeal from the issuance of
a grading permit for grading on land within 100 feet of the mean high-water
line, a tributary stream, or the edge of a tidal wetland or within the expanded
buffer provided for in §
18-13-104(a) of this Code. This section also applies to an appeal from the
issuance of a grading permit for disturbance of one acre or more on any lot
other than one that is part of a larger site with an active or completed
grading permit that provides for site improvements and future development of
lots on that site.
   (b)   Stay pending decision by the Board of Appeals. The timely filing of an
appeal automatically stays all action under the permit pending a final decision
by the Board of Appeals. The Board shall hear and decide the appeal within 45
days of the filing of the appeal. If the Board fails to issue a final written
decision within 45 days, the stay shall be terminated and may not be
reinstated.
(Bill No. 58-10)
SUBTITLE 2. GRADING PERMIT
§ 16-3-201. Approval required; exceptions.
   (a)   Approval required. Except as provided in subsection (b), a person may
not:
      (1)   grade without a grading permit issued by the Department;
      (2)   clear or grade in the critical area buffer, expanded buffer, or
buffer modification area described in §
18-13-104 of this Code without a standard grading plan, a grading permit, or an
approved vegetation management plan, buffer management plan or forest
management plan; or
      (3)   do logging without a grading permit issued by the Department.
   (b)   Exceptions. Approval is not required for clearing or grading
associated with:
      (1)   agricultural land management practices or agricultural buildings,
as defined in
Article 15, except that an approved standard grading plan that is also approved
by the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District is required for agricultural
buildings that involve disturbing between 5,000 square feet and one acre of
land. In addition, an erosion and sediment control plan approved by the Anne
Arundel Soil Conservation District is required in lieu of a standard grading
plan or grading permit for agricultural buildings that involve disturbing more
than one acre of land;
      (2)   the laying of water, sewer, gas, electrical, telephone, or cable
television lines that disturbs less than 100 linear feet, or 500 linear feet
for individual single family residential lots provided the overall disturbance
is less than 5,000 square feet;
      (3)   activities that are subject exclusively to State approval and
enforcement under State law;
      (4)   activities under a standard grading plan approved by the Department
under §
16-3-202; or
      (5)   disturbing less than 5,000 square feet of land or unless prohibited
by subsection (a)(2) of this section or other applicable State or federal law.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 76-13; Bill No. 83-15; Bill No. 24-
17)
§ 16-3-202. Standard grading plan.
   (a)   Generally. A standard grading plan may be used in lieu of a grading
permit if:
      (1)   the applicant files a standard grading plan application that is
approved by the Department;
      (2)   the applicant certifies that construction will meet the conditions
and limitations established on the standard grading plan and will be carried
out in compliance with this title; and
      (3)   the total area disturbed is less than 5,000 square feet of land.
   (b)   When required. A standard grading plan is required for agricultural
buildings that involve disturbing between 5,000 square feet and one acre of
land.
   (c)   Review; County report. As promptly as possible after the filing of a
standard grading plan, but no later than 30 days after the filing of the plan,
the Department shall provide the applicant with a written report of the
findings, comments, and recommendations of County agencies unless the plan is
approved within the 30 day time period.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 6-11; Bill No. 24-17)
§ 16-3-203. Application.
   (a)   Who may file. Any person may file an application for a grading permit,
but the application shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner stating
that the proposed work is authorized if the application is filed by a person
other than the owner.
   (b)   Contents. An application shall include all information required by the
Department. The information ordinarily shall include:
      (1)   a site development plan in accordance with the requirements of §§
17-4-101 et seq. of this Code;
      (2)   an erosion and sediment control plan;
      (3)   the application fee and the permit fee; and
      (4)   a cost estimate prepared by a design professional for all site
improvements not covered by a public works agreement.
   (c)   Review; County report. As promptly as possible after the filing of an
application for a grading permit, but no later than 30 days after the filing of
the application, the Department shall provide the applicant with a written
report of the findings, comments, and recommendations of County agencies unless
the plan is approved within the 30 day time period.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 6-11)
§ 16-3-204. Erosion and sediment control plan.
   (a)   Application requirements. An erosion and sediment control plan shall
contain all information required by COMAR 26.17.01.07. In addition, an erosion
and sediment control plan shall contain all information required by the
Department and the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District. The information
ordinarily shall include:
      (1)   the signature and seal of a design professional on all plan sheets;
      (2)   a boundary line survey tied to the County coordinate system;
      (3)   a detailed plan (plan sheet 24" x 36") at a scale that is no
smaller than a 1" = 40';
      (4)   the elevations, dimensions, location, extent, and slope of proposed
grading, including building and driveway grades, utilities, sewer, water, storm
drains and, if applicable, the 100-year flood elevation clearly indicated with
finished contours at the same interval as required or used for existing
topography;
      (5)   the estimate of the quantity of excavation and fill involved;
      (6)   complete storm drainage studies and stormwater management analysis
if not previously submitted in accordance with the provisions of
Article 17 of this Code;
      (7)   an appropriate legend;
      (8)   a 100-foot adjacent peripheral strip, showing existing topography
at a contour interval as specified by the Department;
      (9)   an acknowledgment that all clearing, grading, construction, and
development will be done pursuant to the plan;
      (10)   an identification of responsible personnel;
      (11)   the use and extent of fills;
      (12)   a statement that inspections will be requested as required by §
16-3-302;
      (13)   any enclosure of sediment basins or traps required by §
16-3-104;
      (14)   the location of the erosion control monitoring device for any
piped outfall, sediment trap outfall, sediment basin outfall, or open channel
outfalls that serve as a sediment and erosion control feature during
construction; and
      (15)   a statement in the construction sequence that the construction of
the first floor walls of any building or structure may not proceed until the
foundation has been backfilled, the disturbed areas have been stabilized and a
certificate is provided to the inspector verifying the grades and drainage
patterns shown on the approved erosion and sediment control plan have been
obtained.
   (b)   Sequence of construction required. An erosion and sediment control
plan shall also include a sequence of construction that accurately describes
the relationship between the implementation and maintenance of controls,
including permanent and temporary stabilization, grading units and the various
stages or phases of earth disturbance and construction. Projects shall be
sequenced and phased so that no more than one grading unit is allowed to be
disturbed at any given time. The sequence of construction shall at least
describe:
      (1)   requests for a pre-construction meeting with the Department;
      (2)   clearing and grubbing as necessary for the installation of
perimeter controls;
      (3)   construction and stabilization of perimeter controls;
      (4)   remaining clearing and grubbing within installed perimeter
controls;
      (5)   road grading;
      (6)   grading for the remainder of the site;
      (7)   utility installation and connections to existing structures;
      (8)   construction of buildings, roads, and other construction;
      (9)   final grading, landscaping, and stabilization;
      (10)   installation of stormwater management measures;
      (11)   approval of the Department prior to removal of sediment controls;
and
      (12)   removal of controls and stabilization of areas that are disturbed
by removal of sediment controls.
   (c)   Stabilization measures required. Erosion and sediment control plans
shall also include specifications for temporary and permanent stabilization
measures. The standard stabilization note on the plan shall state:
      (1)   that following the initial soil disturbance or re-disturbance,
permanent or temporary stabilization must be completed within (i) three
calendar days for all perimeter dikes, swales, ditches, perimeter slopes and
all slopes steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical (3:1), and (ii) seven
calendar days for all other disturbed or graded areas on the project not under
active grading;
      (2)   any details for areas requiring advanced stabilization; and
      (3)   any maintenance requirements as identified in the standards and
specifications.
   (d)   Additional requirements. The following additional requirements shall
apply to implementation of an erosion and sediment control plan:
      (1)   A developer shall obtain all necessary permits and request a pre-
construction meeting described in §
16-3-301.
      (2)   The permittee shall install sediment controls and stabilize
perimeter controls within three days of disturbance and shall obtain first
phase approval by the erosion control inspector prior to commencing work. The
inspector may require that an inspection and certification of the installation
of sediment controls also be performed by a design professional prior to
commencing work.
      (3)   If there is to be demolition of any existing structures, all debris
shall be hauled to an approved site.
      (4)   Access, travel lanes, heavy use, lay down, concrete wash down, and
staging areas shall require accelerated mechanical stabilization.
      (5)   Stabilization shall be completed in seven calendar days on all
other disturbed or graded areas on the project not under active grading. In the
event of wet weather, the sediment and erosion control inspector may require
additional sediment protection and stabilization.
      (6)   After the site is stabilized and with the sediment and erosion
control inspector's approval, framing may commence on the ground floor. During
building construction beyond the ground floor, all disturbed areas must be
stabilized by the end of each day.
      (7)   Installation of storm water management systems may not be conducted
until the upstream areas are 95% stabilized.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 83-15)
§ 16-3-205. Erosion control monitoring device.
   (a)   Requirements. The erosion control monitoring device is to be shown on
the erosion and sediment control plan and shall be an iron survey stake
embedded at least 2.5 feet into the centerline of the receiving channel with
the elevation of the top of the stake recorded on the stake. At least one
device shall be provided for each site outfall. The total number and locations
of the devices shall be determined by the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation
District.
   (b)   Repair required. At any time during the construction and before a
certificate of completion is issued, any sediment deposition or channel erosion
measured at the monitoring device shall be repaired as directed by the
Department.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-3-206. Criteria for issuance.
   The Department may not issue a grading permit unless:
      (1)   an erosion and sediment control plan is approved by the Anne
Arundel Soil Conservation District in accordance with the comprehensive and
integrated plan approval process required by the Environment Article, § 4-201.1
and § 4-203, of the State Code including the submittal of concept, site
development and final plans;
      (2)   the State Highway Administration approves the application for the
grading permit, if applicable;
      (3)   the applicant agrees in writing that all development will comply
with the approved erosion and sediment control plan;
      (4)   a stormwater management plan is approved in accordance with the
requirements of this article;
      (5)   a site development plan is recommended for approval as provided in
§
17-4-203 of this Code;
      (6)   the Department approves the cost estimate filed with the
application; and
      (7)   the applicant pays the grading fee and provides the security
required by §§
16-3-207 and
16-3-208.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 83-15; Bill No. 65-17)
§ 16-3-207. Fees; refunds.
   (a)   Fees. The fees set forth in the chart in this subsection apply to all
grading permits other than those issued for work on property owned or leased
and developed by the County or the Board of Education.
Grading Permit Category Fee
Grading Permit Category                                      Fee
Application                                                  $43
Single family dwelling on lot of 20,000 square feet or less  $692
Single family dwelling on lot over 20,000 square feet        $1,124
Churches, parsonages, incorporated nonprofit eleemosynary
and community associations, and fire stations on properties  $112
owned by a volunteer fire company formed pursuant to §12-1-
201 of this Code
Forest harvest operation                                     $173
Grading permit, other than for a single family dwelling, a
church or nonprofit agency, or standard logging plan, is     $69
based on an approved cost estimate, as follows:              $138
$0 to $500                                                   $138 plus 7% of
$500.01 to $1,250                                            costs over $1,250
over $1,250
                                                             Difference between
                                                             the fee for the
                                                             original permit
Additional work                                              and the fee
                                                             required for the
                                                             entire grading and
                                                             sediment control
                                                             project
Renewal of expired permit                                    $50
 
   (b)   Refunds. On request of the applicant, the Department may refund 50% of
a permit fee if for any reason the permit is not issued. Application fees are
nonrefundable.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 20-15; Bill No. 66-16; Bill No. 44-24)
§ 16-3-208. Security.
   (a)   Security required. An applicant other than the County, the Board of
Education, or a public utility, or an applicant for a forest harvest operation
shall provide the County with security in an amount equal to the approved cost
estimate as shown on the approved grading and sediment control computation
sheet. The security shall be in the form of a cash deposit, certified check,
cashier's check, irrevocable letter of credit, or bond from a bonding company
or financial institution acceptable to the County. A public utility shall
provide a letter of guarantee in a form approved by the Office of Law.
   (b)   Full release. Security given under this section shall be released if
the Department issues a certificate of completion after having determined that
the minimum requirements of this title have been met.
   (c)   Partial release. The Department may allow a partial release of the
security given under this section, not to exceed 50% of the obligations or
remaining obligations under the permit, if the applicant has performed at least
50% of the obligations or remaining obligations under the permit and the County
determines that a partial release of the security will not impair
implementation of the provisions of this title.
   (d)   Forfeiture. If an applicant fails to comply with any term or condition
of the permit, the County may declare that the security is forfeited to the
County.
   (e)   Costs in excess of security. The cost of work performed under the
provisions of this article in excess of that for which the County is
compensated by security shall be an obligation of the owner of the property.
The costs shall be levied and collected from the owner in the same manner as
County real property taxes and shall have the same priority rights, bear the
same interest and penalties, and in every respect be treated as County real
property taxes. The interest rate charged to the property owner shall be the
maximum legal rate. This subsection does not apply to a bona fide purchaser of
a subdivided lot who had no financial interest in the development of the lot
prior to acquiring legal title unless the violation is attributable to that
purchaser.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-3-209. Revisions.
   (a)   Department authorized to require revisions. If the Department finds
that an approved plan, site development plan, or stormwater management plan is
not adequate to effect compliance with the law because of design errors,
unanticipated site conditions, failure to follow the approved phasing, or other
conditions, the Department may require revisions to the plan.
   (b)   Major revisions. The Department will process major revisions of
approved plans in the same procedural manner as the initial application for the
grading permit. The approved revision shall be dated by the Soil Conservation
District and noted on the erosion and sediment control plan.
   (c)   Minor revisions. The Department may approve minor revisions to the
approved erosion and sediment control plan based on a list of minor revisions
approved by the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District and the Maryland
Department of the Environment. To apply for a minor revision, the permittee
shall have the design professional responsible for the grading permit plans
prepare five sets of the permit plans showing the plan changes in red for
review. These plans shall be transmitted to the Department. If approved, the
plan sets will be stamped with the date approved and distributed.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 83-15)
§ 16-3-210. Posting.
   A permittee shall post the approved grading permit in a conspicuous onsite
location during construction and shall maintain a copy of the approved plan and
any approved revisions on site.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-3-211. When application abandoned.
   An application for a permit shall be deemed abandoned 180 days after the
date of filing unless the application has been pursued in good faith or a
permit has been issued.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-3-212. Expiration of issued permit.
   A grading permit expires:
      (1)   if installation and inspection of all erosion and sediment control
measures shown as Phase I on the approved plans has not occurred within one
year from the date of issuance;
      (2)   three years after approval by the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation
District unless a renewal of the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District
approval is obtained;
      (3)   one year after work has stopped with respect to a permit under
which work has begun and stopped;
      (4)   upon the transfer of a permit to another person without approval
from the Department; or
      (5)   six years after issuance.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 67-20)
§ 16-3-213. Renewal of expired grading permit.
   (a)   Request for renewal. Within 6 months after the expiration of a grading
permit, the permittee may file a written request with the Director to renew the
permit if the conditions under which the permit was originally issued have
remained unchanged.
   (b)   Renewal time period. The Director may grant one or more renewals,
extending the expiration date by not more than one year. A new request is
required for each additional renewal.
   (c)   Conditions for approval. If a permit is extended under the provisions
of this section, the Director may require that the project address ESD to the
MEP.
(Bill No. 58-10)
SUBTITLE 3. INSPECTIONS AND COMPLETION OF WORK
§ 16-3-301. Pre-construction meeting.
   At least 48 hours before commencing work under a grading permit and approved
plans, a permittee shall notify the Department of the intended date of
commencement. Work may not commence until the permittee or responsible
personnel have met on the site with a representative of the Department to
review the approved plans.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-3-302. Requests for inspections.
   A permittee shall request that the Department inspect work upon:
      (1)   completion of installation of all erosion and sediment control
measures shown as Phase I on the approved plans and before proceeding with any
other grading or building construction;
      (2)   stabilization at the time of foundation backfill; and
      (3)   final stabilization before the removal of erosion and sediment
controls.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-3-303. Inspections.
   (a)   Plan kept on site. The developer shall maintain copies of approved
erosion and sediment control plans on site.
   (b)   Routine inspection. Every active site having an approved erosion and
sediment control plan shall be inspected for compliance with the plan on
average once every two weeks.
   (c)   Reports. A written report shall be prepared by the inspection agency
after every routine inspection. The report shall describe:
      (1)   the date and location of the site inspection;
      (2)   whether the approved erosion and sediment control plan has been
properly implemented and maintained;
      (3)   practice deficiencies or erosion and sediment control plan
deficiencies;
      (4)   if a violation exists, the type of enforcement action taken; and
      (5)   if applicable, a description of any modifications to the erosion
and sediment control plan.
   (d)   Notice of violations. In addition to the requirements of §
16-5-104, the inspection agency shall notify the on-site personnel or the
developer in writing when violations are observed, describing:
      (1)   the nature of the violation;
      (2)   the required corrective action; and
      (3)   the time period in which to have the violation corrected.
(Bill No. 83-15)
§ 16-3-304. Supervision of inspections and tests.
   The Department may require that inspections and testing of a grading
operation be performed under the direction of a design professional and that
the design professional provide certifications as required by the Department.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 83-15)
§ 16-3-305. Records.
   On completion of work for which a grading permit was issued, the Department
shall require the following for its files and shall also require copies for the
Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District and the Department of Public Works:
      (1)   an as-built plan as required by §
16-4-302;
      (2)   an acknowledgment by the permittee that grading, drainage,
structures, systems, and erosion and sediment control practices have been
completed in substantial conformance with the approved plans and all required
specifications as required by COMAR 26.17.01.07B; and
      (3)   a report summarizing the inspection reports, field and laboratory
tests, and locations of tests and field observations.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 83-15)
§ 16-3-306. Notification of completion.
   The permittee shall notify the Department when the grading operation is
ready for final inspection. The Department will not give final approval unless
all work and required stabilization, including the installation of all drainage
structures, stormwater management facilities and erosion protective devices,
has been completed and all required reports and other information have been
submitted.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 83-15)
§ 16-3-307. Certificate of completion.
   The Department shall issue a certificate of completion for a project for
which a grading permit is required within 60 days after it receives a written
notice of completion of the project if after an inspection the Department finds
that the permittee has complied with the provisions of this article.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 83-15)
§ 16-3-308. Complaints.
   The Department shall accept and investigate complaints regarding erosion and
sediment control concerns from any interested parties and shall:
      (1)   conduct an initial investigation within three working days from
receipt of the complaint;
      (2)   notify the complainant of the initial investigation and findings
within seven days from receipt of the complaint; and
      (3)   take appropriate action pursuant to Title 5 when violations are
discovered during the course of the complaint investigation.
(Bill No. 83-15)
SUBTITLE 4. MODIFICATIONS
§ 16-3-401. Modifications.
   (a)   Filing of request. An applicant shall file a written request for a
modification of this title with the Director and, if required, with the Anne
Arundel Soil Conservation District. The request shall state the specific
modification requested and the reasons for the request.
   (b)   Approval. The Director may approve an application for a modification
to a provision of this title that is not required by State law upon an
affirmative written finding that:
      (1)   practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship will result from
strict application of this title;
      (2)   the purposes of this title will be served by an alternative
proposal;
      (3)   the request is not based on financial considerations; and
      (4)   the modification is not detrimental to the public health, safety,
or welfare or injurious to other properties.
   (c)   Conditions. In modifying a provision of this title, the Director may
require conditions to secure the objectives of the provision that has been
modified.
(Bill No. 58-10)
TITLE 4. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
Subtitle 1. General Provisions
   
16-4-101.   Applicability.
   
16-4-102.   Administration and enforcement.
   
16-4-103.   County Procedures Manual.
   
16-4-104.   Compliance with design standards, the County Procedures Manual,
watershed management studies, and flood management plans.
Subtitle 2. Stormwater Management Plans
   
16-4-201.   Stormwater management plans required.
   
16-4-202.   Minimum control requirements—In general.
   
16-4-203.   Requirements in addition to the minimum control requirements.
   
16-4-204.   Alternative stormwater management practices.
Subtitle 3. Inspections, Completion of Work, and Maintenance
   
16-4-301.   Inspections.
   
16-4-302.   Completion.
   
16-4-303.   Maintenance.
Subtitle 4. Stormwater Practices
   
16-4-401.   Private stormwater management.
   
16-4-402.   Revolving fund—Private stormwater management practices.
   
16-4-403.   Public stormwater management.
SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 16-4-101. Applicability.
   (a)   Applicability of this title. This title applies to all new development
and redevelopment projects that do not have an issued grading permit or final
plan approval for erosion and sediment control and stormwater management plans
by May 4, 2010. This includes adherence to COMAR 26.17.02.
   (b)   Inapplicability of this title. The Planning and Zoning Officer may
grant an administrative waiver to a development that meets the conditions of
COMAR 26.17.02.01-2 and the grandfathering provisions in the County Procedures
Manual.
   (c)   Exemptions. Except in the critical area, the following activities are
exempt from the provisions of this title:
      (1)   agricultural land management practices;
      (2)   development, other than a new single family detached dwelling, that
does not disturb over 5,000 square feet of land area;
      (3)   additions or modifications to existing single family detached
dwellings if land disturbance is less than 5,000 square feet; and
      (4)   development regulated under State law that provides for managing
stormwater runoff.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 58-11)
§ 16-4-102. Administration and enforcement.
   The Department and the Office of Planning and Zoning shall administer and
enforce this title.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-4-103. County Procedures Manual.
   (a)   Preparation. The Director shall prepare and regularly update the
County Procedures Manual in furtherance of the provisions of this title.
   (b)   Written interpretations. The Director may issue written
interpretations to clarify the requirements of the County Procedures Manual.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 74-11; Bill No. 65-17)
§ 16-4-104. Compliance with design standards, the County Procedures Manual,
watershed management studies, and flood management plans.
   (a)   Documents adopted. The following documents, referred to in this title
as design standards, are adopted as establishing requirements for stormwater
management principles, methods, and practices in this County:
      (1)   the latest edition of the 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual
Volumes I and II (Maryland Department of the Environment, April 2000);
      (2)   the latest edition of the USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service Maryland Conservation Practice Standard Pond Code 378 (January 2000) or
latest edition;
      (3)   the latest edition of the County Procedures Manual; and
      (4)   the latest edition of the DPW Design Manual.
   (b)   Compliance with title and design standards required; conflicting
standards. Each developer required to submit a stormwater management plan and
provide stormwater management shall comply with this title and the design
standards. In the event of a conflict among the design standards, the more
restrictive provision shall govern.
   (c)   Consistency with watershed management studies or flood management
plans. If applicable, stormwater management plans shall be consistent with
watershed management plans prepared by the County or with flood management
plans as approved by the Administration in accordance with the Flood Hazard
Management Act of 1976.
(Bill No. 58-10)
SUBTITLE 2. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS
§ 16-4-201. Stormwater management plans required.
   (a)   Requirement. A developer may not undertake any development or land
disturbance that is subject to the provisions of this title without an approved
stormwater management plan.
   (b)   Preparation. A stormwater management plan shall be prepared by a
design professional, according to the requirements of the State Code for the
type of stormwater management plan required.
      (1)   ESD Planning Techniques and Practices. Stormwater management plans
shall demonstrate that environmental site design (ESD) has been implemented to
the maximum extent practicable (MEP) using the ESD Planning Techniques and
Practices in COMAR 26.17.02.08B, the Design Manual, and the County Procedures
Manual.
      (2)   Contents and submission of stormwater management plans. The
developer shall be responsible for submitting phased stormwater management
plans for development projects according to the comprehensive review and
approval process in COMAR 26.17.02.09E and the County Procedures Manual
including, but not limited to, the concept plan, stormwater management site
development plan, the final stormwater management plan, and an operations and
maintenance plan.
   (c)   Review. The Department shall review the stormwater management plan to
determine whether the plan meets the requirements of this title and give
notification of approval or reasons for disapproval. For single lot development
in the critical area, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall review the
stormwater management plan to determine whether the plan meets the requirements
of this title and give notification of approval or reasons for disapproval. In
granting approval of a stormwater management plan, the Office of Planning and
Zoning or the Department may impose such conditions as it considers necessary
to ensure compliance with the provisions of this title and the preservation of
the public health and safety.
   (d)   Additional approvals required. If the stormwater management plan
includes stormwater management practices that require small pond approval, a
stormwater management plan shall be approved by the MDE and by the Anne Arundel
Soil Conservation District.
   (e)   Easements, right-to-discharge, and other property interests. If a
stormwater management plan involves direction or relocation of some or all of
the stormwater runoff from the site in a manner that materially alters the flow
characteristics of depth, velocity, width, or rate, or concentrates the
discharge, a developer shall obtain from abutting and adjacent property owners
any necessary easement, right-to-discharge, or other property interest
concerning flow of water. This does not relieve the developer from obtaining
any necessary easements, right-to-discharge, or other property interest
concerning flow of water from adjacent property owners.
   (f)   Summary sheet. The plan shall include a summary sheet that lists the
types of practices being utilized, their street location and addresses, the
grid coordinates in NAD 83, and the size of the drainage area being treated.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 74-11; Bill No. 65-17)
§ 16-4-202. Minimum control requirements—In general.
   (a)   New development.
      (1)   ESD requirements. The planning techniques, nonstructural practices,
and design methods specified in the Design Manual shall be used to implement
ESD to the MEP. The use of ESD planning techniques and treatment practices
shall be exhausted before any structural best management practice (BMP) is
implemented. The approved structural stormwater management measures are listed
in COMAR 26.17.02.08C and the County Procedures Manual. All stormwater
management plans must be designed using the ESD sizing criteria, recharge
volume, water quality volume, and stream channel protection storage volume
criteria according to the Design Manual.
      (2)   MEP standard. The MEP standard is met when channel stability is
maintained, predevelopment groundwater recharge is replicated, nonpoint source
pollution is minimized, and regenerative step pool conveyance systems are
employed to the extent possible on all public stormwater systems. Structural
management practices may be used only if determined to be absolutely necessary.
      (3)   Overbank flood protection. Overbank flood protection (Qp) is
required as specified in the County Procedures Manual.
      (4)   Extreme flood volume. Extreme flood volume (Qf) is required as
specified in the County Procedures Manual.
   (b)   Redevelopment.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified in an approved watershed management
plan, the minimum control requirements for redevelopment are:
         (i)   reduction of existing impervious area by at least 50% within the
limits of disturbance according to the Design Manual;
         (ii)   implementation of ESD to the MEP to provide water quality
treatment for at least 50% of the existing impervious area within the limits of
disturbance; and
         (iii)   use of a combination of (i) and (ii) for at least 50% of the
existing site impervious area.
      (2)   Alternative stormwater management measures may be used to meet the
requirements of this title if it can be satisfactorily demonstrated to the
Department that impervious area reduction has been maximized and ESD has been
implemented to the MEP. Alternative stormwater management measures include but
are not limited to:
         (i)   use of an onsite structural BMP;
         (ii)   use of an offsite structural BMP to provide water quality for
an area equal to or greater than 50% of the existing impervious area; and
         (iii)   use of a combination of impervious area reduction, ESD
implementation, and onsite or offsite structural BMP for an area equal to or
greater than 50% of the existing site impervious area within the limits of
disturbance.
      (3)   If it can be demonstrated to the Department that all attempts to
reduce impervious area, implement ESD to the MEP, and use alternative measures
described in paragraph (2) above have been exhausted, then the following
alternatives may be considered:
         (i)   watershed or stream restoration;
         (ii)   retrofitting an existing stormwater management facility,
including existing BMP upgrades, filtering practices, and offsite ESD
implementation;
         (iii)   a combination of ESD and an onsite or offsite structural BMP;
         (iv)   payment of a fee-in-lieu;
         (v)   a partial modification of the treatment requirements if ESD is
not practicable;
         (vi)   using design criteria based on watershed management plans
prepared by the County; or
         (vii)   implementing stormwater management practices to provide water
quality control for 50% of the existing impervious area.
      (4)   The Department may consider the prioritization of alternatives in §
16-4-202(b)(3) after determining that it is not practicable to meet the 2009
regulatory requirements using ESD. In deciding what alternatives may be
required, the Department may consider factors including, but not limited to:
         (i)   whether the project is in an area targeted for development
incentives such as a Priority Funding Area, a designated Transit Oriented
Development Area, or a designated Base Realignment and Closure Revitalization
and Incentive Zone;
         (ii)   whether the project is necessary to accommodate growth
consistent with comprehensive plans; or
         (iii)   whether bonding and financing have already been secured based
on an approved development plan.
      (5)   Stormwater management shall be addressed according to the new
development requirements in the Design Manual for any net increase in
impervious area.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 74-11; Bill No. 65-17)
§ 16-4-203. Requirements in addition to the minimum control requirements.
   The approving authority may require more than the minimum control
requirements specified in this subtitle if:
      (1)   hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant;
      (2)   flooding, stream channel erosion, or water quality problems exist
between the site outfall and the designated point of investigation; or
      (3)   the County has completed a watershed management study that
indicates that additional requirements are necessary.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-4-204. Alternative stormwater management practices.
   Alternative stormwater management practices that meet the performance
criteria of using ESD to the MEP established in the Design Manual may not be
used unless they are approved by the Administration and then by the County.
(Bill No. 58-10)
SUBTITLE 3. INSPECTIONS, COMPLETION OF WORK, AND MAINTENANCE
§ 16-4-301. Inspections.
   (a)   Notification by developer. A developer shall notify the Department at
least 48 hours before commencing work and on completion of any work in
conjunction with the stormwater management plan.
   (b)   Inspections by the County. The Department shall make and document
regular inspections, at a minimum, at each stage of construction and shall
include the information specified in COMAR 26.17.02.10 and listed in the County
Procedures Manual.
   (c)   Violations. When any violation is observed, the Department shall
provide to the developer and to any onsite personnel written notice describing
the nature of the violation and the required corrective action. The developer
may not proceed with work until the Department inspects and approves the work
previously completed.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 74-11)
§ 16-4-302. Completion.
   (a)   As-built plans and certification. When construction is complete, the
applicant shall submit to the Department as-built plans and an as-built
certification prepared by a design professional. At a minimum, the as-built
certification shall include a set of drawings comparing what was constructed to
the approved stormwater management plan and shall meet the latest as-built
submittal requirements set by the Department. The Department may require any
additional information that is necessary to determine that the work complies
with the approved stormwater management plan.
   (b)   Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy may not be issued
until the required stormwater management system is completed to the
satisfaction of the Department.
   (c)   Two-year warranty; best management practice to be owned or maintained
by homeowner's association.
      (1)   Scope. This subsection does not apply to a best management practice
that is installed by the County, Board of Education, or a public utility, or
that is not required for a new development or a redevelopment project.
      (2)   Warranty. At the time of submission of as-built plans and
certification as required by subsection (a), the applicant shall provide a
written warranty of any best management practice that will be owned or
maintained by a homeowner's association. The warranty shall run for a period of
two years from the date of the Department's final approval of the as-built
plans, or as extended under paragraph (6).
      (3)   Form of warranty. The form and content of the warranty provided by
the applicant shall be in a form acceptable to the Department and shall warrant
that any best management practice to be owned or maintained by a homeowner's
association complies with all applicable requirements. The warranty shall
include verification that the applicant has reserved a right of entry onto the
property to conduct repairs or restoration to a best management practice.
      (4)   Security. The warranty shall be accompanied by a security posted by
the applicant in the form approved by the Department. The security shall be in
an amount equal to the construction costs as estimated at the time of issuance
of the grading permit for any best management practice that will be owned or
maintained by a homeowner's association and shall secure any repair or
restoration until the two-year warranty, as extended, expires.
      (5)   Inspection. At intervals at the discretion of the Department during
the warranty period and upon final inspection prior to the release of the
warranty, the Department shall inspect any best management practice that will
be owned or maintained by a homeowner's association. The inspections shall
include all required elements of a maintenance inspection described in the
County Procedures Manual. If the Department determines that any repair or
restoration to a best management practice is required, the Department shall
issue a notice to the applicant.
      (6)   Extension of warranty. If an applicant is issued a notice from the
Department during the two-year warranty period to repair or restore a best
management practice, other than for routine maintenance and upkeep, the
warranty and security shall be extended for one additional year beyond the
original two-year period. If an applicant is issued a notice during an extended
warranty period to repair or restore a best management practice, other than for
routine maintenance and upkeep, the warranty and security shall be extended for
one additional year beyond the extended warranty period. The total length of
the warranty period, including extensions, shall not exceed four years.
      (7)   Forfeiture of security. If an applicant fails to repair or restore
a best management practice as directed by the Department, the security shall be
forfeited to the County. If the County's cost to complete the work to repair or
restore a best management practice is greater than the amount of the security,
the excess cost shall be billed to the applicant.
      (8)   Release.
         (i)   The Department shall conduct a final inspection at least 30 days
prior to the expiration of the warranty period, as extended, to ensure the best
management practice functions as designed. If, on final inspection, no repair
or restoration of the best management practice is required, the security
provided under this section shall be released upon expiration of the warranty
period, as extended.
            (ii)   If the warranty is extended beyond the original two-year
warranty period and if the Department determines that a partial release of the
security will not impair implementation of the written warranty, the Department
may allow a partial release, not to exceed 75% of the total security required
by the warranty. A partial release of the security does not relieve the
applicant of its obligations to repair or restore the best management practice
or its liability under paragraph (7).
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 67-20)
§ 16-4-303. Maintenance.
   (a)   Generally. The property owner shall perform preventive maintenance to
ensure that a private stormwater management system is functioning properly. The
Department shall inspect all private stormwater management practices every
three years after release of the grading permit security or, for best
management practices that require a warranty under §
16-4-302(c), after the expiration of the two-year warranty, as extended, to
ensure that preventive and routine maintenance is performed.
   (b)   Inspection reports. The Department shall prepare and keep maintenance
inspection records for all stormwater management systems as required by COMAR
26.17.02.11 and the County Procedures Manual.
   (c)   Immediate danger. If, on inspection by the Department, the condition
of a stormwater management practice presents an immediate danger to the public
health, safety, or the natural environment because of an unsafe condition or
improper maintenance, the Department shall take such action as may be necessary
to protect the public and make the practice safe. Any cost incurred by the
County shall be billed to the property owner and shall be paid within 30 days
of the date of the bill, and any amount unpaid 30 days after the date of the
bill shall be collected as provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 74-11; Bill No. 23-17; Bill No. 67-20)
SUBTITLE 4. STORMWATER PRACTICES
§ 16-4-401. Private stormwater management.
   (a)   Inspection and maintenance agreement. Before the issuance of a grading
permit for property that will have private stormwater management, the owner of
the property shall execute an inspection and maintenance agreement with the
County.
   (b)   Scope of agreement. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall:
      (1)   provide that the owner is responsible for installation of the
private stormwater management;
      (2)   adopt by reference and incorporate the final stormwater management
plan and the maintenance schedule required by §
16-4-201(c);
      (3)   require the owner to maintain inspection records for the stormwater
management system and to supply them to the Department every three years or
upon request;
      (4)   prohibit the owner from altering the private stormwater management
without prior approval from the Department;
      (5)   allow the County or its agents to access the private stormwater
management system to ensure that the system is properly still in place and
maintained and functioning as intended;
      (6)   allow the Department to perform any necessary work to correct a
violation and return the stormwater management practice to proper working
condition if the property owner, after reasonable notice from the Department,
fails to correct a violation;
      (7)   provide that the cost of work performed by the Department be levied
and collected from the owner of the property in accordance with subsection (c);
      (8)   bind subsequent owners of the property to the agreement; and
      (9)   be recorded among the land records of the County.
   (c)   Liability for cost of work performed by the Department. The cost of
work performed by the Department under the provisions of this section shall be
billed to the property owner and shall be paid within 30 days of the date of
the bill, and any amount unpaid after 30 days of the date of the bill shall be
collected as provided in §
1-8-101 of this Code.
   (d)   Repairs, restoration, and maintenance by owner. The owner of property
with a private stormwater management practice, and any other person or agent in
control of the property, shall maintain the private stormwater management and
promptly repair and restore it so that it remains at all times in a condition
that is in accordance with the final stormwater management plan.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 23-17)
§ 16-4-402. Revolving fund—Private stormwater management practices.
   (a)   Establishment. There is a revolving fund to support the cost of
repairs or reconstruction of private stormwater management practices undertaken
by the County.
   (b)   Expenditures. The Controller may allow an expenditure of up to
$100,000 for each fiscal year from the general County capital projects funds on
a revolving fund basis to support the cost of repairs or reconstruction
undertaken by the County.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-4-403. Public stormwater management.
   (a)   Manuals. All public stormwater management shall comply with the Design
Manual and the County Procedures Manual.
   (b)   Outfall requirements. All new public stormwater outfalls shall be
regenerative step pool conveyance systems as detailed in the County Procedures
Manual unless the applicable design standards contained in the County
Procedures Manual cannot be met.
(Bill No. 58-10)
TITLE 5. VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES
Section
   
16-5-101.   Violations.
   
16-5-102.   Enforcement.
   
16-5-103.   Stop work order.
   
16-5-104.   Notice of violation.
   
16-5-105.   Civil fines.
   
16-5-106.   Clearing in violation of the law.
§ 16-5-101. Violations.
   It is a violation of this article to:
      (1)   use property in violation of this article;
      (2)   permit another person to use property in violation of this article;
      (3)   perform work for another person in violation of this article;
      (4)   violate any notice or order issued by the Department;
      (5)   discharge or permit the discharge of stormwater runoff from a site
to a storm drain or watercourse without first obtaining the approval of the
Department;
      (6)   spill, dump or dispose of any material or substance other than
natural stormwater runoff to a stormdrain or watercourse unless authorized by a
valid NPDES permit issued by the State of Maryland;
      (7)   alter the ESD planning techniques, treatment practices and
structural stormwater measures used to satisfy the Minimum Control requirements
of
Title 4;
      (8)   alter the site runoff characteristics on which a prior approval was
based without the prior approval of the Department;
      (9)   occupy a building or dwelling prior to the completion of the
stormwater management system to the satisfaction of the Department;
      (10)   clear a developed woodland or forest in the critical area unless
authorized under an issued grading permit, building permit, buffer or forest
management plan, or standard grading plan;
      (11)   create a source of offsite erosion or sediment deposition; or
      (12)   fail to comply with the approved grading permit plans or standard
grading plan.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 74-11)
§ 16-5-102. Enforcement.
   (a)   Remedies independent. The enforcement measures set forth in this title
are independent remedies and may be utilized in any manner considered necessary
by the Department.
   (b)   Duty to correct after fine or imprisonment. The imposition of a fine
or imprisonment for a violation of this article does not excuse the violation,
and a person convicted of a violation of this article shall correct or remedy
the violation within a reasonable time.
   (c)   Persons who have liability for violations. A property owner is liable
for a violation of this article that occurs at or from the owner's property,
whether or not committed by the property owner.
   (d)   Enforcement measures available. For a violation of this article or any
term or condition of a permit, the Department may take enforcement measures
through any appropriate means, including:
      (1)   injunctive or any other appropriate court proceedings;
      (2)   the suspension or revocation of the permit, denial of certificates
of occupancy, or the denial of the issuance of additional permits until the
violation is cured;
      (3)   the issuance of a stop work order;
      (4)   the issuance of notice of a violation;
      (5)   the imposition of civil fines; and
      (6)   the pursuit of a criminal prosecution.
   (e)   Investigation fee. There is a fee of $150 for each investigation by
the Department that reveals a violation of any provision of this article.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 44-24)
§ 16-5-103. Stop work order.
   (a)   Grounds for issuance. The Department may issue a stop work order if it
determines that a person has violated this article or any term or condition of
a permit.
   (b)   Content. A stop work order shall describe the violation and prohibit
all construction on site other than work expressly designated in the order to
environmentally or materially secure the site.
   (c)   Notice; compliance. The Department shall notify the permittee of a
stop work order by first class mail, postage prepaid, or by an electronic or
facsimile communication. The Department shall post the order at the work site
and the permittee shall comply immediately.
   (d)   Removal. A stop work order may not be removed from the site by anyone
other than the Department.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-5-104. Notice of violation.
   (a)   Grounds for issuance. The Department may issue a notice of violation
to an owner or permittee who has violated this article or any term or condition
of a permit that orders the person to cure the violation within the time
specified in the notice.
   (b)   Content. A notice of violation shall describe the violation and shall
require the owner or permittee to cure the violation within a specified time.
   (c)   Notice. The Department shall serve a notice of violation on the owner
or permittee by first class mail, postage prepaid, or by an electronic or
facsimile communication.
   (d)   Noncompliance; completion of work by County. If the owner or permittee
fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with a notice of violation, the
Department may complete the work in a manner that the Department deems
appropriate, and the owner and permittee shall compensate the Department for
all costs incurred, including costs for administration, construction,
consultants, equipment, inspection, notification, remediation, repair, and
restoration.
(Bill No. 58-10)
§ 16-5-105. Civil fines.
   (a)   Generally. A violation of any provision of this article is a civil
offense, punishable by a civil fine as provided by §
9-2-101 of this Code.
   (b)   Class A civil offense.
      (1)   It is a Class A civil offense to violate any provision of Title 3
in the critical area.
      (2)   It is a Class A civil offense to violate any provision of Title 4
in the critical area.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided by this section, it is a Class A civil
offense to violate any provision of
Article 17, Title 8.
      (4)   It is a Class A civil offense to clear trees of significant size,
as defined in §
17-1-101 of this Code, in violation of any provision of Title 3.
      (5)   The following factors shall be considered in determining the amount
of any fine assessed under this section:
         (i)   the gravity of the violation;
         (ii)   any willfulness or negligence involved in the violation;
         (iii)   the environmental impact of the violation; and
         (iv)   the cost of restoration and mitigation, including any cost
incurred by the State or County.
   (c)   Class B civil offense. It is a Class B civil offense to violate any
provision of Title 4 of this article outside the critical area.
   (d)   Class C civil offense. It is a Class C civil offense to violate any
other provision of this article.
(Bill No. 58-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 80-21)
§ 16-5-106. Clearing in violation of the law.
   A person who clears in violation of the law shall plant at a ratio of three
times the area cleared. Any fee-in-lieu of planting shall be as set forth in §
17-11-101 for clearing in violation of either the forest conservation or the
critical area provisions of
Article 17, and the fee shall be paid on demand.
(Bill No. 58-10)
ARTICLE 17. SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT
   Title
      
1.   DEFINITIONS
      
2.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
3.   SUBDIVISION
      
4.   SITE DEVELOPMENT
      
5.   ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES
      
6.   GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS
      
7.   DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR PARTICULAR TYPES OF DEVELOPMENT
      
8.   CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY
      
9.   BOG OVERLAY
      
10.   AGRICULTURAL LAND PRESERVATION
      
11.   FEES AND SECURITY
      
12.   MODERATELY PRICED DWELLING UNITS
TITLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Section
   
17-1-101.   Definitions.
§ 17-1-101. Definitions.
   Unless defined in this article, the Natural Resources Article of the State
Code, or COMAR, the definitions of words defined elsewhere in this Code apply
in this article. The following words have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   "ADA accessible" means accessible to persons with disabilities as
required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101, et
seq.
      (2)   “Affordable housing” means housing:
         (i)   that complies with the requirements for workforce housing listed
in Title 10 of Article 18 of this Code; or
         (ii)   1.   for which there are recorded restrictive covenants on the
property for at least 30 years restricting occupancy to income eligible
households; and
            2.   the housing is financed, in whole or in part, through the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development funding, low income housing tax
credit program, Maryland Community Development Administration’s rental housing
development programs, Anne Arundel County affordable housing trust funds, or a
combination of these funds and programs.
      (3)   “Afforestation” has the meaning stated in Natural Resources
Article, § 5-1601, of the State Code, for land outside the critical area, and
the meaning stated in COMAR, Title 27 for land inside the critical area.
      (4)   “Agricultural and resource areas” means undeveloped areas zoned for
densities of less than or equal to one dwelling unit per five acres.
      (5)   “Agricultural preservation subdivision” means a subdivision of land
in a State agricultural preservation program for which an agricultural
preservation easement has been acquired pursuant to the Agriculture Article,
Title 2, Subtitle 5, of the State Code, and a subdivision of land in a County
agricultural preservation program for which an agricultural easement has been
acquired pursuant to this Code, including a subdivision under an easement that
permits subdivision of “family conveyance lots.”
      (6)   “Bicycle pedestrian and transit infrastructure” means bikeways,
shared-use paths, sidewalks, transit stops, transit stations, and other
infrastructure that supports bicycle and pedestrian transportation.
      (7)   “Bikeway” means any road, street, path, or way which in some manner
is specifically designated for bicycle travel, regardless of whether such
facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or are to be shared
with other transportation modes.
      (8)   “Board of Education” means the Board of Education of Anne Arundel
County.
      (9)   “Bog protection plan” means a plan that:
         (i)   delineates the bog, the contributing streams, the 100-foot
upland buffer, the limited activity area, and the contributing drainage area;
         (ii)   identifies natural features and rare, threatened, or endangered
species; and
         (iii)   demonstrates how a proposed development will comply with the
requirements of this Code.
      (10)   “Buffer management plan” means a plan approved by the Office of
Planning and Zoning that governs development in the critical area buffer, in
accordance with COMAR Title 27, including the re-establishment of a buffer.
      (11)   “Bulk parcel” means a non-buildable lot remaining after
subdivision that has a potential for future development with the density that
remains within the subdivision as a whole, on which all environmentally
sensitive areas existing at the time of creation of the subdivision have been
identified, that was not tested for adequacy of public facilities during
subdivision, and that may not be further subdivided or otherwise developed
without first passing the tests for adequacy of public facilities and complying
with all applicable environmental regulations.
      (12)   “Bus or rail transit” means regularly operated public transit
services using either motor buses under contract to the City of Annapolis, Anne
Arundel County, or the State, or operated by the City of Annapolis, Anne
Arundel County, or the State, or their successors or assigns, or light rail
transit under the auspices of the State.
      (13)   “Capital Improvement Program” means an annual document prepared by
the County indicating County capital projects that have an authorization for
the current fiscal year or that are currently planned for the following five-
year period.
      (14)   “Champion tree” has the meaning stated in Natural Resources
Article, § 5-1601, of the State Code.
      (15)   “Clear sight triangle” means an area of unobstructed vision at a
road intersection.
      (16)   “Clearing” is a form of development that means the process of
cutting or removing trees, woody vegetation, ground cover, stumps, or roots,
and does not include gardening or maintenance of an existing grass lawn or
removal of hazardous trees.
      (17)   “Cluster development” means a residential development in which
dwelling units are concentrated in a selected area or selected areas of the
development through flexibility in lot size design, so as to preserve and
protect natural features, conserve forest, provide open area and recreation
area, and integrate environmental site design, without an increase in overall
density.
      (18)   “Commercial or industrial areas” means manufacturing operations,
office complexes, shopping centers, and other similar uses and their associated
storage areas, yards, and parking areas.
      (19)   “Condominium” has the meaning stated in Real Property Article,
Title 11, of the State Code.
      (20)   “Contract school” means a school facility operated as a public
school under contract with the Board of Education, located in privately owned
facilities, and operated by Board of Education staff.
      (21)   “County” means Anne Arundel County, Maryland.
      (22)   “County Inventory of Historic Resources” means properties listed
on the Maryland Inventory of Historic Properties, the National Register of
Historic Places or the National Register of Historic Landmarks. Historic
resources consist of properties, buildings, structures, districts, and
archaeological sites that represent County history, that are associated with
the lives of historically significant persons, that have historically
significant architectural value, or that are capable of yielding information
important to the County’s history or prehistory.
      (23)   “County Pedestrian and Bicycle Master Plan” means a plan adopted
by the County Council which identifies alignments for pedestrian and bicycle
facilities and sidewalks throughout the County.
      (24)   “County Procedures Manual” has the meaning stated in Article 16 of
this Code.
      (25)   “Declaration of intent” means a document required under COMAR,
Title 08, that is a notarized statement signed by a landowner certifying that
the activity on the landowner’s property is exempted from and does not conflict
with the forest conservation provisions of this article and does not conflict
with the purposes of any other declaration of intent.
      (26)   “Dedicate” or “dedication” as used in this article means a grant
of real property by its owner to the County for a public use.
      (27)   “Design Manual” has the meaning stated in Article 16 of this Code.
      (28)   “Developable area” means the area of a lot in which the principal
and accessory structures may be located.
      (29)   “Developed woodlands” has the meaning stated in COMAR, Title 27.
      (30)   “Developer” means a person who engages in development.
      (31)   “Development” means the subdivision of property or any activity
other than farming, gardening, or yard maintenance that results in a change in
existing site conditions, including the establishment of a use; the change of a
use; the improvement of property through construction, alteration, or
relocation of a structure; the provision of stormwater management or roads;
grading; and clearing.
      (32)   “Disturbance” is a form of development that means cutting or
removing vegetation or grading or filling activities, including any alteration
or change to the land, including any amount of clearing, grading, or
construction activity, but not including gardening or maintenance of an
existing grass lawn.
      (33)   “DPW Design Manual” has the meaning stated in Article 16 of this
Code.
      (34)   “Easement” means a non-possessory interest in land that creates
the right to use the property of another for a specific purpose or that imposes
limitations upon use or obligations to preserve or maintain all or a specified
portion of the property.
      (35)   “Environmental site design (ESD)” means:
         (i)   using small-scale stormwater management practices, nonstructural
techniques, and better site planning to mimic natural hydrologic runoff
characteristics and minimize the impact of land development on water resources;
and
         (ii)   using design methods specified in the State Stormwater
Management Design Manual.
      (36)   “Environmentally sensitive areas” means the area of a site which
contains tidal and nontidal wetlands, bogs, 100-year floodplains, streams,
steep slopes, and all associated buffers, and, in the critical area, also
includes habitat protection areas. These areas may also include future overlay
zones designated by the County Council as environmentally sensitive areas.
      (37)   “Facade” means the exterior walls on an enclosed or covered
portion of a structure.
      (38)   “Final plan” means the application and materials submitted with an
application for final plan review.
      (39)   “Flag lot” means a lot with two distinct parts: the flag, which is
the portion of the lot that is buildable, and the pole, which connects the flag
to the road.
      (40)   “Floodplain” has the meaning stated in Article 16 of this Code.
      (41)   “Forest” has the meaning stated in Natural Resources Article, § 5-
1601, of the State Code.
      (42)   “Forest conservation” has the meaning stated in Natural Resources
Article, § 5-1601, of the State Code.
      (43)   “Forest conservation plan” means a document prepared by a
qualified professional under COMAR, Title 08, that demonstrates a priority for
the retention of existing onsite forest and that provides for any required
afforestation and reforestation.
      (44)   “Forest management” means the protection, manipulation, and
utilization of the forest to provide multiple benefits, including timber
harvesting, water transpiration, and wildlife habitat.
      (45)   “Forest management plan” means a document prepared by a registered
professional forester that gives direction for the management of forests for
purposes of sustainability, recreation, wildlife enhancement, planting and
regeneration, or regeneration or disturbance activities, such as harvesting,
thinning, or cutting of a forest.
      (46)   “Forest stand delineation” has the meaning stated in Natural
Resources Article, § 5-1601, of the State Code.
      (47)   “Forestation agreement” means a contract that requires the
property owner and developer to plant, replant, reforest, or afforest in
accordance with an approved forest conservation plan, buffer management plan,
or bog protection plan and to maintain the planting, replanting, reforestation,
or afforestation for a period of two years.
      (48)   “Frontage” means that portion of a lot that adjoins a road and
provides access to the lot, except on waterfront lots where it is that portion
of a lot abutting the mean high-water line, or abutting platted land owned by a
homeowner’s association or the County that abuts the mean high-water line.
      (49)   “General Development Plan” means the plan adopted by the County
Council in accordance with Article 18 of this Code.
      (50)   “Geographical attendance area” has the meaning stated in Education
Article, § 4-109, of the State Code.
      (51)   “Growing season” means the period of time during which consecutive
frost-free days occur.
      (52)   “Habitat protection area” means an area that is designated for
protection under Natural Resources Article, § 8-1806, of the State Code, or by
the Secretary of Natural Resources. “Habitat protection area” includes:
         (i)   the buffer as defined in COMAR, Title 27;
         (ii)   a nontidal wetland as defined in COMAR, Title 26;
         (iii)   a habitat of a threatened species as defined in COMAR, Title
27;
         (iv)   a habitat of an endangered species as defined in COMAR, Title
27;
         (v)   a habitat of a species in need of conservation as defined in
COMAR, Title 27;
         (vi)   a plant habitat as defined in COMAR, Title 27;
         (vii)   a wildlife habitat as defined in COMAR, Title 27; and
         (viii)   anadromous fish propagation waters as defined in COMAR, Title
27.
      (53)   “Hazardous tree” has the meaning stated in COMAR, Title 27.
      (54)   “High density residential areas” means areas zoned for densities
greater than one dwelling unit per acre, including both existing and planned
development and their associated infrastructure, such as roads, utilities, and
waster and sewer service.
      (55)   “Highly erodible soils” means those soils with a K value greater
than .35 and with slopes greater than 5%, and for land within the critical
area, slopes greater than 15%.
      (56)   “Highway traffic sound level” means the peak-notice-hour average
sound level for the road with level of service (“LOS”) D traffic in the current
roadway configuration or with approved future improvements.
      (57)   “Historic waterfowl staging and concentration area” has the
meaning stated in COMAR, Title 27.
      (58)   “Hydric soil” means soils that are wet frequently enough to
periodically produce anaerobic conditions, thereby influencing the species
composition or growth, or both, of plants on those soils.
      (59)   “Hydrophytic vegetation” has the meaning stated in COMAR, Title
27.
      (60)   “In-kind replacement” means the removal of a permanent structure
and the construction of another permanent structure in the same location that
is smaller than or identical to the original structure in use, footprint, area,
height, width and length.
      (61)   “Institutional development areas” means schools, colleges,
universities, military installations, transportation facilities, utility and
sewer projects, government offices and facilities, golf courses, recreation
areas, parks, and cemeteries.
      (62)   “K value” means the soil erodibility factor in the universal soil
loss equation.
      (63)   “Landscape Manual” means the Anne Arundel County Landscape Manual.
      (64)   “Linear project” has the meaning stated in Natural Resources
Article, § 5-1601, of the State Code.
      (65)   “Lot” means land depicted and shown on a recorded plat that was
approved in accordance with the subdivision laws in effect at the time of plat
recordation, land described in a recorded deed that was subdivided in
accordance with the subdivision laws in effect at the time of deed recordation,
land located entirely outside the critical area that is described in a deed
that was recorded in the land records before September 7, 2004, and land for
which a court order has established a new boundary line or lines. This
definition does not include land platted as a road that is owned pursuant to
Real Property Article, § 2-114, of the State Code.
      (66)   “Lot coverage” has the meaning stated in Natural Resources
Article, § 8-1802, of the State Code.
      (67)   “Medium density residential areas” means areas zoned for densities
greater than one dwelling unit per five acres and less than or equal to one
dwelling unit per acre, including both existing and planned development and
either associated infrastructure, such as roads, utilities, and water and sewer
service.
      (68)   “Minor subdivision” means:
         (i)   an agricultural preservation subdivision; or
         (ii)   a subdivision not previously shown on a record plat approved by
the County and involving no more than five lots for single-family detached
dwellings for which the extension of public roads, water, or sewer is not
required.
      (69)   “Mixed use development areas” means single, relatively high
density development projects, usually commercial in nature, which include one
or more types of uses.
      (70)   “Multi-modal transportation” means any mode of public or private
mobility, including motorized transportation, bicycling, walking, or any
combination thereof.
      (71)   “Multi-modal transportation center” is a facility that joins into
one location, all modes of public or private mobility transportation, including
motorized transportation, public transit, bicycling, walking, or any
combination thereof.
      (72)   “Multi-modal transportation infrastructure” means roads, bicycle,
pedestrian, and transit infrastructure, and other infrastructure that supports
multi-modal transportation.
      (73)   “Natural features” means floodplains, slopes of 15% or greater,
soil types, streams, tidal and nontidal wetlands, and vegetation.
      (74)   “Natural runoff conveyance system” means a system that is designed
to provide (i) shallow aquatic pools, riffle grade controls, and native
vegetation in order to restore the natural stream characteristics of a
conveyance channel such as a regenerative step pool storm conveyance (SPSC)
system, and (ii) the minimization of impacts to or enhancements of the
conveyance channel buffer or any associated wetlands to ensure certain flood
conveyance and attenuation.
      (75)   “Nontidal wetland” has the meaning stated in COMAR, Title 26.
      (76)   “Office” means the Office of Planning and Zoning.
      (77)   “Open area” means that portion of a lot or site that protects
natural features that is required under §
17-6-111.
      (78)   “Open space” means a separate lot that serves to protect natural
features and provide for recreational activities.
      (79)   “Outdoor activity area” means outdoor areas for common and
extended human use that is more than transient in nature. Outdoor activity
areas include patios, decks, balconies, swimming pools, gazebos, playgrounds,
and related outdoor amenities. Outdoor activity area does not include front and
side yards of single-family detached dwellings and all yards of multifamily
dwelling units that are not occupied by an approved patio, deck, or balcony.
      (80)   “Owner” means a person who holds fee simple title.
      (81)   “Pervious manmade surface” means any surface or lot coverage that
does not meet the definition of “impervious surface” as defined in Article 16
of this Code and is installed in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications.
      (82)   “Planned unit development areas” means developments comprising a
combination of land uses or varying intensities of the same land use in
accordance with an integrated plan that provides flexibility in land use design
approved by the local jurisdiction.
      (83)   “Preliminary plan” means the application and materials submitted
with an application for preliminary plan review.
      (84)   “Public works agreement” means a contract between a developer and
the County that requires the developer to install public improvements,
including public improvements relating to roads, storm drains, water, and
sewer.
      (85)   “Reforestation” has the meaning stated in Natural Resources
Article, § 5-1601, of the State Code, for land outside the critical area and,
for land in the critical area means the establishment of a forest through
artificial reproduction or natural regeneration.
      (86)   “Reservation” means the identification and setting aside of an
area of land in a subdivision for future acquisition for public use that
subjects the land reserved to use limitations for a specified period of time
and that may be designated on the General Development Plan or in the County or
State Capital Improvement Program or the State highway needs inventory.
      (87)   “Reviewing agencies” means an advisory group of federal, State, or
County agencies designated by the Office of Planning and Zoning to provide
comments on applications.
      (88)   “Scenic or historic road” means a road shown on the official map
entitled “Scenic and Historic Roads, 2006 adopted by the County Council.
      (89)   “Scheduled completion year” means three years after approval of
the first sketch, final, preliminary, or site development plan that has been
approved for adequacy of public facilities.
      (90)   “School year” means the one-year period of time beginning on
September 30th and ending on September 29th of the following calendar year.
      (91)   “Shared-use path” means a bikeway that can also be a trail, which
is physically separated from motor vehicle traffic by an open space or barrier,
and is either within the public right-of-way or easement. Shared-use paths may
also be used by pedestrians, skaters, wheelchair users, joggers, and other non-
motorized users, and motorized users only as permitted in this Code and in
State Code, and may be designed for two-way travel.
      (92)   “Significant archaeological resource” means a resource that:
         (i)   meets one or more of the criteria required to be considered
eligible for the National Register of Historic Places; or
         (ii)   is considered locally significant as determined by the Planning
and Zoning Officer because it:
            1.   is important to the history or pre-history of the County due
to:
               A.   a broad pattern of history or event;
               B.   association with the life of an historically significant
person; or
               C.   historically significant architectural value; and
            2.   has viable research potential and retains the integrity
required to convey new information related to the County’s past.
      (93)   (i)   “Site” means the lots or parcels of land that are contiguous
and are being developed as part of a common subdivision or site development
plan.
         (ii)   “Site” includes any confronting lots or parcels of land that
are otherwise contiguous and being developed as part of a common subdivision or
site development plan, if separated by no more than one of the following:
            1.   existing road right-of-way with a functional classification of
collector or local;
            2.   transmission right-of-way; or
            3.   at the discretion of the Office of Planning and Zoning,
existing road right-of-way with a functional classification of arterial.
      (94)   “Sketch plan” means the application and materials submitted with
an application for sketch plan review.
      (95)   “Slope” means a natural incline for land outside the critical
area. For land inside the critical area, “slope” means any incline whether
natural or manmade.
      (96)   “Soil conservation and water quality plan” means a farm plan
approved by a local soil conservation district to minimize soil erosion, and to
minimize the movement of sediment, animal waste, nutrients, or agricultural
chemicals into the waters of the State.
      (97)   “Steep slope” means a 25% or greater slope that has an onsite and
offsite contiguous area that is greater than 5,000 square feet over 10 feet
vertical as measured before development. In the critical area, “steep slope”
means a 15% or greater slope that is over six feet vertically as measured
before development.
      (98)   “Subdivision” means the division of land so as to create two or
more lots, the revision of a record plat previously approved by the County, or
the establishment of a record plat for land not shown on a record plat
previously approved by the County.
      (99)   “Targeted growth area” means an area targeted for economic growth
and depicted as such in the current Anne Arundel County General Development
Plan.
      (100)   “Tidal wetlands” means “private wetlands” or “State wetlands” as
defined in the Environment Article, § 16-101, of the State Code.
      (101)   “Tree” has the meaning stated in Natural Resources Article, § 5-
1601, of the State Code.
      (102)   “Tree of significant size” means a tree that, in accordance with
Natural Resources Article, Title 5, of the State Code, has a diameter measured
at 4.5 feet above the ground of 30 inches or more or that is 75% or more of the
diameter of the current State champion tree of that species.
      (103)   “Tributary stream” has the meaning stated in Natural Resources
Article, § 8-1802\, of the State Code.
      (104)   “Waterfowl” has the meaning stated in COMAR, Title 27.
      (105)   “Whip” has the meaning stated in Natural Resources Article, § 5-
1601, of the State Code.
      (106)   “Wildlife corridor” has the meaning stated in COMAR, Title 27.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06; Bill No. 59-10;
Bill No. 47-12; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 76-13; Bill No. 3-17; Bill No. 78-18;
Bill No. 68-19; Bill No. 80-21; Bill No. 73-22; Bill No. 52-23; Bill No. 64-23;
Bill No. 72-24; Bill No. 14-25)
TITLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
17-2-101.   Scope; applicability.
   
17-2-102.   Policy.
   
17-2-103.   Compliance with other law.
   
17-2-104.   Administration and interpretation.
   
17-2-105.   Original developer lots.
   
17-2-106.   Consolidation without subdivision.
   
17-2-107.   Community meetings.
   
17-2-108.   Modifications.
   
17-2-109.   Appeal.
   
17-2-110.   County webpage notices.
   
17-2-111.   Expedited review program.
§ 17-2-101. Scope; applicability.
   (a)   Scope. This article applies to all land located in the County, except
that it does not apply to land owned or leased and developed by the County, the
Board of Education, or for use as a public charter school, as defined in § 9-
102 of the Education Article of the State Code, unless federal or State law
requires compliance with this article. The provisions of this article are
minimum requirements and are in addition to other requirements of this Code.
   (b)   Applicability to pending and future proceedings. Subject to the
grandfathering provisions of COMAR Title 27, this article applies to all
pending and future proceedings and actions of any board, department, or agency
empowered to decide applications under this Code, except that:
      (1)   an application for subdivision filed on or before April 4, 2005
shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to May 12, 2005 until the
recordation of a record plat;
      (2)   a site plan filed on or before April 4, 2005 for development in an
open space district, town center district, industrial park district, maritime
district, mixed use district, commercial revitalization area, Odenton Town
Center, Parole Town Center, or suburban community center shall be governed by
the law as it existed prior to May 12, 2005 for the development shown on the
approved site plan;
      (3)   an application for a building or grading permit filed on or before
April 4, 2005 shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to May 12, 2005
for the development approved by the permit;
      (4)   a building or grading permit issued on or before May 12, 2005 shall
be governed by the law as it existed prior to May 12, 2005 for the development
approved by the permit;
      (5)   a building permit that is related to a grading permit governed by
the law as it existed prior to May 12, 2005 shall be governed by the law as it
existed prior to May 12, 2005;
      (6)   an application for subdivision filed before July 6, 2010 shall be
governed by the law as it existed prior to November 22, 2010 until recordation
of the record plat if the County approves an administrative waiver as
stipulated in COMAR, Title 26 or the project is exempt from the administrative
waiver process;
      (7)   an application for a building or grading permit filed before July
6, 2010 shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to November 22, 2010
for the development approved by the permit if the County approves an
administrative waiver as stipulated in COMAR, Title 26 or the project is exempt
from the administrative waiver process;
      (8)   subject to the election provisions of subsection (10), an
application for subdivision filed before November 19, 2012, and related permit
and plan applications and approvals for the subdivision, shall be governed by
the law as it existed prior to April 16, 2013, until November 19, 2017;
      (9)   subject to the election provisions of subsection (10), an
application for a building or grading permit, including preliminary plan
approval and site development plan approval, filed before November 19, 2012
shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to April 16, 2013;
      (10)    for any application described in subsection (8) or (9), the
applicant may make an election, in writing and filed with the Planning and
Zoning Officer no later than July 1, 2013, to be governed by the law as it
exists after April 16, 2013;
      (11)   an application for sketch plan approval, final plan approval,
preliminary plan approval, or approval of a building or grading permit
associated with a site development plan filed before August 1, 2018 shall be
governed by the provisions of Subtitles 2 and 5 of Title 5 as they existed
prior to August 1, 2018;
      (12)   for property located in the Core in the Parole Town Center, an
application for final approval of a sketch plan, a preliminary plan, a proposed
record plat, or for recommendation of approval of an application for a building
or grading permit in connection with a preliminary plan or site development
plan, or for approval of a site development plan for development that does not
require a permit, filed before December 6, 2018, shall be governed by §
17-5-201 as it existed prior to December 6, 2018;
      (13)   an application for sketch plan approval, final plan approval,
preliminary plan approval, or approval of a building or grading permit
associated with a site development plan filed before January 1, 2019 shall be
governed by the provisions of §
17-6-110 as they existed prior to April 14, 2019;
      (14)   the following shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to
January 9, 2020:
         (i)   an application for approval of a sketch plan, final plan, final
infrastructure construction plan, preliminary plan, or site development plan,
and any building or grading permits associated with these plans, filed on or
before December 15, 2019;
         (ii)   applications for building and grading permits that are not
associated with a final plan or site development plan filed on or before
December 15, 2019;
         (iii)   revisions to the plans and permits referenced in subparagraphs
(i) and (ii) that do not materially alter the proposed or actual limits of
disturbance; and
         (iv)   an application for a special exception filed on or before
December 15, 2019 and all applications associated with the special exception;
and
      (15)   an application for sketch plan approval, final plan approval,
preliminary plan approval, or approval of a building or grading permit
associated with a BRAC Mixed Use Development plan that was filed before
December 15, 2022 shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to June 27,
2022;
      (16)   an application for approval of a sketch plan or final plan for a
cluster development, and any building permit, grading permit, or other
application associated with a cluster development, filed before November 25,
2022 shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to November 25, 2022; and
      (17)   for a property located in the Parole Town Center, the following
shall be governed by Subtitle 9 of Title 7 as it existed prior to December 8,
2023:
         (i)   an application for approval of or revision to a sketch plan,
final plan, preliminary plan, site development plan, or any building or grading
permits or other applications associated with these plans, filed on or before
December 8, 2023; and
         (ii)   an application for any building or grading permits not
associated with a final plan or site development plan filed on or before
December 8, 2023; and
      (18)    for a property located in the Odenton Town Center, the following
shall be governed by Subtitle 8 of Title 7 as it existed prior to March 29,
2024:
         (i)   an application for approval of or revision to a sketch plan,
final plan, preliminary plan, site development plan, or any building or grading
permits or other applications associated with these plans, filed on or before
March 29, 2024; and
         (ii)   an application for any building or grading permits not
associated with a final plan or site development plan filed on or before March
29, 2024;
      (19)   for a property located in a mixed use district, the following
shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to February 2, 2025:
         (i)   an application for approval of or revision to a sketch plan,
final plan, preliminary plan, site development plan, or any building or grading
permits filed on or before February 2, 2025 and any other applications
associated with these plans; and
         (ii)   an application for any building or grading permits not
associated with a final plan or site development plan filed on or before
February 2, 2025; and
      (20)   an application for a sketch plan, preliminary plan, final plan, or
building permit, site development plan, or grading permit associated with a
proposed development filed before July 1, 2025, shall be governed by the law as
it existed prior to July 1, 2025..
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 52-06; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 93-12;
Bill No. 76-13; Bill No. 64-18; Bill No. 94-18; Bill No. 101-18; Bill No. 68-
19; Bill No. 22-20; Bill No. 31-22; Bill No. 73-22; Bill No. 88-22; Bill No.
64-23; Bill No. 84-23; Bill No. 72-24; Bill No. 75-24; Bill No. 26-25; Bill No.
31-25)
§ 17-2-102. Policy.
   The policy of the County is to:
      (1)   establish standards for logical, sound, and economical development;
      (2)   provide for adequate light, air and privacy; secure safety from
fire, flood, and other danger; prevent population congestion and overcrowding
of the land; provide orderly expansion and extension of community services and
facilities at minimum cost and maximum convenience;
      (3)   provide for the proper and safe arrangement and connectivity of
multi-modal transportation infrastructure in relation to those existing or
planned and to provide for the most beneficial relationship between the use of
land, buildings, traffic, and multi-modal transportation;
      (4)   improve the quality of life through protection of the environment,
including the prevention of air, water, light, and noise pollution, the
prevention of soil erosion, and the preservation of natural features;
      (5)   minimize adverse impacts on water quality; conserve plant, fish,
and wildlife habitat; and foster appropriate development activity for shoreline
areas;
      (6)   conserve and protect forests, woodlands, and trees;
      (7)   ensure appropriate surveying of land, preparing and recording of
plats, and the equitable handling of all subdivision plats by providing uniform
procedures and standards for observance by developers;
      (8)   ensure that land is subdivided so that it may be used safely for
building purposes;
      (9)   ensure that land is not subdivided or developed until adequate
facilities and improvements, such as drainage, water, sewerage, and open area,
are provided or security acceptable to the County is given to ensure that the
required improvements will be made;
      (10)   ensure that existing and proposed public improvements conform with
and are related to the proposals shown and recommendations contained in the
current General Development Plan, Capital Improvement Program, and other
transportation or master development plans or programs adopted by the County;
and
      (11)   supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and
standards contained in
Article 15 of this Code,
Article 18 of this Code, the recommendations contained in the current General
Development Plan, and the Capital Improvement Program, and other transportation
or development plans or programs adopted by Anne Arundel County.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 78-18; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-2-103. Compliance with other law.
   Except as otherwise provided by this article, all subdivision and
development shall comply with all applicable federal, State, and County law and
regulations, the DPW Design Manual, and applicable environmental site design
techniques.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-2-104. Administration and interpretation.
   This article is administered and interpreted by the Planning and Zoning
Officer and the Office of Planning and Zoning, except that the expedited review
program established under § 17-2-111 may also be administered by the Director
of Inspections and Permits and the Department of Inspections and Permits.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 23-16)
§ 17-2-105. Original developer lots.
   (a)   Definition. "Original developer lot" means a lot on a plat recorded
before January 15, 1970 that, before January 15, 1971, was not (1) the subject
of an executed public works agreement and (2) transferred to a third-party bona
fide purchaser for value.
   (b)   Requirement. An original developer lot is not a buildable lot unless
and until the owner completes subdivision under this article.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05)
§ 17-2-106. Consolidation without subdivision.
   The owner of contiguous properties may consolidate the properties by deed
without initiating subdivision if the consolidation of the properties does not
create a violation of the development provisions of this article or a violation
of the provisions of
Article 18 of this Code, or, within the critical area, is in compliance with
COMAR, Title 27. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall not recognize as one
lot consolidated parcels that include land within a platted and recorded road
or right-of-way.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-2-107. Community meetings.
   (a)   Scope.
      (1)   This section applies to any application that includes:
         (i)   a modification to permit direct impact to environmentally
sensitive areas;
         (ii)   a subdivision of property that adjoins a residentially zoned
and developed lot;
         (iii)   development of a commercial, industrial, or institutional use,
or an active recreational use as defined in §
18-1-101, that adjoins a residentially zoned and developed lot; or
         (iv)   any revision to items (i), (ii), or (iii) that is accepted
under the original project number followed by a hyphenated numerical suffix.
      (2)    This section does not apply to:
         (i)   an application for an amended record plat that does not impact
the adequacy of public facilities;
         (ii)   development that the Planning and Zoning Officer determines
will have no impact on the use and enjoyment of adjoining property; or
         (iii)   in-kind replacement of a deck or a structure that is accessory
to residential development.
   (b)   Time for application and review, generally. An application for an
amended record plat may be submitted prior to the community meeting required by
subsection (c), but the Office of Planning and Zoning will generally not review
the application until after the required community meeting, and is otherwise
subject to the requirements of this section.
   (c)   Meetings required. In the six-month period before the initial
submission of a subdivision or preliminary plan that falls within the scope of
this section, the developer shall hold a community meeting for the purpose of
presenting information regarding the development, including proposed stormwater
management design and any requested modifications, and allowing the community
to ask questions and provide comments. Additionally, within 45 days after the
submission of a final plan or site development plan that falls within the scope
of this section, the developer shall hold a community meeting for the purpose
of presenting information regarding changes made to the information presented
at the initial submission meeting and allowing the community to ask questions
and provide comments. The developer shall record or cause to be recorded, by
audio or audio-visual means, the proceedings of each community meeting and,
promptly after the meeting, shall provide a copy of the recording to the Office
of Planning and Zoning. The meeting shall be held in the County, Monday through
Thursday, beginning between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m., at an ADA
accessible facility located within five miles of the development site. However,
if, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Officer, the five mile
restriction is impracticable, then the meeting shall be held at a location as
may be authorized by the Planning and Zoning Officer in writing.
   (d)   Notice. At least 21 days before the date of a community meeting, the
developer shall mail by first class mail a notice of the date, time, and
location of the meeting to all lot owners within 300 feet of the property
subject to the application; to the president of any community or homeowners’
association of any subdivision that is located within 300 feet of the property
subject to the application that is on the list of community associations,
persons, and organizations maintained in the Office of the County Executive; to
the Office of Planning and Zoning; to the County Executive or the County
Executive’s designee; and to the Councilmember of the Councilmanic District in
which the property subject to the application is located and, if the property
abuts another Councilmanic district, to that County Councilmember.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 62-07; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 15-12;
Bill No. 23-18; Bill No. 49-19; Bill No. 28-21; Bill No. 75-21)
§ 17-2-108. Modifications.
   (a)   Generally. The Planning and Zoning Officer may approve an application
for a modification to any provision of this article other than §
17-2-107 or one contained in
Titles 5,
8, or
9, except as allowed by §§
17-5-203(b),
17-5-205(b),
17-8-201(b),
17-8-203(c),
17-8-403,
17-8-601(b)(2),
17-8-601(c),
17-8-901, or
17-9-401, and to any applicable regulations, manuals, or specifications,
including the DPW Design Manual, upon making specific findings, enumerated in
writing, that the modification request satisfies each of the following
criteria:
      (1)   practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship will result from
strict application of this article or, for a modification relating to forest
conservation, unwarranted hardship will result due to special features of the
site or other circumstances;
      (2)   the purposes of this article, including minimization and mitigation
of environmental impacts through the use of clustering or other available
design alternatives to preserve the character of the impacted area, will be
served by an alternative proposal;
      (3)   the modification is not detrimental to the public health, safety,
or welfare, is not injurious to other properties, or, if the modification
relates to forest conservation, does not adversely affect water quality;
      (4)   the modification does not have the effect of nullifying the intent
and purpose of this article, the General Development Plan, or Article 18 of
this Code; and
      (5)   the applicant has submitted written verification to the Office of
Planning and Zoning that:
         (i)   the requested modification was disclosed and discussed at a
community meeting required under this article; or
         (ii)   a notice explaining the reason for the modification, along with
a copy of the request for modification, was mailed to:
            1.   all owners of property located within 300 feet of the affected
property; and
            2.   the president of any community or homeowners’ association of
any subdivision that is located within 300 feet of the affected property
subject to the application that are on the list of community associations,
persons, and organizations maintained in the Office of the County Executive.
   (b)   Comments; decision. The Planning and Zoning Officer shall provide
comments on an application for a modification no later than 45 days after the
filing of the application but may not issue a decision on the application until
at least 15 days have elapsed from the date the verification referenced in
subsection (a)(5) was submitted.
   (c)   When modification may be denied. An application for a modification may
be denied if requested solely because compliance would add significantly to
development costs or if requested solely for the convenience of the developer,
such as when the land is not usable because of error or poor assumptions on the
part of the developer.
   (d)   Modification not required. At the discretion of the Planning and
Zoning Officer, demolition of existing structures may proceed without a
modification of site development plan requirements in order to abate a civil
infraction that violates this Code or to protect the public health or safety.
   (e)   Modification to eliminate sketch plan review or preliminary plan
review. The Planning and Zoning Officer may grant a modification to the
requirement of a sketch or preliminary plan review for redevelopment and
development within the town center districts if the applicant demonstrates to
the Planning and Zoning Officer’s satisfaction that adequate public facilities
will be available to serve the development at the time of final plan or site
development plan approval and that the final plan or site development plan will
satisfy environmental site design standards and techniques for stormwater
management and roads.
   (f)   Conditions. In granting a modification, the Planning and Zoning
Officer may require conditions to secure the objectives of the provision that
has been modified.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 9-11; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 27-18;
Bill No. 68-19; Bill No. 82-22)
§ 17-2-109. Appeal.
   (a)   When allowed. A person aggrieved by the approval or denial of a
modification, the approval or denial of a sketch plan, or the approval or
denial of a final plan may file an appeal to the Board of Appeals within 30
days of the date of such approval or denial.
   (b)   Issues on appeal. The Board of Appeals may not:
      (1)   hear or decide in an appeal from the approval or denial of a final
plan issues that were decided in the approval or denial of a sketch plan but
not appealed; or
      (2)   reconsider in an appeal from the approval or denial of a final plan
issues that were decided in an appeal from the approval or denial of a sketch
plan.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-2-110. County webpage notices.
   (a)   Requirements for posting. The Office of Planning and Zoning regularly
shall cause the following to be posted on the County's webpage:
      (1)   notice of applications for subdivision or modification;
      (2)   notice of the approval or denial of modifications;
      (3)   notice of the approval or denial of sketch plans;
      (4)   notice of the approval or denial of final plans;
      (5)   a list of all scheduled community meetings required by this
article;
      (6)   a recording of a community meeting, as required under §
17-2-107, for at least 90 days;
      (7)   a list of submitted site development plans provided to the County
Executive in accordance with §
17-4-208; and
      (8)   the County Landscape Manual.
   (b)   Timing. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall cause notice of the
approval or denial of applications for a modification, the approval or denial
of applications for sketch plan approval, and the approval or denial of
applications for final plan approval to be posted on the County’s webpage
within five days after the date of the approval or denial.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 20-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 28-21)
§ 17-2-111. Expedited Review Program.
   (a)   Program established. There is an expedited review program that may be
utilized in lieu of the review process provided in this article for engineered
water and sewer, road, storm drain, stormwater management or grading plans
outside the critical area overlay.
   (b)   Generally. A developer may elect to participate in the expedited
review program and contract for private review of engineered water and sewer,
road, storm drain, stormwater management or grading plans by reviewers
certified by the County.
   (c)   Process and procedure. The Office of Planning and Zoning and the
Department of Inspections and Permits shall adopt regulations, forms and
compliance checklists to implement the expedited review program, which shall
include the following provisions.
      (1)   All expedited reviews shall be at the sole cost of the developer.
      (2)   All potential certified reviewers shall meet minimum qualifications
established by the Office of Planning and Zoning and the Department of
Inspections and Permits.
      (3)   The Office of Planning and Zoning and the Department of Inspections
and Permits shall maintain a rotation list of all certified reviewers and refer
requests for review from the list of certified reviewers on a rotation. The
Office of Planning and Zoning and the Department of Inspections and Permits
shall determine which certified reviewers received the last request and refer
the requesting applicant the names of the next three certified reviewers on the
list to review the application. The applicant shall notify the Office of
Planning and Zoning and the Department of Inspections and Permits of their
selection of a certified reviewer within three days of execution of an
agreement with a certified reviewer.
      (4)   Certified reviewers shall enter into an agreement to indemnify the
County from any and all claims or liabilities arising out of negligent acts or
omissions of the certified reviewer.
      (5)   All recommendations for plan approval by certified reviewers are
subject to review by the Office of Planning and Zoning and the Department of
Inspections and Permits.
      (6)   Notwithstanding a recommendation for plan approval by a certified
reviewer, final plan approval authority remains solely with the Office of
Planning and Zoning and the Department of Inspections and Permits.
      (7)   Certified reviewers may not have an interest, as that term is
defined in §
7-1-101 of this Code, in any project in which they are retained to perform a
review or have an interest in any other project or business entity of the
developer who is requesting expedited review from the reviewer, or in any
business entity in which the developer and the reviewer have a shared interest.
Certified reviewers shall disclose any interest in projects or businesses as
part of the qualification process and have an affirmative duty to update the
disclosure annually.
      (8)   The program shall include a process to address complaints regarding
certified reviewers and remedies, including de-certification.
   (d)   In lieu of County review. Expedited review under this section shall be
in lieu of the County review process under Title 3 and Title 4 of this article,
provided, however, that all plans recommended for approval by expedited review
shall be reviewed by the Office of Planning and Zoning and the Department of
Inspections and Permits for compliance with all applicable requirements of
State and County law, and may not be approved until full compliance is
confirmed.
   (e)   Time for final review. Final plan review by the Office of Planning and
Zoning and the Department of Inspections and Permits of engineered water and
sewer, road, storm drain, stormwater management or grading plans recommended
for approval by a certified reviewer shall be completed no later than 10 days
after certification and written request for approval from a certified reviewer.
   (f)   Reporting to County Council. No later than July 1 of each year, the
Planning and Zoning Officer, through the Office of Planning and Zoning, the
Department of Inspections and Permits, the Chief Administrative Officer, and
the County Executive, shall submit an annual report to the County Council
describing the operation of the expedited review program, including a summary
of the program from the preceding year, the number of certified reviewers
approved, the number of projects that elected and completed the expedited
review process, the time frame for projects to complete the expedited review
process, and any disciplinary actions.
   (g)   Disclosure of expedited review election. The Office of Planning and
Zoning and Department of Inspections and Permits shall maintain a list on the
County website of all projects for which a developer has opted for expedited
review by a certified reviewer. The list shall include the date of request,
type of review requested and the deadline for submission of the reviewed
application to the Office of Planning and Zoning or Department of Inspections
and Permits.
(Bill No. 23-16)
TITLE 3. SUBDIVISION
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
17-3-101.   Scope.
Subtitle 2. Sketch Plans
   
17-3-201.   Sketch plan application.
   
17-3-202.   Public notice.
   
17-3-203.   Review; County report; developer re-submittal; notice of approval.
   
17-3-204.   Expiration of approved sketch plan.
Subtitle 3. Final Plans
   
17-3-301.   Final plan application.
   
17-3-302.   Contents of proposed record plat.
   
17-3-303.   Review process.
   
17-3-304.   Completion of subdivision.
Subtitle 4. Requirements for All Subdivisions
   
17-3-401.   Lot and block size.
   
17-3-402.   Historic resources.
   
17-3-403.   Reservation of land for public facilities.
   
17-3-404.   Acceptance of land or improvements for public purpose.
   
17-3-405.   Subdivision name.
   
17-3-406.   Compliance with criteria for environmental site design.
Subtitle 5. Residential Subdivisions
   
17-3-501.   Scope.
   
17-3-502.   Lot design criteria.
   
17-3-503.   Road frontage.
   
17-3-504.   Setbacks from transmission mains and power lines.
   
17-3-505.   Residential subdivisions abutting heavy industrial zones.
Subtitle 6. (Reserved)
Subtitle 7. Floodplain
   
17-3-701.   100-year floodplain requirements.
Subtitle 8. Amended Record Plats
   
17-3-801.   Amended record plats.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 17-3-101. Scope.
   This title applies to subdivision only.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 2. SKETCH PLANS
§ 17-3-201. Sketch plan application.
   (a)   Generally. Unless a modification of the requirement for the filing of
an application for sketch plan approval is granted, a subdivision other than a
minor subdivision shall be initiated by filing an application for sketch plan
approval prepared by and under the seal of a qualified professional.
   (b)   Contents. A sketch plan shall be on a 24" x 36" sheet at a scale that
is no smaller than 1" = 100' and shall contain all information required by the
Office of Planning and Zoning, including attachments appearing on the current
sketch plan checklist maintained by the Office of Planning and Zoning. The
sketch plan shall show the initial location of all development, including
multi-modal transportation infrastructure, roads, buildings, parking,
stormwater management, and utilities, identify conservation and environmentally
sensitive areas, and provide other information required by the Office of
Planning and Zoning to clearly identify areas on the site that are suitable for
development.
   (c)   Attachments. A sketch plan shall be accompanied by all information
required by the Office of Planning and Zoning and the Department of Inspections
and Permits, including to the extent applicable:
      (1)   a sketch plan showing an initial location of stormwater management,
utilities, forest conservation area, and any other pertinent information
requested by the Office of Planning and Zoning to facilitate determination of
the development envelope on the site;
      (2)   a landscape plan that is in compliance with the Landscape Manual;
      (3)   the estimated quantity of proposed excavation and fill;
      (4)   a forest stand delineation;
      (5)   a bog protection plan for a bog protection area;
      (6)   maps of existing and proposed drainage areas at a scale of 1" =
100' for sites less than 25 acres and 1" = 200' for sites greater than 25
acres;
      (7)   a traffic impact study;
      (8)   a bicycle, pedestrian, and transit assessment, unless exempt
pursuant to subsection (d);
      (9)   in the critical area:
         (i)   a sediment control plan for all forest or woodland disturbance
of 5,000 square feet or more;
         (ii)   a buffer management plan as required by COMAR, Title 27;
         (iii)   a critical area report and habitat assessment; and
         (iv)   all computations and data necessary to determine if the 10%
pollutant reduction requirements of § 16-4-205 of this Code are met;
      (10)   an equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) worksheet;
      (11)   a copy of a summary of comments received at the pre-submission
community meeting; an affidavit signed by the developer or other evidence
acceptable to the Office of Planning and Zoning to prove that a community
meeting was held and that a copy of the summary of comments was mailed to each
participant at the pre-submission community meeting, to all lot owners within
300 feet of the property to be subdivided, and to the County Councilmember of
the Councilmanic District where the property is located and, if the property
abuts another Councilmanic District, to that County Councilmember; and
      (12)   a moderately priced dwelling unit worksheet formulated by the
Office of Planning and Zoning or the Administrator, as that term is defined in
§
17-12-101, that includes, at a minimum, the number and dwelling types of
moderately priced dwelling units that will be offered for sale or rental and
the number of bedrooms in each moderately priced dwelling unit, which shall be
approved as a condition of the sketch plan application approval.
   (d)   Exemption from bicycle pedestrian transit assessment. The following
subdivisions or developments may opt to pay bicycle pedestrian and transit
infrastructure fees in lieu of preparing a bicycle pedestrian and transit
assessment:
      (1)   subdivisions of five or fewer dwelling units;
      (2)   non-residential developments comprising less than 5,000 enclosed
square feet, other than warehouse developments; and
      (3)   warehouse developments comprising less than 15,000 enclosed square
feet.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 65-17; Bill No. 78-18;
Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-3-202. Public notice.
   (a)   Signs required. Within seven days after the filing of an application
for sketch plan approval, signs that face all contiguous rights of way shall be
posted on the property and the developer shall file a certification with clear
photographic evidence to verify compliance with this subsection. The Office of
Planning and Zoning shall furnish signs to the developer that contain, at a
minimum, the project and subdivision number, the name of the applicant, and a
telephone number for additional information. The developer is responsible for
posting and maintaining the signs.
   (b)   Location. Signs shall be located not more than 10 feet from each
boundary of the property that abuts a public road or navigable water, except
that, if required by flora covering the property or topographic conditions of
the land, a sign may be posted farther than 10 feet from the boundary to
enhance its visibility. If the property does not abut a public road, one or
more signs shall be posted in locations that can be readily seen by the public.
The bottom of each sign shall be erected three feet above the ground.
   (c)   Notice to community associations and others. Within seven days after
the filing of an application for subdivision that proposes to create additional
lots, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall provide to the Office of the
County Executive the information contained on the signs; the Councilmanic
District where the property is located; and, if the property abuts another
Councilmanic District, an identification of that Councilmanic District. The
Office of the County Executive shall send a notice containing that information
to each community association, person, and organization on its list that is
located in the Councilmanic District of the property proposed for subdivision
and any abutting Councilmanic District.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-3-203. Review; County report; developer re-submittal; notice of approval.
   (a)   Developer submittal; approval or denial. As promptly as possible after
the filing of a sketch plan, but not later than 15 days prior to the Comment
Review Committee meeting as required by subsection (b), the Office of Planning
and Zoning shall provide the developer, the developer's representative and all
reviewing agencies, with a written approval or denial of the sketch plan
application, including a report of all findings, comments, and recommendations
of reviewing County agencies, and if applicable a notice of the date, time and
location of the Comment Review Committee meeting. The written approval or
denial will resolve inconsistencies and conflicts among agency comments and
will offer the applicant direction on how to proceed to final plan review, or
what issues need to be addressed with a new application for sketch plan
approval.
   (b)   Comment Review Committee meeting; meeting summary. Within 75 days
after the filing of a sketch plan, the developer may request that the Office of
Planning and Zoning schedule at its office, or at a mutually agreed upon
location, a meeting of the Development Review Team Leader and Office of
Planning and Zoning reviewers, representatives of other County reviewing
agencies, and the developer and its representatives. The Committee will discuss
the report provided under subsection (a), reviewing agencies' comments, and any
other matters that pertain to the submittal and approval of the plan. Within 15
days of the meeting, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall confirm in writing
to the developer and the developer's designated representatives a summary of
the meeting including any recommendations, requirements for approval, or other
unresolved matters to be addressed before approval may be granted. If the
meeting summary includes findings, comments or recommendations that were not
discussed during the Comment Review Committee meeting, the developer may
request that the Office of Planning and Zoning schedule a follow-up meeting of
the reviewing agencies to address such issues.
   (c)   Developer re-submittals; comments by the County. After the developer
files a sketch plan re-submittal, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall
provide promptly any further findings, comments, and recommendations of the
County through its reviewing agencies, and shall attempt to resolve
inconsistencies or conflicts among the agency comments. Within 60 days after
the date the report is mailed, the developer shall file a sketch plan re-
submittal that addresses the findings, comments, and recommendations. This
process continues unless the application becomes void under subsection (e) or
action is taken on the application under subsection (f).
   (d)   Authority to extend time periods.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written request not less than 10 days before a
re-submittal deadline in subsection (c), the Office of Planning and Zoning may
grant a time extension for re-submittal not to exceed 180 days.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a written request not less than 10 days before a
re-submittal deadline in subsection (c), and upon a determination by the
Planning and Zoning Officer that good cause is shown, the Office of Planning
and Zoning may grant a second time extension for re-submittal not to exceed 120
days.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a written request not less than 10 days before a
re-submittal deadline in subsection (c), and upon a determination by the
Planning and Zoning Officer that good cause is shown, the Office of Planning
and Zoning may grant a third time extension for re-submittal not to exceed 60
days.
      (4)   After a third time extension, any further extensions require a
modification.
   (e)   Effect of failure to meet time requirements. An application for sketch
plan approval is void and a new application fee for sketch plan approval shall
be paid for the next submittal if the developer fails to file any sketch plan
re-submittal within the time periods required by this section.
   (f)   Action on the application. At any time after the filing of an
application for sketch plan approval, the Office of Planning and Zoning may
deny the application for failure to comply with the provisions of this Code, or
other law. Otherwise, the Office shall approve the application for sketch plan
approval.
   (g)   Notice of approval. Within 10 days after receiving notice of an
approval of an application for sketch plan approval, the developer shall mail,
by first class mail, notice of the approval to all lot owners within 300 feet
of the property, with a copy to:
      (1)   the president of any community or homeowners' association of a
subdivision that is both located within 300 feet of the property and on the
list of community associations, persons, and organizations maintained in the
Office of the County Executive;
      (2)   the Office of Planning and Zoning;
      (3)   the Councilmember of the Councilmanic District in which the
property is located and, if the property abuts another Councilmanic District,
to that County Councilmember;
      (4)   the County Executive; and
      (5)   individuals who attended a community meeting held pursuant to §
17-2-107(c) and who provided the developer with their name and mailing address
or email address for the purpose of notice.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 90-09; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 7-11; Bill No. 28-18;
Bill No. 59-19; Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-3-204. Expiration of approved sketch plan.
   A sketch plan expires 12 months after it is approved by the Office of
Planning and Zoning unless a final plan is submitted for review prior to sketch
plan expiration. Notwithstanding any modifications granted to allow for
additional time to complete a sketch plan, the Planning and Zoning Officer may
extend approval of the sketch plan for a period not to exceed one year from the
original date of expiration upon receipt of a written request made for good
cause not less than 15 days before the expiration of the sketch plan approval.
Upon expiration of a sketch plan the developer shall file a new sketch plan
application and pay required fees prior to further review.
(Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 15-13)
SUBTITLE 3. FINAL PLANS
§ 17-3-301. Final plan application.
   (a)   Generally. A minor subdivision is initiated by the filing of an
application for final plan approval. All other subdivisions are initiated by an
application for sketch plan approval. Final plan review of subdivisions other
than minor subdivisions may only proceed after the sketch plan has been
approved or the Planning and Zoning Officer has granted a modification to
eliminate the sketch plan review requirement. An application for final plan
approval shall be prepared by and under the seal of a qualified professional.
   (b)   Contents. A final plan shall include all information required to be in
a sketch plan.
   (c)   Attachments. A final plan shall be accompanied by all information
required by the Office of Planning and Zoning and the Department of Inspections
and Permits, including to the extent applicable:
      (1)   a final infrastructure construction plan, including a stormwater
management plan in accordance with
Article 16 of this Code, a storm drain plan, a water and sewer plan, and a
public multi- modal transportation plan;
      (2)   a forest conservation plan;
      (3)   drafts of all other deeds, easements, rights-of-way, agreements,
and other documents required by this article and requested by the Office of
Planning and Zoning;
      (4)   final quantities of proposed excavation and fill;
      (5)   a bog protection plan for a bog protection area;
      (6)   a traffic impact study if not previously provided;
      (7)   a bicycle, pedestrian, and transit assessment, if not previously
provided, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (d);
      (8)   a buffer management plan as required by COMAR, Title 27;
      (9)   a demonstration of external ADA accessibility as required by law;
      (10)   for subdivisions consisting of six or more lots, drafts of
documents required in connection with the creation and incorporation of a
community association or homeowners association;
      (11)   a proposed record plat;
      (12)   a digital copy of the proposed record plat or the fee for digital
conversion of a proposed record plat; and
      (13)   identification of each lot that will contain a moderately priced
dwelling unit or units, and a notation that use of each unit is subject to the
recorded agreement required by §
17-12-104(b).
   (d)   Exemption from bicycle pedestrian transit assessment. The following
subdivisions or developments may opt to pay bicycle, pedestrian, and transit
infrastructure fees in lieu of preparing a bicycle, pedestrian, and transit
assessment:
      (1)   subdivisions of five or fewer dwelling units;
      (2)    non-residential developments comprising less than 5,000 enclosed
square feet, other than warehouse developments; and
      (3)   warehouse developments comprising less than 15,000 enclosed square
feet.
   (e)   Public notice. Unless public notice has already been provided in
connection with an application for sketch plan approval, within seven days
after the filing of an application for final plan approval, signs shall be
posted and notice to community associations and others given as provided in §
17-3-202.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 65-17; Bill No. 78-18;
Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-3-302. Contents of proposed record plat.
   A proposed record plat shall be on an 18" x 24" mylar sheet with a 1½"
margin at the left edge, and shall contain the following:
      (1)   a title block in the lower right corner that includes:
         (i)   a proposed subdivision name that does not duplicate or closely
approximate any other subdivision name;
         (ii)   the title, scale, date, and Maryland NAD 83;
         (iii)   the location by County and State and the assessment district;
         (iv)   if the final plan was for a site that is less than what was
covered by the sketch plan, the subdivision name and section, the outlines of
the proposed subdivision, roads within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision,
and abutting properties; and
         (v)   for all unsubdivided property within 200 feet of the boundaries
of the proposed subdivision, the name and address of the property owner of
record and the tax map, block, and parcel number;
      (2)   for a subdivision served by public water and public sewer, a
signature block to the left of the title block for the Planning and Zoning
Officer, indicating that the Planning and Zoning Officer signs for the Office
of Planning and Zoning and for the Health Officer or, for all other
subdivisions, separate signature blocks for the Health Officer and Planning and
Zoning Officer to the left of the title block, with an identification of
whether the subdivision is served by well and septic, well and public sewer, or
public water and septic;
      (3)   the name, address, phone number, fax number, and e-mail address of
the consultant who submitted the plat to left of the signature blocks in the
lower left corner of the plat;
      (4)   a vicinity map in the upper right corner;
      (5)   general notes below the vicinity map, including notes that street
names and addresses noted on the plat represent official address data at the
time of plat approval and that the Planning and Zoning Officer may change
street names and property addresses to ensure the public health, safety, and
welfare;
      (6)   a tabulation below the general notes that includes the total number
of lots; the current zoning of the property; the density of the site; the
density of any bulk parcel; and the gross and net area of the site, each lot,
open space, open area, recreation area, floodplain, public road rights-of-way,
and private road rights-of-way;
      (7)   reference to each condition, covenant, and restriction relating to
the use and maintenance of open space;
      (8)   a dedication by all owners, with the exception of lienholders, in
the top left corner of the plat as follows:
Dedication by Owners
The undersigned, being all owner(s) of the property shown and described on this
record plat, with the exception of lienholders, adopt(s) this record plat;
establish(es) the building restriction lines; and dedicate(s) all public roads,
widening strips, floodplains, easements, and rights-of- way to public use, such
lands being deeded to Anne Arundel County, Maryland or to the State, as may be
appropriate, prior to or contemporaneous with the recordation of this plat.
To the best of my/our knowledge, information, and belief, the requirements of
the Real Property Article, § 3-108, of the State Code, concerning the making of
plats and setting of markers, have been satisfied. There are no suits, actions
at law, leases, liens, mortgages, trusts, easements, or rights-of-way affecting
the property included in this record plat other than the following:
___________________________. All owners of the property, with the exception of
lienholders, have affixed their signatures and seals on this record plat.
   Witness and date:               Owner and date:
   ___________________________         _________________________(Seal)
   ___________________________         _________________________(Seal)
   I (we) assent to and do hereby join in this record plat.
   Witness and date:               Owner and date:
   ___________________________         _________________________(Seal)
   ___________________________         _________________________(Seal)
      (9)   for a residential subdivision in which open area is required, one
of the following paragraphs within the dedication:
The open area shown on this record plat is conveyed to Anne Arundel County,
Maryland, by deed to be set aside for public use, such lands being deeded to
Anne Arundel County, Maryland, or the State of Maryland, as may be appropriate,
before or with the recordation of this plat.
or
The open area shown on this record plat is set aside for the use of the
residents of the subdivision and is conveyed to
____________________________________________________ [insert name of
incorporated homeowners' association] before or with the recordation of this
plat.
or
In lieu of setting aside open area, the owner(s) has/have paid a fee to Anne
Arundel County, Maryland for the County’s acquisition, creation, maintenance,
and administration of offsite open area.
      (10)   a surveyor's certificate in the following form:
Surveyor's Certificate
I certify that this record plat is correct; that it is a subdivision of
[indicate "part" or "all"]  of the lands conveyed by
__________________________________________________________
   [insert names of immediate prior grantors]
to ________________________________________________________
   [insert names of present owners]
by deed dated _________ and recorded in the land records of Anne Arundel
County, Maryland, in Liber ________ , Folio _______, and that the requirements
of the Real Property Article, § 3-108, of the State Code, concerning the making
of plats and setting of markers, have been satisfied.
   ______________________         _________________________________________
   Date                  Surveyor's signature
   Surveyor's typed name and address:      Surveyor's professional seal:
   ___________________________
   ___________________________      SEAL
   ___________________________
      (11)   a notice to title examiners in the following form:
   Notice to Title Examiners
   This plat has been approved for recording only and shall become null and
void unless a public works agreement has been executed and delivered
simultaneously with the approval of this plat or no later than twelve months
after this plat has been recorded.
      (12)   the name, address, and seal of the registered land surveyor
responsible for creating the plat placed above the owner and surveyor
certification on the left margin of the plat;
      (13)   all plat boundary lines, with lengths and courses to hundredths of
a foot and bearings related to the County grid coordinate system to a minimum
accuracy of 30 seconds, as determined by a survey in the field, with a minimum
adjusted error of closure of one in 10,000;
      (14)   location and identifying marks for all permanent reference
monuments and markers;
      (15)   the exact layout, including:
         (i)   the lengths of all arcs, radii, and tangents;
         (ii)   all lines with dimensions in feet and hundredths and with
bearings to a minimum accuracy of 10 seconds;
         (iii)   easements and rights-of-way;
         (iv)   the limits of each 100-year floodplain, coastal floodplain, and
coastal high hazard area; and
         (v)   all lots numbered in numerical order and all blocks lettered in
alphabetical order in the manner required by the Office of Planning and Zoning;
      (16)   accurate outlines with dimensions and acreage of a lot reserved
for acquisition and use by the County or the Board of Education;
      (17)   the gross area of each lot;
      (18)   the critical area boundary;
      (19)   the boundaries of an historic resource, archaeological site, or
cemetery;
      (20)   the location of noise mitigation measures;
      (21)   the boundaries of a bulk parcel, with a note stating that the
parcel may not be subdivided or otherwise developed without first passing the
tests for adequacy of public facilities; and
      (22)   for a subdivision in the critical area:
         (i)   a chart containing clearing calculations by lot, in compliance
with limitations established in §
17-8-602; and
         (ii)   a chart containing coverage calculations by lot and including
reservation of coverage for future use, in compliance with the limitations and
requirements established in §
17-8-402(d).
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 17-16; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-3-303. Review process.
   (a)   County report; developer re-submittal. As promptly as possible after
the filing of the application for final plan approval, but no later than 60
days after the filing of the application for final plan approval or 45 days
after filing of the application for a minor subdivision or amended plat, the
Office of Planning and Zoning shall provide to the developer a written report
of the findings, comments, and recommendations of the County through its
reviewing agencies. The report shall attempt to resolve inconsistencies or
conflicts among the agency comments. Within 10 days after receiving the report,
the developer may request that the Office of Planning and Zoning schedule a
Comment Review Committee meeting on the final plan comments in the same manner
specified in §
17-3-203(a) and (b). Within 60 days after the date the report is mailed, or
after the developer receives the summary of the Comment Review Committee, the
developer shall file a final plan re-submittal that addresses the findings,
comments, and recommendations contained in the report.
   (b)   Further comments by the County; further developer re-submittals. After
the developer files a final plan re-submittal, the Office of Planning and
Zoning shall provide promptly, or within 30 days for an application for a minor
subdivision or amended plat, any further findings, comments, and
recommendations of the County through its reviewing agencies, and shall attempt
to resolve inconsistencies or conflicts among the agency comments. Within 60
days after the date the report is mailed, the developer shall file a final plan
re-submittal that addresses the findings, comments, and recommendations. This
process continues unless the application becomes void under subsection (d) or
action is taken on the application under subsection (e).
   (c)   Authority to extend time periods.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written request not less than 10 days before the
re-submittal deadline in subsections (a) or (b), the Office of Planning and
Zoning may grant a time extension for re- submittal not to exceed 180 days.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a written request not less than 10 days before a
re-submittal deadline in subsections (a) or (b), and upon a determination by
the Planning and Zoning Officer that good cause is shown, the Office of
Planning and Zoning may grant a second time extension for re-submittal not to
exceed 120 days.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a written request not less than 10 days before a
re-submittal deadline in this subsection, and upon a determination by the
Planning and Zoning Officer that good cause is shown, the Office of Planning
and Zoning may grant a third time extension for re-submittal not to exceed 60
days.
      (4)   After a third time extension, any further extensions require a
modification.
   (d)   Effect of failure to meet time requirements. An application for final
plan approval is void and a new application fee for final plan approval shall
be paid for the next submittal if the developer fails to file final plan re-
submittals within the time periods required by this section.
   (e)   Action on the application. At any time after the filing of an
application for final plan approval, the Office of Planning and Zoning may deny
the application for failure to comply with the provisions of this Code, or
other law. Otherwise, the Office shall approve the application for final plan
approval.
   (f)   Notice of approval. Within 10 days after receiving notice of an
approval of an application for final plan approval, the developer shall mail,
by first class mail, notice of the approval to all lot owners within 300 feet
of the property, with a copy to:
      (1)   the president of any community or homeowners’ association of a
subdivision that is both located within 300 feet of the property and on the
list of community associations, persons, and organizations maintained in the
Office of the County Executive;
      (2)   the Office of Planning and Zoning;
      (3)   the Councilmember of the Councilmanic District in which the
property is located and, if the property abuts another Councilmanic District,
to that County Councilmember;
      (4)   the County Executive; and
      (5)   individuals who attended a community meeting held pursuant to §
17-2-107(c) and who provided the developer with their name and mailing address
or email address for the purpose of notice.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 90-09; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 7-11; Bill No. 28-18;
Bill No. 59-19; Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-3-304. Completion of subdivision.
   (a)   Action required by developer within twelve months. Within 12 months
after the date of approval of a final plan, a developer shall:
      (1)   satisfactorily address all remaining comments of the Office of
Planning and Zoning and reviewing agencies; and
      (2)   prepare, execute, and deliver at one time a forestation agreement,
a digital copy of the proposed record plat that satisfies digital plat
specifications posted on the County website, and all other deeds, easements,
rights-of-way, bonds, fees, homeowners association and community association
documents, and other documents required by this article.
   (b)   Public works agreement. A recorded plat and all related approvals,
including adequate public facilities and utility allocation approvals, shall be
null and void unless a public works agreement, accompanied by security in the
amount required by Title 11, is executed and delivered simultaneously with the
approval of the plat or no later than twelve months after the recordation of
the record plat. If a recorded plat is rendered void under this subsection, the
developer shall thereafter conform to all County laws in effect at the time a
new application for subdivision is submitted. For any recorded plat rendered
void under this subsection, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall prepare and
record an appropriate notice that the record plat is void.
   (c)   Change of use of mobile home park. If the subdivision is a change of
use of a mobile home park, the proposed record plat may not be recorded until
the developer provides confirmation satisfactory to the Office of Planning and
Zoning that any relocation assistance required to be paid to residents has been
fully paid.
   (d)   Authority to extend time periods. Notwithstanding any modifications
granted to allow for additional time to complete a subdivision, upon receipt of
a written request made not less than 15 days before the re-submittal deadline
in subsection (a), the Planning and Zoning Officer shall grant a time extension
of 60 days for re-submittal. Decisions on whether to extend time under this
subsection do not require a modification, and may not be appealed to the Board
of Appeals.
   (e)   Effect of failure to meet time requirement. An application for final
plan approval and the approval of a final plan are void if the developer fails
to complete the actions required by subsection (a) within 12 months after the
date of final plan approval or within the time specified by the Office of
Planning and Zoning under subsection (d).
   (f)   Recording. The County shall record among the land records the proposed
record plat and other documents appropriate for recording.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 15-13; Bill No. 20-14; Bill No. 17-16)
SUBTITLE 4. REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SUBDIVISIONS
§ 17-3-401. Lot and block size.
   (a)   Lot size. The size of a lot shall be no less than that required by
Article 18 of this Code for the district in which the lot is located. The area
occupied by tidal and nontidal wetlands, 100-year floodplain, bogs, and steep
slopes may not be included in determining the minimum required lot size.
   (b)   Block length and width. Block length and width shall be adequate to
provide convenient access, circulation, and safety of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
   (c)   Open area. Open area lots shall have a minimum road frontage of 15
feet or a 15-foot access easement.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-3-402. Historic resources.
   Historic resources, including buildings, structures, and landscape features
that are integral to the historic setting, shall be on a separate lot of
suitable size to ensure protection.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-3-403. Reservation of land for public facilities.
   (a)   Land needed for public facilities. The Planning and Zoning Officer may
require that land in a subdivision be reserved for acquisition by the County or
the Board of Education for use as a park, County or State multi-modal
transportation infrastructure, school, County or State road, or other public
facility if the Planning and Zoning Officer determines after receipt of a
written request from a department or other public entity charged with
responsibility for the facility that the land is needed and the facility is
funded in the Capital Improvement Program of the County or State.
   (b)   Conditions. The following conditions apply to land reserved under this
section:
      (1)   a reservation may not continue for longer than three years from the
date of recordation of the plat without written approval from all owners of the
land reserved;
      (2)   the period of time for which the land is reserved shall be
specified on the proposed record plat; and
      (3)   the land shall remain in its natural state and undeveloped during
the reservation period, except that the Office of Planning and Zoning may
approve use of the land for agricultural purposes or for temporary uses
authorized by
Article 18 of this Code.
   (c)   Value. When land within a subdivision is reserved under this section,
acquisition of the reserved land may be:
      (1)   in consideration of density transferred from the reserved land to
abutting or adjacent land under the same ownership; or
      (2)   at the unimproved value of the land before subdivision, plus
expenses for taxes and maintenance only with interest at the rate of 6%.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No 78-18)
§ 17-3-404. Acceptance of land or improvements for public purpose.
   The approval of a proposed record plat by the Planning and Zoning Officer
does not constitute or imply the acceptance by the County of any road, right-
of-way, easement, or facility. Acceptance shall occur only after all public
improvements required by a public works agreement have been completed and
approved by the County.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-3-405. Subdivision name.
   The Office of Planning and Zoning shall approve the name of a subdivision
and may not approve a name that duplicates the name of another subdivision in
the County. The approved name is the official name. A different name may not be
used for any purpose unless the Office approves an amended record plat with the
different name.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-3-406. Compliance with criteria for environmental site design.
   All subdivision applications shall fully comply with the stormwater
requirements of this Code and shall employ environmental site design to the
maximum extent practicable.
(Bill No. 59-10)
SUBTITLE 5. RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
§ 17-3-501. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to residential subdivisions only.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-3-502. Lot design criteria.
   (a)   Generally. To the extent practical, a residential lot shall be
rectangular, have dimensions that do not exceed a depth to width ratio of three
to one, and have a rear lot line that does not abut the side lot line of a
contiguous lot.
   (b)   Building envelope; cluster development. A residential lot shall be of
sufficient size to have a building envelope unencumbered by easements or
restrictions that substantially restrict the use of the building envelope.
Residential dwelling units on residential lots shall be clustered to the
maximum extent practicable as determined by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
In determining the extent to which clustering will be required for a minor
subdivision or subdivision of lots shown on a previously recorded plat, the
Planning and Zoning Officer shall evaluate the development patterns and lot
sizes of adjoining properties and approve development that does not
substantially alter the character of the neighborhood. Cluster development
shall include landscaped screening and buffer areas that have a width of 25
feet, along adjacent, non-local roads and adjoining properties that are not a
part of the development.
   (c)   Relationship to roads. Unless the Office of Planning and Zoning
determines that variation produces a better road or lot plan, a residential lot
shall be designed so that side lot lines are at right angles to roads or radial
to curving roads. A lot other than a corner lot that abuts two roads is allowed
only if necessary to avoid having the lot front on a non-access road or to
address other site planning or land use issues.
   (d)   Multifamily lots. A multifamily residential lot shall be designed so
that the location of a building on the lot makes efficient use of parking,
driveways, and common yard areas.
   (e)   Flag lots disfavored. Flag lots are disfavored because of impervious
surface and neighborhood impacts and subdivisions shall be designed to avoid
the creation of flag lots. The developer shall evaluate all other design
options and the Planning and Zoning Officer may approve flag lots only if no
other practical alternative is available. Approved flag lots shall be designed
so that no more than two flag lots have a common or shared driveway entrance to
a public right-of-way, except that the Office of Planning and Zoning may
approve up to three additional flag lots with common or shared entrances to
protect natural features or to provide a better lot layout.
   (f)   Easements on cluster lots disfavored. To the extent practicable,
forest conservation easements, natural area easements, historic resource
easements, archaeological easements, and cemetery easements may not be located
on cluster lots.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 73-22)
§ 17-3-503. Road frontage.
   Except for an agricultural preservation subdivision, a residential lot for a
single-family detached dwelling shall have a minimum road frontage of 15 feet
or an access easement of at least 15 feet to serve one dwelling unit or 30 feet
to serve no more than five dwelling units.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-3-504. Setbacks from transmission mains and power lines.
   A residential lot shall be of sufficient size to provide a 30-foot setback
between a dwelling, excluding a deck, and an easement, right-of-way, or area
used or proposed to be used for an underground high- volume or high-pressure
transmission main or transmission line.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-3-505. Residential subdivisions abutting heavy industrial zones.
   A residential subdivision on property abutting a W3 Heavy Industrial Zone
shall be a cluster development pursuant to §
17-3-502. For a residential subdivision developed on a parcel of at least 20
acres under this section, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall approve a
development in accordance with bulk regulations under §
18-4-601 of this Code in order to ensure, to the extent reasonably practicable,
sufficient buffers for the cluster subdivision for sight obstruction and to
shield against nuisances, including noise, light, vibrations, noxious odors,
dust, or debris emanating from the abutting industrial zone.
(Bill No. 72-15)
SUBTITLE 6. (RESERVED)
SUBTITLE 7. FLOODPLAIN
§ 17-3-701. 100-year floodplain requirements.
   A developer of a residential subdivision in a zoning district other than RA
shall convey to the County a fee simple interest in the 100-year floodplain.
When the Planning and Zoning Officer determines it appropriate, a developer of
land in RA, commercial, industrial, maritime, mixed use development, and other
zoning districts may convey to the County a floodplain easement sufficient to
allow the County to access and maintain the 100-year floodplain.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
SUBTITLE 8. AMENDED RECORD PLATS
§ 17-3-801. Amended record plats.
   Upon the filing of an application and a proposed amended record plat and
compliance with the requirements of §§
17-3-301 through
17-3-304, and
17-3-403, the Planning and Zoning Officer may approve an amended record plat
that revises a previously recorded record plat approved by the County if the
amended record plat:
      (1)   modifies existing public rights-of-way or easements that were
originally in error or that otherwise need to be modified;
      (2)   modifies erroneous record plat notes, eliminates references to a
bulk parcel, reserve parcel, or reserved parcel, or updates notes to reflect
existing conditions;
      (3)   changes the name of a subdivision;
      (4)   depicts land not in the critical area, a bog protection area, or a
buffer, and modifies one or more internal lot lines of existing buildable lots
on a recorded record plat without creating new lots and without involving the
relocation of a lot with road frontage on one road to frontage on a different
road, a relocation of a lot in one public utility service area to a lot in a
different public utility service area;
      (5)   creates new lots in a non-residential subdivision that will not
create impacts that exceed the impacts in the original studies that formed the
basis for passing all adequacy of public facilities tests in connection with
the original subdivision; or
      (6)   removes age restriction notes from an approved record plat if no
residential building units have been constructed and the proposed development
passes the test for adequacy of public facilities.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 59-10)
TITLE 4. SITE DEVELOPMENT
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
17-4-101.   Scope.
Subtitle 2. Site Development Plans
   
17-4-201.   Preliminary plan.
   
17-4-202.   Site development plan.
   
17-4-203.   Review process.
   
17-4-204.   Compliance.
   
17-4-205.   Agreements.
   
17-4-206.   Approval by Health Department mandatory.
   
17-4-207.   Expiration of site development plan.
   
17-4-208.   Notice to community associations and others.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 17-4-101. Scope.
   This title applies to site development only and does not apply to:
   (1)   a tenant permit in a structure previously approved by the County;
   (2)   permits relating to a final infrastructure construction plan and lot
clearing shown on an approved final plan previously approved under this
article;
   (3)   permits relating to improvements to an existing structure located
outside the critical area or a designated bog protection area if the Office of
Planning and Zoning, after considering any comments from reviewing agencies,
issues an administrative decision that the improvements do not result in:
      (i)   additional cumulative floor area of more than 4,000 square feet;
      (ii)   an increase of impervious surface of more than:
         1.   1,000 square feet; or
         2.   at least 1,000 square feet but not more than 4,000 square feet,
provided that the new impervious surface in excess of 1,000 square feet shall
be managed in the following order of priority and reviewed as part of an
administrative decision request:
            A.   planting onsite at a ratio equal to the area of new impervious
surface;
            B.   installation of onsite stormwater management practices; or
            C.   planting offsite at a ratio equal to the area of new
impervious surface.
      (iii)   a use that will generate five or more cumulative equivalent
dwelling units;
      (iv)   a limit of disturbance of 5,000 square feet or more;
      (v)   more than 50 new daily vehicle trips in the scheduled completion
year of the improvements or a requirement for a traffic impact study;
      (vi)   insufficient water supply for providing adequate fire suppression;
      (vii)   a deficiency in the parking requirements contained in
Article 18 of this Code or an inability to provide adequate onsite stacking
capacity;
      (viii)   the need for a variance to the applicable bulk regulations
contained in
Article 18 of this Code;
      (ix)   inadequate land area to meet landscape requirements; or
      (x)   impacts to cultural resources or scenic or historic roads;
   (4)   at the discretion of the Department of Inspections and Permits, a
grading permit for a single residential lot development that contains or is
accompanied by all information required by this article;
   (5)   an agricultural building that does not require a permit under §
105.2.1.14 of the Construction Code;
   (6)   accessory uses to farming, such as farm stores or stands that sell
farm products or value- added farm products directly to consumers, that:
      (i)   do not exceed a cumulative 1,200 square feet of floor area; and
      (ii)   have a proposed cumulative limit of disturbance of less than 5,000
square feet;
   (7)   farm dual uses under
Article 18 of this Code that are located outside of the critical area;
   (8)   a temporary use authorized under §
18-2-203 of this Code; or
   (9)   a water quality improvement project as defined in §
16-1-101 of this Code; or
   (10)   an accessory structure, including a trailer, for an office of meeting
space placed on a religious or educational facility property that:
      (i)   is no more than 1,200 square feet;
      (ii)   is served by electricity but not plumbing or sewer;
      (iii)   does not increase the impervious surface; and
      (iv)   does not impact onsite parking required in Article 18.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 8-11; Bill No. 74-21; Bill No. 99-21;
Bill No. 10-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 73-23; Bill No. 74-24; Bill No. 96-24)
SUBTITLE 2. SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS
§ 17-4-201. Preliminary plan.
   (a)   Generally. A developer shall file a preliminary plan prior to
submitting an application for a site development plan and prior to submitting
an application for a grading or building permit. A developer shall also file
with the Office of Planning and Zoning a preliminary plan for development that
does not require a permit.
   (b)   Contents.
      (1)   A preliminary plan shall be on a 24" x 36" sheet at a scale that is
no smaller than 1"=100' and shall contain all information including attachments
as required on the most recent preliminary plan checklist on file at the Office
of Planning and Zoning or Department of Inspections and Permits. The
preliminary plan shall show an initial location of development, including
roads, buildings, parking, stormwater management, utilities, and forest
conservation, and shall provide any other information required by the Office of
Planning and Zoning and the Department of Inspections and Permits to clearly
identify areas on the site that are suitable for development.
      (2)   A preliminary plan shall include a moderately priced dwelling unit
worksheet formulated by the Office of Planning and Zoning or the Administrator,
as that term is defined in §
17-12-101, that includes, at a minimum, the number and dwelling types of
moderately priced dwelling units that will be offered for sale or rental and
the number of bedrooms in each moderately priced dwelling unit, which shall be
approved as a condition of the preliminary plan application approval.
   (c)   Review; County report; developer re-submittal. As promptly as possible
after the filing of a preliminary plan, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall
provide the developer with a written report of the findings, comments, and
recommendations of County agencies. Upon review of a completed preliminary plan
the Office of Planning and Zoning will provide the developer with a written
decision approving or denying the application. That approval or denial will
resolve inconsistencies or conflicts among the agency comments and give the
applicant direction on how to proceed to the next step in the process or give
direction on what issues need to be addressed with a new application for a
preliminary plan.
   (d)   Expiration of preliminary plan. A preliminary plan expires 12 months
after the date that the Office of Planning and Zoning approves the preliminary
plan unless a site development plan is submitted for review prior to
preliminary plan expiration. Upon expiration of the preliminary plan a
developer shall file a new application and fees for a preliminary plan
application prior to any further review.
   (e)   Exemption from bicycle, pedestrian, and transit assessment. The
following subdivisions or developments may opt to pay bicycle, pedestrian, and
transit infrastructure fees in lieu of preparing a bicycle, pedestrian, and
transit assessment:
      (1)   subdivisions of five or fewer dwelling units;
      (2)   non-residential developments comprising less than 5,000 enclosed
square feet, other than warehouse developments; and
      (3)   warehouse developments comprising less than 15,000 enclosed square
feet.
(Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 65-17; Bill No. 78-18; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-4-202. Site development plan.
   (a)   Generally. A developer shall file a site development plan with an
application for a building or grading permit other than a permit relating to a
final infrastructure construction plan. A developer shall also file with the
Office of Planning and Zoning a site development plan for development that does
not require a permit.
   (b)   Contents. A site development plan shall be on a 24" x 36" sheet at a
scale that is no greater than 1" = 40' and no smaller than 1" = 60' and shall
contain all information required by the Office of Planning and Zoning and the
Department of Inspections and Permits. The information ordinarily shall
include:
      (1)   the location of proposed stormwater management, in compliance with
the stormwater management requirements of this Code and checklists provided by
the Office of Planning and Zoning;
      (2)   a vicinity map no smaller than 4" x 4" at a scale of 1" = 2,000';
      (3)   a boundary line survey using the County coordinate system;
      (4)   a north arrow;
      (5)   a scale;
      (6)   a legend;
      (7)   the gross area of the lot and disturbed area in acreage and square
feet and disturbed area;
      (8)   the zoning of the lot;
      (9)   the lot boundary;
      (10)   the setbacks required by Article 18 of this Code;
      (11)   a field run or aerial topography of existing conditions;
      (12)   three coordinate ‘tics' shown at multiples of 250';
      (13)   the location and size of all existing and proposed easements with
a label explaining the purpose;
      (14)   the location, rights-of-way widths, paving widths, and names of
all existing improved and unimproved roads;
      (15)   the location, size, and type of open area;
      (16)   the location of slopes of 15% or greater in the critical area and
in sensitive areas; the location of steep slopes outside the critical and
sensitive areas; the location of slope buffers; the location of a 100-year
floodplain, including FEMA floodplain; the location of coastal floodplain and
coastal high hazard areas; and the location of other natural features;
      (17)   the location of all historic resources, archaeological sites, and
cemeteries;
      (18)   the location of proposed stormwater management devices;
      (19)   the location of existing and proposed structures, sewers, water
lines, and storm drains on the lot, and a note if they are to be removed;
      (20)   the location of each structure within 100 feet of the lot;
      (21)   a 100-foot adjacent peripheral strip, showing existing topography;
      (22)   the critical area boundary and classifications and a tabulation of
acreage by critical area classification;
      (23)   the location of private onsite water and sewerage facilities and
septic replacement areas;
      (24)   tabulations for forest conservation that are consistent with State
and County law and checklists provided by the Office of Planning and Zoning;
      (25)   the proposed use and height of each structure on the lot;
      (26)   a detailed computation of:
         (i)   floor area for each structure;
         (ii)   coverage by structures;
         (iii)   number of parking spaces; and
         (iv)   number and size of dwelling units by type;
      (27)   the identification of each lot that will contain a moderately
priced dwelling unit or units, and a notation that use of each unit is subject
to the recorded agreement required by §
17-12-104(b);
      (28)   the location of parking and truck loading areas, with the location
of all access and egress drives;
      (29)   the location of all buffers required by this Code;
      (30)   the location of outdoor storage;
      (31)   the location and type of recreational facilities;
      (32)   the location, design, and type of lighting facilities;
      (33)   mean high and mean low water lines;
      (34)   the location, size, and type of existing and proposed signs,
method of illumination, and a scaled drawing that shows each facade of the
structure on which the square footage of the proposed sign is calculated,
dimensions, height above grade, and all structural and architectural supports
or backgrounds;
      (35)   the location of existing and proposed piers, launching ramps, and
shore erosion control measures, and existing deterrents or aids to navigation;
      (36)   the dimensions and material for piers, pilings, and shore erosion
control measures;
      (37)   the location and dimensions of areas to be dredged, including
present and proposed depths, and the volume of dredge spoil to be removed, the
type of material, and the location and dimensions of each disposal area;
      (38)   the location and dimension of boat slips, fuel docks, gasoline
storage tanks, maritime storage areas, and maintenance and repair facilities;
and
      (39)   the location and capacity of launching ramps, marine railways,
travel lifts, hoists, and water lifts.
   (c)   Attachments. A site development plan shall be accompanied by all
information required by the Office of Planning and Zoning and the Health
Department, including to the extent applicable:
      (1)   a final infrastructure construction plan, including a stormwater
management plan in accordance with Article 16 of this Code, a storm drain plan,
and a water and sewer plan that identifies whether the development is served by
well and septic, well and public sewer, or public water and septic, and
includes a plan for adequacy of shared sewage disposal facilities;
      (2)   a final landscape plan that is in compliance with the Landscape
Manual;
      (3)   a grading and sediment control plan and any other information
required by
Article 16 of this Code;
      (4)   a forest conservation plan;
      (5)   a bog protection plan for a bog protection area;
      (6)   maps of existing and proposed drainage areas at a scale of 1" =
100' for a lot less than 25 acres and 1" = 200' for a lot greater than 25
acres;
      (7)   a traffic impact study, if not previously provided;
      (8)   a bicycle, pedestrian, and transit assessment, if not previously
provided, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (d);
      (9)   a forestation agreement and all other deeds, easements, rights-of-
way, agreements, and other documents as required by this article;
      (10)   in the critical area:
         (i)   a sediment control plan for all forest or woodland disturbance
of 5,000 square feet or more;
         (ii)   a buffer management plan as required by COMAR, Title 27;
         (iii)   a critical area report and habitat assessment; and
         (iv)   all computations and data necessary to determine if the 10%
pollutant reduction requirements of § 16-4-205 of this Code are met;
      (11)   for commercial or manufacturing uses:
         (i)   special uses proposed;
         (ii)   the number of employees for which a building is designed;
         (iii)   the type of power to be used for any manufacturing process;
         (iv)   the type of waste or by-product to be produced by a
manufacturing process; and
         (v)   the proposed method of disposal of wastes or by-products from a
manufacturing process;
      (12)   for water-dependent uses, information showing that:
         (i)   the proposed use will not significantly alter existing water
circulation patterns or salinity regimes;
         (ii)   the body of water upon which the use is proposed has adequate
flushing characteristics in the area;
         (iii)   disturbance to wetlands, submerged aquatic plant beds, or
other important aquatic habitats will be minimized;
         (iv)   adverse impacts to water quality, such as nonpoint source
runoff, sewage runoff from land or vessels, or discharge from boat cleaning and
maintenance operations, is minimized;
         (v)   shellfish beds will not be disturbed or made subject to a
discharge that would render them unsuitable for harvesting;
         (vi)   impacts caused by dredging will be minimized;
         (vii)   dredged spoil will be located outside the buffer or a habitat
protection area unless necessary for shore erosion or beach nourishment
projects; and
         (viii)   interference with natural transport of sand will be
minimized;
      (13)   information that demonstrates compliance with the Glen Burnie Town
Center Plan, the Odenton Town Center Master Plan, or any other applicable plan
or law;
      (14)   a copy of a summary of comments received at a community meeting
and an affidavit signed by the developer or other evidence acceptable to the
Office of Planning and Zoning that a community meeting was held and that a copy
of the summary of comments was mailed to each participant at the pre-submission
community meeting, to all lot owners within 175 feet of the property to be
developed, and to the County Councilmember of the Councilmanic District where
the property is located and, if the property abuts another Councilmanic
district, to that County Councilmember;
      (15)   if required by the Office of Planning and Zoning, an application
for approval of a proposed amended record plat to ensure the conformance of
site conditions to those conditions reflected on the record plat;
      (16)   for development of six or more dwelling units, evidence of the
creation and incorporation of an association of homeowners or unit owners;
      (17)   a demonstration of ADA accessibility as required by federal law
and §
15-2-101 of this Code, including designated handicapped parking spaces, ingress
and egress for the proposed buildings, and travelways between the proposed
buildings and the designated handicapped parking spaces; and
      (18)   an equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) worksheet, if not previously
provided.
   (d)   Exemption from bicycle, pedestrian, and transit assessment. The
following subdivisions or developments may opt to pay bicycle, pedestrian, and
transit infrastructure fees in lieu of preparing a bicycle, pedestrian, and
transit assessment:
      (1)   subdivisions of five or fewer units;
      (2)   non-residential developments comprising less than 5,000 enclosed
square feet, other than warehouse developments; and
      (3)   warehouse developments comprising less than 15,000 enclosed square
feet.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 19-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 93-12;
Bill No. 65-17; Bill No. 78-18; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-4-203. Review process.
   (a)   County report; developer re-submittal. As promptly as possible after
the filing of a site development plan, but not later than 15 days prior to the
Comment Review Committee meeting if required by subsection (b), the Office of
Planning and Zoning shall provide to the developer, the developer's
representatives and all reviewing agencies, a written report of the findings,
comments, and recommendations of the County through its reviewing agencies, and
if applicable a notice of the date, time and location of the Comment Review
Committee meeting. The site development plan report shall attempt to resolve
inconsistencies or conflicts among the agency comments. Within 60 days after
the date the site development plan report is mailed, the developer shall file a
re-submittal that addresses all the findings, comments, and recommendations
contained in the report. After the developer files a site development plan re-
submittal, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall provide promptly any further
findings, comments, and recommendations from the County reviewing agencies, and
shall attempt to resolve inconsistencies or conflicts among the agency
comments. Within 60 days after the date the report is mailed, the developer
shall file a site development plan re-submittal that addresses the findings,
comments, and recommendations. This process continues until the application
becomes void under subsection (b) or a recommendation is made under subsection
(e).
   (b)   Comment Review Committee meeting; meeting summary. Within 75 days
after the filing of a site development plan, the developer may request the
Office of Planning and Zoning schedule at its office, or at a mutually agreed
upon location, a meeting of the Development Review Team Leader and Office of
Planning and Zoning reviewers, representatives of other County reviewing
agencies, and the developer and its representatives. The Committee will discuss
the report provided under subsection (a), reviewing agencies' comments, and any
other matters that pertain to the submittal and approval of the plan. Within 15
days of the meeting, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall confirm in writing
to the developer and the developer's designated representatives a summary of
the meeting including any recommendations, requirements for approval, or other
unresolved matters to be addressed before approval may be granted. If the
meeting summary includes findings, comments or recommendations that were not
discussed during the Comment Review Committee meeting, the developer may
request that the Office of Planning and Zoning schedule a follow-up meeting of
the reviewing agencies to address such issues.
   (c)   Time extensions.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written request not less than 10 days before the
re-submittal deadline in subsection (a) the Office of Planning and Zoning may
grant a time extension for re-submittal not to exceed 180 days.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a written request not less than 10 days before a
re-submittal deadline in subsections (a) or (b), and upon a determination by
the Planning and Zoning Officer that good cause is shown, the Office of
Planning and Zoning may grant a second time extension for re-submittal not to
exceed 120 days.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a written request not less than 10 days before a
re-submittal deadline in this subsection, and upon a determination by the
Planning and Zoning Officer that good cause is shown, the Office of Planning
and Zoning may grant a third time extension for re-submittal not to exceed 60
days.
      (4)   After a third time extension, any further extensions require a
modification.
      (5)   A site development plan is void and a new application fee for site
development plan approval shall be paid for the next submittal if the developer
fails to file site development plan re- submittals within the time periods
required by this section.
   (d)   Applications not impacting adequacy of public facilities. The Planning
and Zoning Officer may permit a developer to file a site development plan
consisting of information required by §
16-2-206 of this Code.
   (e)   Recommendation and approval. At any time after the filing of a site
development plan associated with an application for a building or grading
permit, the Office of Planning and Zoning may recommend to the Department of
Inspections and Permits that the application be denied for failure to comply
with the provisions of this Code, the Odenton Town Center Master Plan, or other
law, or failure to provide confirmation satisfactory to the Office of Planning
and Zoning that any relocation assistance required to be paid to mobile home
park residents has been fully paid. Otherwise, the Office shall recommend
approval. No appeal may be taken from a recommendation made under this
subsection. Approval of the permit by the Department of Inspections and Permits
constitutes approval of the site development plan.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 90-09; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 7-11; Bill No. 20-14;
Bill No. 28-18; Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-4-204. Compliance.
   A lot shall be used only in accordance with an approved site development
plan. Deviation from the approved plan rescinds the approval of the permit by
operation of law. Continued conformance with the approved plan is a
prerequisite for the issuance of a zoning certificate of use.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-4-205. Agreements.
   Before issuance of a building or grading permit, a developer shall prepare,
execute, and deliver at one time a public works agreement, a forestation
agreement, a deed to right-of-way containing public road improvements
constructed by the developer, and all other deeds, easements, rights-of-way,
agreements, and other documents required by this article.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-4-206. Approval by Health Department mandatory.
   (a)   Development served by shared sewage disposal facilities. No site
development plan involving shared sewage disposal facilities may be approved
without prior written approval by the Health Officer or Health Officer's
designee. This approval shall expire when the site development plan expires.
   (b)   Development served by septic systems. The Planning and Zoning Officer
may decline to approve development served by a septic system if the Health
Department's last PERC test approval is more than two years old.
(Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-4-207. Expiration of site development plan.
   (a)   In connection with a permit. A site development plan associated with
an application for a building or grading permit expires one year after the date
that the Office of Planning and Zoning recommends permit approval, or upon the
expiration of some other period of time, not to exceed six years, as provided
in a sketch or site development plan approval letter from the Planning and
Zoning Officer. Notwithstanding any modifications granted to allow for
additional time to complete site development, the Planning and Zoning Officer
may extend the approval of the site development plan for a period not to exceed
one year from the original date of expiration of site development plan approval
upon receipt of a written request made for good cause not less than 15 days
before the expiration of the site development plan approval, provided the total
period of all extensions does not exceed six years from the date the Office of
Planning and Zoning recommends permit approval. The developer shall obtain all
required permits within the period prescribed by this subsection and site
development shall be pursuant to valid permits.
   (b)   Not in connection with a permit. A site development plan not
associated with an application for a building or grading permit expires two
years after the date that the Office of Planning and Zoning approves the plan,
or upon the expiration of some other time, not to exceed six years, as provided
in a sketch or site development plan approval letter from the Planning and
Zoning Officer, unless the developer establishes the use within the period
prescribed by this subsection.
   (c)   Notice of expiration. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall provide
the date of expiration of approval of a site development plan as well as
information on the extension process and any applicable fee to the developer on
the initial approval of the plan.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 15-13)
§ 17-4-208. Notice to community associations and others.
   (a)   Information provided to the Office of the County Executive. Within
seven days after the filing of a site development plan associated with an
application for a building or grading permit for commercial or industrial
development that adjoins a residentially zoned and developed lot, the Office of
Planning and Zoning shall notify the Office of the County Executive of receipt
of the plan and provide the following information:
      (1)   the tax assessment district, tax map, block, and parcel numbers of
the property to be affected;
      (2)   the project or permit number or case and file numbers;
      (3)   the name of the applicant and the nature of the request;
      (4)   the general location of the property and the nearest intersecting
roadway;
      (5)   the Councilmanic District where the property is located and, if the
property abuts another Councilmanic District, an identification of that
Councilmanic District;
      (6)   the size of the lot; and
      (7)   the date on which written comments are due to the Office of
Planning and Zoning.
   (b)   Notice. The Office of the County Executive shall send a notice
containing that information to each community association, person, and
organization on its list that is located in the Councilmanic District of the
property proposed for development and any abutting Councilmanic District. The
notice shall state that additional information may be obtained from the Office
of Planning and Zoning.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
TITLE 5. ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
17-5-101.   Purposes.
   
17-5-102.   Assumptions and elements.
   
17-5-103.   Separate conveyance of approvals for adequacy of public facilities
prohibited.
Subtitle 2. Processing
   
17-5-201.   Requirement to pass adequacy of public facilities tests;
exemptions.
   
17-5-202.   Testing; approval.
   
17-5-203.   Duration of approval – Subdivisions other than minor subdivisions.
   
17-5-204.   Duration of approval – Minor subdivisions.
   
17-5-205.   Duration of approval – Site development plan.
   
17-5-206.   Further testing.
   
17-5-207.   Exemptions.
Subtitle 3. Adequate Fire Suppression Facilities
   
17-5-301.   Standards.
Subtitle 4. Adequate Road Facilities
   
17-5-401.   Standards.
   
17-5-402.   Roads included.
   
17-5-403.   Impact area.
Subtitle 5. Adequate School Facilities
   
17-5-501.   Standards; report to the Board of Education.
   
17-5-502.   School utilization chart.
   
17-5-503.   Waiting list.
   
17-5-504.   Annual report.
Subtitle 6. Adequate Sewerage Facilities
   
17-5-601.   Standards.
Subtitle 7. Adequate Storm Drain Facilities
   
17-5-701.   Standards.
   
17-5-702.   Storm drain facilities included.
   
17-5-703.   Study impact area.
Subtitle 8. Adequate Water Supply Facilities
   
17-5-801.   Standards.
Subtitle 9. Mitigation
   
17-5-901.   Mitigation.
   
17-5-902.   Delay in or alternative method of accomplishing mitigation.
Subtitle 10. Phasing
   
17-5-1001.   Phasing of development.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 17-5-101. Purposes.
   The purpose of this title is to provide a growth management process that
will enable the County to provide adequate public schools, roads, and other
infrastructure facilities in a timely manner and achieve General Development
Plan growth objectives. The process is designed to direct growth to areas where
adequate public infrastructure exists or will exist. Another purpose of this
title is to provide a predictable planning environment for the provision of
adequate fire, road, school, sewerage, storm drain, and water facilities by
requiring certain developments to pass certain tests as a condition of
subdivision or site development.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-5-102. Assumptions and elements.
   (a)   Assumptions. The growth management process is based on the following
assumptions:
      (1)   the General Development Plan, the Water and Sewer Master Plan, and
Article 18 of this Code define land use and the distribution and pace of
development;
      (2)   the County has a responsibility to fund and construct adequate
public facilities in a timely and coordinated manner;
      (3)   a growth management process results in more predictable residential
and commercial development; and
      (4)   a commitment from government and the community to the growth
management process is fundamental to achieving adequate public facilities.
   (b)   Elements. There are various interconnected elements that constitute
the growth management process. Each element plays a role in providing the
predictability required for planning and implementing adequate public
facilities.
      (1)   The General Development Plan, the Water and Sewer Master Plan,
Article 18 of this Code, and the provisions of this title constitute the policy
base for the growth management process. This common base is the platform from
which data is generated and planning documents written.
      (2)   A Capital Improvement Program defines the necessary public fire,
road, school, sewerage, storm drain, and water infrastructure that supports the
land use and growth policies established in the General Development Plan. The
Program contains, at a minimum, planning assumptions, standards of service,
descriptions of additions and improvements, justification and priorities for
additions and improvements, and budget projections for each of the next six
years. The plans are reviewed and approved annually.
      (3)   Limited resources require coordinated allocation of funds for
roads, schools, and other infrastructure facilities. The County Executive, the
County Council, and all participating agencies and departments work together to
review priorities and budget projections included in the Capital Improvement
Program. The County Council, through adoption of the Program, approves the
distribution of funds across capital improvement master plans.
      (4)   The General Development Plan guides where and when growth should
occur. The adequate public facilities process manages growth so that facilities
can be constructed in a timely manner.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-5-103. Separate conveyance of approvals for adequacy of public facilities
prohibited.
   Approvals for the adequacy of public facilities may not be assigned or
conveyed separately from the property to which the approvals apply.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 2. PROCESSING
§ 17-5-201. Requirement to pass adequacy of public facilities tests;
exemptions.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to an amended record plat.
   (b)   General requirement. The Planning and Zoning Officer may not give
final approval to a proposed record plat, recommend approval of an application
for a building or grading permit in connection with a preliminary plan or site
development plan, or approve a site development plan for development that does
not require a permit unless the development passes the tests for adequate
public facilities set forth in this title if required by the chart in this
section.
   The chart uses the following key: S = subject to the test and E = exempted
from the test.
Development Fire        Roads Schools Sewage Disposal Storm Drain Water Supply
Type        Suppression
Development    Fire        Roads Schools Sewage   Storm Drain Water Supply
Type           Suppression               Disposal
Non-
Residential:
Odenton Town
Center:
nonresidential
developments
other than
building       S           E1    E       S        S           S
additions of
less than
1,000 square
feet and
tenant
improvements
Odenton Town
Center and
Parole Town
Center:
nonresidential
building       E           E     E       S        E           S
additions of
less than
1,000 square
feet and
tenant
improvements
Other non-
residential    S           S     E       S        S           S
subdivisions
Redevelopment
in the Glen
Burnie
Sustainable    S           E8    E       S        S           S
Community
Overlay Area
under Subtitle
3 of Title 7
Site
development
plans for
religious
facilities     S           E     E       S        S           S
that do not
contain a
private
academic
school
Site
development
plans for the
site of a
private        S           E     E       S        S           S
academic
school in
existence on
or before May
12, 2005
Other non-
residential
site           S           S     E       S        S           S
development
plans
Residential:
Redevelopment
in the Glen
Burnie
Sustainable    S           E8    E7      S        S           S
Community
Overlay Area
under Subtitle
3 of Title 7
Residential
development in
transit-
oriented       S           S     E9      S        S           S
overlay
development
policy areas
Residential
subdivisions
not otherwise  S           S     S2      S        S           S
addressed in
this chart
Residential
development
that is funded S           S     E6      S        S           S
in part by low
income tax
credits
Residential
development in
Meade Village
(located at
1710 Meade     S           S     E5      S        S           S
Village Circle
Road, Severn,
Maryland
21144)
Odenton Town
Center:
residential    S           E1    E       S        S           S
developments
in the OTC-C
Parole Town
Center: all    S           S     E4      S        S           S
residential
developments
Odenton Town
Center and
Parole Town
Center:
residential    E           E     E       S        E           S
building
additions of
less than
1,000 square
feet
Odenton Town
Center: all
other          S           E1    S       S        S           S
residential
developments
Housing for
the elderly of S           S     E       S        S           S
moderate means
Affordable
housing or
workforce
housing under  S           S     E       S        S           S
Title 10,
Article 18 of
this Code
Institutional  S           S     E3      S        S           S
uses
Residential
subdivisions
restricted to
persons 55
years of age   S           S     E       S        S           S
or older
without
resident minor
children
Residential
subdivisions
if no new      E           E     E       E        E           E
dwelling unit
potential is
created
Residential
site
development
plans other
than those for S           S     S2      S        S           S
a single-
family
detached
dwelling
Residential
site
development
plans for a    E           E     E       S        E           S
single-family
detached
dwelling
Agricultural
preservation   E           E     E       S        E           S
subdivision
Dwelling unit,
apartment, as
an accessory   S           S     E       S        S           S
use in a
commercial
district
Dwelling,
caretaker or
resident       S           S     E       S        S           S
manager, in a
commercial
district
 
1   But subject to the requirements in Subtitle 8 of Title 7.
2   But subject to the requirements of §
17-5-207.
3   But subject to a determination by the Planning and Zoning Officer that the
use will have no impact on public school capacity.
4   But subject to the conditions listed in §
17-5-207(c).
5   But subject to the conditions listed in §
17-5-207(d).
6   But subject to the conditions listed in §
17-5-207(e).
7   But subject to the conditions listed in §
17-5-207(f).
8   But subject to the conditions listed in §
17-5-401(f).
9   But subject to the conditions listed in §
17-5-207(g).
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 90-07; Bill No. 65-08; Bill No. 52-09;
Bill No. 13-10; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 94-18; Bill No. 13-19; Bill No. 12-20;
Bill No. 64-20; Bill No. 93-21; Bill No. 52-23; Bill No. 64-23; Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-5-202. Testing; approval.
   (a)   When tested. At the developer’s option, development may be tested for
adequacy of public facilities either during review of the initial application
for approval of a sketch plan or preliminary plan, or during review of the
application for final plan or site development plan approval. The developer
must submit sufficient data, as required by the Office of Planning and Zoning,
to demonstrate adequacy of public facilities. If a developer opts to test a
development for adequacy of public facilities during review of the initial
application for approval of a sketch plan or preliminary plan, testing for
adequacy of sewerage facilities or water supply facilities may be deferred at
the developer’s option and tested during review of the application for final
plan or site development plan approval.
   (b)   Date of approval generally.
      (1)   Subject to paragraphs (2) through (6) of this subsection, approval
for adequacy of public facilities, other than fire suppression facilities,
occurs on:
         (i)   the date of a letter from the Office of Planning and Zoning
approving a sketch plan or preliminary plan for the public facilities for which
adequacy was tested;
         (ii)   the date of a letter from the Office of Planning and Zoning
approving a final plan or site development plan; or
         (iii)   the date that the Office of Planning and Zoning recommends to
the Department of Inspections and Permits that an application for a building or
grading permit be approved.
      (2)   If availability of sewerage facilities or water supply facilities
is tested during sketch plan or preliminary plan review, approval of adequacy
of sewerage facilities or water supply facilities occurs on the date of a
letter from the Office of Planning and Zoning approving a sketch plan or
preliminary plan.
      (3)   If testing for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water supply
facilities is deferred to final plan or site development plan approval, a
sketch plan or preliminary plan may be given contingent approval if the
development passes tests for adequate public facilities other than sewerage
facilities or water supply facilities, except that a preliminary sewer and
water allocation and management program analysis and a preliminary
determination of adequate water supply capacity for fire flow as required by §
17-5-801 shall be conducted prior to contingent approval being granted.
      (4)   If testing for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water supply
facilities is deferred to final plan or site development plan approval,
approval for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water supply facilities occurs
on the date of a letter from the Office of Planning and Zoning approving a
final plan or site development plan or on the date that the Office of Planning
and Zoning recommends to the Department of Inspections and Permits that an
application for a building or grading permit be approved.
       (5)   A plan may be given contingent approval if the development passes
all tests for adequate public facilities other than schools and the development
is placed on the waiting list provided for in §
17-5-503.
      (6)   A determination of adequacy of fire suppression facilities is valid
for six months and it may be necessary to re-test for adequacy of fire
protection facilities as a condition precedent to final plan approval, site
development plan approval, and permit issuance.
   (c)   Testing of bulk parcels. A bulk parcel is tested for adequacy of
public facilities after the creation of the bulk parcel and during review of
the application for approval of the final plan or site development plan for
development within the bulk parcel.
   (d)   Revocation of approval – Adequate sewerage or water supply facilities.
      (1)   Approval for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water supply
facilities is revoked by operation of law if the allocation of the capacity on
which such adequacy was based lapses in accordance with §
13-5-405 of this Code. If an allocation is restored in accordance with §
13-5-405(d) of this Code, approval for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water
supply facilities shall be restored at the same time. Review of any development
applications for a lot to which revocation applies shall be suspended from the
date of revocation to the date of restoration, and all approvals given on those
development applications prior to the date of revocation shall remain valid if
approval for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water supply facilities is
restored.
      (2)   Revocation under this subsection shall cause a proposed preliminary
plan, site development plan, or subdivision plan to be void by operation of law
if approval for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water supply facilities is
not restored before the property is sold at tax sale. Revocation does not
affect the legality of a subdivision of land for which the record plat was
recorded in the land records at the time of revocation.
      (3)   Revocation under this subsection applies to a lot in a subdivision
for which the record plat already has been recorded in the land records unless
all fees and charges necessary to connect the improvements on that lot to the
County’s water or wastewater system were paid at the time of revocation or
unless approval for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water supply facilities
is restored for that lot.
      (4)   No building or grading permits may be issued for a lot to which
revocation applies unless approval for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water
supply facilities is restored. Any approvals on a permit application granted
prior to the date of revocation shall remain valid if adequacy of sewerage
facilities or water supply facilities is restored. If approval for adequacy of
sewerage facilities or water supply facilities is not restored before the
property is sold at tax sale, any permit application for the property is null
and void.
      (5)   The Office of Planning and Zoning shall maintain a record available
to the public of the lots, subdivisions, preliminary plans, or site development
plans for which approval for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water supply
facilities has been revoked under this subsection.
      (6)   The Department of Inspections and Permits shall suspend any
building permits issued for a lot to which revocation applies and shall issue a
stop work order. If the approval for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water
supply facilities is restored for a lot with a suspended building permit, the
suspended building permit shall be reactivated and the stop work order shall be
lifted. If approval for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water supply
facilities is not restored before the property is sold at tax sale, the
Department of Inspections and Permits shall revoke the suspended building
permit and the stop work order shall remain in effect. Improvements on a lot to
which revocation of approval for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water
supply facilities applies may not be connected to the County’s water or
wastewater system regardless of the status of the permit.
   (e)   Adequacy of sewerage or water facilitiesDeadline for testing. If a
developer opts to defer testing for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water
supply facilities to final plan or site development plan approval, adequacy of
sewerage facilities or water supply facilities shall be tested and approved
within the scheduled completion year or adequacy of all public facilities shall
be tested again. The Planning and Zoning Officer may extend the time to defer
testing for adequacy of sewerage facilities or water supply facilities beyond
the scheduled completion year if the development is approved by the Planning
and Zoning Officer, Administrative Hearing Officer, or Board of Appeals for
phasing as provided in §
17-5-1001.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 90-09; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 5-11; Bill No. 18-12;
Bill No. 110-15; Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-5-203. Duration of approval – Subdivisions other than minor subdivisions.
   (a)   Conditions to be met to retain approval. Unless a developer opts to
postpone the test for adequacy of public facilities to final plan review for a
development pursuant to §
17-5-202(a), upon the approval of a sketch plan for a subdivision other than a
minor subdivision, no further approval for adequacy of public facilities, other
than fire suppression facilities, is required if:
      (1)   the developer files an application for final plan approval within
one year after the date of sketch plan approval or as extended by the Planning
and Zoning Officer;
      (2)   the final plan is approved and a proposed record plat meeting the
requirements of the final plan approval is submitted to the County as required
under §
17-3-304(a) within 12 months after the date of final plan approval or within
the time specified by the Planning and Zoning Officer under §
17-3-304(d);
      (3)   simultaneously with the approval of the plat or no later than
twelve months after the date the record plat is recorded, the developer
executes and delivers to the County a public works agreement for any proposed
mitigation; and
      (4)   the impact of the subdivision does not exceed the impact in the
original study that formed the basis for passing a test.
   (b)   Effect of failure to file to meet time requirements. Except as
provided in subsection (c), when a subdivision has met the requirements for
adequate public facilities during sketch plan review and the time requirements
of subsection (a) are not met, the proposed subdivision plan is void unless the
Planning and Zoning Officer grants a modification to allow for additional time
to complete the subdivision. The Planning and Zoning Officer may not grant a
modification to a developer who has failed to respond to County comments as
required by this article.
   (c)   When time frames tolled. The time requirements of this section are
tolled on the date that a subdivision is placed on the waiting list provided
for in §
17-5-503. The time requirements begin to run anew on the date that the
development passes the adequacy of public facilities tests for schools under §
17-5-501 or on the date upon which the six-year period provided for in §
17-5-503 has run.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 90-09; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 9-11; Bill No. 15-13;
Bill No. 17-16; Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-5-204. Duration of approval – Minor subdivisions.
   (a)   Conditions to be met to retain approval. Upon the approval of a final
plan for a minor subdivision, no further approval for adequacy of public
facilities, other than fire suppression facilities, is required if:
      (1)   the final plan is approved and a record plat meeting the
requirements of the final plan approval is submitted to the County as required
under §
17-3-304(a) within 12 months after the date of final plan approval or within
the time specified by the Office of Planning and Zoning under §
17-3-304(d);
      (2)   simultaneously with the approval of the plat or no later than
twelve months after the date the record plat is recorded, the developer
executes and delivers to the County a public works agreement for any proposed
mitigation; and
      (3)   the impact of the subdivision does not exceed the impact in the
original study that formed the basis for passing a test.
   (b)   Effect of failure to meet time requirement. Except as provided in
subsection (c), when a subdivision has met the requirements for adequate public
facilities during final plan review and the time requirement of subsection (a)
is not met, the proposed subdivision plan is void unless the Planning and
Zoning Officer grants a modification to allow for additional time to complete
the subdivision. The Planning and Zoning Officer may not grant a modification
to a developer who has failed to respond to County comments as required by this
article.
   (c)   When time frame tolled. The time requirement of this section is tolled
on the date that a subdivision is placed on the waiting list provided for in §
17-5-503. The time requirement begins to run anew on the date that the
development passes the adequacy of public facilities tests for schools under §
17-5-501 or the date upon which the six-year period provided for in §
17-5-503 has run.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 9-11; Bill No. 17-16)
§ 17-5-205. Duration of approval – Site development plan.
   (a)   Conditions to be met to retain approval. Upon the recommendation of
the Office of Planning and Zoning that an application for a building or grading
permit be approved, no further approval for adequacy of public facilities,
other than fire suppression facilities, is required if:
      (1)   the building or grading permit is reviewed and approved for
issuance by the Office of Planning and Zoning prior to the expiration of the
site development plan; and
      (2)   the impact of the development does not exceed the impact in the
original study that formed the basis for passing a test.
   (b)   Effect of failure to meet time requirement. Except as provided in
subsection (c), when a development has met the requirements for adequate public
facilities during site development plan review and the time requirement of
subsection (a) is not met, the proposed site development plan is void unless
the Planning and Zoning Officer grants a modification to allow for additional
time to complete site development. The Planning and Zoning Officer may not
grant a modification to a developer who has failed to respond to County
comments as required by this article.
   (c)   When time frame tolled. The time requirement of this section is tolled
on the date that a development is placed on the waiting list provided for in §
17-5-503. The time requirement begins to run anew on the date that the
development passes the adequacy of public facilities tests for schools under §
17-5-501 or the date upon which the six-year period provided for in §
17-5-503 has run.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 9-11; Bill No. 15-13)
§ 17-5-206. Further testing.
   If the impact of a development exceeds the impact shown in the original
impact study, the development is tested for the excess impact only.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-5-207. Exemptions.
   (a)   Exemption. A developer may obtain an exemption from the requirements
for adequate public facilities for schools for no more than five lots in a
subdivision for single family detached dwellings or for no more than five
dwelling units shown on a site development plan if the developer shall provide
evidence of ownership of the property for a minimum of three years as of the
date of an initial subdivision or site development plan application and shall
sign and record an agreement as required by subsection (b).
   (b)   Agreement. All applications for subdivision or residential site
development plans seeking exemption under this section shall execute an
agreement with the County in which the developer acknowledges the exemption
shall be limited to five lots or dwelling units, including any existing
residences, of the pending application and that further subdivision or
development of the site, if permitted, will be subject to the adequate public
facilities requirement for schools. The agreement shall be:
      (1)   in the form and contain the language required by the Office of Law;
      (2)   recorded among the land records of Anne Arundel County, run with
the land, and bind all future owners of the site that is the subject of the
application and all future owners of the lots created by a subdivision approved
under this exemption;
      (3)   executed and recorded before approval by the Planning and Zoning
Officer of the proposed record plat for a subdivision, the application for a
grading or building permit in connection with a site development plan, or the
approval of a site development plan for development that does not require a
permit, as applicable; and
      (4)   noted on the proposed record plat or site development plan, with
the note including a reference to the book and page number of the location in
the land records.
   (c)   Exemptions within Parole Town Center. Residential development in the
Parole Town Center, subject to an approved incentive program, is exempt from
the adequate schools facilities test if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The project provides structured parking;
      (2)   The project is a mixed use development that includes residential,
and commercial or industrial uses that are integrated and connected by
pedestrian access;
      (3)   The residential portion of the mixed use project consists of
multifamily dwellings, with no less than 50% of the dwelling units consisting
of efficiency or one-bedroom units, and no dwelling units with more than two
bedrooms;
      (4)   The project includes enhancement elements for bicycle, pedestrian,
and transit infrastructure within the Parole Town Center, as determined by the
Office of Planning and Zoning;
      (5)   The project includes enhancement elements that will improve
conveyance, roadway capacity, or vehicular traffic circulation within the
Parole Town Center, as determined by the Office of Planning and Zoning; and
      (6)   Vehicular access may not be from a scenic and historic road or a
local road that directly accesses a scenic or historic road; and
      (7)   The provisions of this subsection are not varied, modified, or
reduced.
   (d)   Exemptions within Meade Village. Residential development in Meade
Village is exempt from the adequate schools facilities test if the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The project consists of no more than 25 units;
      (2)   The project is developed in conjunction with a partnership that
includes the Housing Commission of Anne Arundel County;
      (3)   The project includes funding comprised of either 4% low income
housing tax credits, tax exempt bonds, or County home funds;
      (4)   The project holds approval from the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development for federal conversion under the Rental
Assistance Demonstration Program;
      (5)   The sale or rental of the units is restricted to persons having a
household income not exceeding 120% of the area median income, adjusted by
household size, as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development; and
      (6)   The provisions of this subsection are not varied, modified, or
reduced.
   (e)   Exemptions for residential development funded in part by low income
tax credits. Residential development that is funded in part by low income tax
credits awarded from the Maryland Department of Housing and Community
Development is exempt from the adequate school facilities test if the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The project consists of no more than 50 dwelling units;
      (2)   (i)   As of the date of application for the award of the low income
tax credits, all schools serving the project were designated as open on the
County’s school utilization chart; or
         (ii)   At the time of testing for adequate schools facilities, the
school enrollment for each elementary and middle school is no more than 3%
above the percentage of the State-rated capacity set forth in §
17-5-502(a)(3) and the school enrollment for each high school is no more than
5% above the percentage of the State-rated capacity set forth in §
17-5-502(a)(3);
      (3)   The property is encumbered by recorded deed restrictions that the
units be restricted to occupancy by eligible households under this paragraph
for at least 30 years and that at least 60% of rental units be occupied by a
household with an income that does not exceed 60% of the median income adjusted
for household size for the Baltimore Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area, as
defined and published annually by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development; and
      (4)   The provisions of this subsection are not varied, modified, or
reduced.
   (f)   Exemptions within the Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area.
Residential redevelopment in the Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area
under Subtitle 3 of Title 7 is exempt from the adequate schools facilities test
if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The redevelopment takes place on properties located in the TC
Zoning District or located, in whole or in part, within a transit-oriented
overlay development policy area identified in the General Development Plan;
      (2)   The project includes a mix of at least two of the following uses,
integrated and connected by pedestrian access:
         (i)   residential;
         (ii)   commercial; or
         (iii)   industrial; and
      (3)   If residential uses form part of the mix of uses, no less than 50%
of the dwelling units consist of efficiency or one-bedroom units and no
dwelling units have more than two bedrooms.
   (g)   Exemptions for residential development in transit-oriented overlay
development policy areas. Residential development in transit-oriented overlay
development policy areas, as identified in the General Development Plan, is
exempt from the adequate school facilities test if the following conditions are
met:
      (1)   The development is located in a critical economic development
policy area, as identified in the General Development Plan;
      (2)   The development is located within one mile from an Amtrak rail
station or MARC commuter rail station;
      (3)   All dwelling units in the development have fewer than two bedrooms;
      (4)   The development includes enhancements for pedestrian and bicycle
access to the rail station; and
      (5)   The provisions of this subsection are not varied, modified, or
reduced.
(Bill No. 90-07; Bill No. 65-08; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 94-18; Bill No. 13-
19; Bill No. 12-20; Bill No. 64-20; Bill No. 85-21; Bill No. 93-21; Bill No.
94-21; Bill No. 64-23)
Editor’s note – Additional legislative history for this section may be found in
Bill No. 15-18.
SUBTITLE 3. ADEQUATE FIRE SUPPRESSION FACILITIES
§ 17-5-301. Standards.
   A development passes the test for adequate fire suppression facilities if in
the scheduled completion year of the development the public water supply
system, or a private fire protection water supply system approved by the Office
of Planning and Zoning after consultation with the reviewing agencies, will be
capable of providing adequate fire-flow. A development may be re-tested for
adequacy of fire suppression facilities as a condition precedent to final plan
approval and permit issuance.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
SUBTITLE 4. ADEQUATE ROAD FACILITIES
§ 17-5-401. Standards.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d), and in
§
17-6-504(9), a development passes the test for adequate road facilities if in
the scheduled completion year of the development it creates 50 or fewer daily
trips or if:
      (1)   the road facilities in the impact area of the proposed development
will operate at or above the minimum of ‘D' level of service after including
the traffic generated by the development; and
      (2)   road facilities in the impact area of the proposed development will
have an adequacy rating of not less than 70 as defined by the Anne Arundel
County road rating program or, if not rated by the Anne Arundel County road
rating program, have been found by the County to be adequate with respect to
road capacity, alignment, sight distance, structural condition, design, and
lane width, except that the requirements of this subsection (a)(2) do not apply
to development in a commercial revitalizationarea, to scenic or historic roads
in the impact area of the proposed development, or to roads other than those
that front on the cluster lots in a cluster development in an RA or RLD
District; or
      (3)   the developer has an approved mitigation plan under §§
17-5-901 et seq.
   (b)   Parole Town Center.
      (1)   In the Parole Town Center, a development passes the test for
adequate road facilities if in the scheduled completion year of the
development, after the offset provided for in paragraph (2), it creates 250 or
fewer daily trips or if:
         (i)   each intersection from site access points to and including the
first intersection with an arterial or higher classification road operates with
a peak hour level of service “D” or better, except that, at the discretion of
the Planning and Zoning Officer, intersections located in the Core may operate
with a peak hour level of service “E” or better; and
         (ii)   intersections as identified by the Office of Planning and
Zoning operate with a peak hour level of service “D” or better, except that, at
the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Officer, intersections located in the
Core may operate with a peak hour level of service “E” or better; or
         (iii)   the developer has an approved mitigation plan under §§
17-5-901 et seq.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, if a
site was previously developed, the developer may request an offset for the
vehicle trips generated by any prior uses that are being replaced on the site
that exist or existed within five years of the date of the development
application, subject to the following:
         (i)   The developer shall provide supporting information to justify
the assumptions made regarding the trip generation of the prior uses, including
a traffic analysis that illustrates the prior uses on the site, the square
footage attributable to the prior uses, and the daily trips generated by the
prior uses.
         (ii)   If the information and analysis provided in accordance with
subsection (b)(2)(i) is accepted by the Office of Planning and Zoning, the
number of trips attributed to the prior uses shall be used to offset the total
number of daily trips generated by the uses proposed in the new development of
the site.
         (iii)   The offset allowed by subsection (b)(2)(ii) applies regardless
of whether any structures that contained the prior uses are demolished from the
site.
   (c)   Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area. In the Glen Burnie
Sustainable Community Overlay Area, redevelopment under
Title 7, Subtitle 3 and
Article 18, Title 14, Subtitle 6 passes the test for adequate road facilities
if in the scheduled completion year of the redevelopment it creates 250 or
fewer new daily trips or if each intersection from site access points to and
including the first intersection with an arterial or higher classification road
operates with a peak hour critical lane volume of less than 1,450.
   (d)   Odenton Town Center.
      (1)   In the Odenton Town Center, a development passes the test for
adequate road facilities if in the scheduled completion year of the
development, after the offset provided for in paragraph (2), it creates 250 or
fewer daily trips, or:
         (i)   each intersection inside the Odenton Town Center, from all site
access points to and including the first intersection with an arterial road and
other intersections identified by the Office of Planning and Zoning, operates
at a peak hour level of service ‘D’ or better at all intersections outside the
OTC-C Zoning District, or a peak hour level of service ‘E’ or better at all
intersections inside the OTC- C Zoning District; or
         (ii)   the developer has an approved mitigation plan under
Subtitle 9 of Title 5.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, if a
site was previously developed, the developer may request an offset for the
vehicle trips generated by any prior uses that are being replaced on the site
that exist or existed within 10 years of the date of the development
application, subject to the following:
         (i)   The developer shall provide supporting information to justify
the assumptions made regarding the trip generation of the prior uses, including
a traffic analysis that illustrates the prior uses on the site, the square
footage attributable to the prior uses, and the daily trips generated by the
prior uses.
         (ii)   If the information and analysis provided in accordance with
subsection (d)(2)(i) is accepted by the Office of Planning and Zoning, the
number of trips attributed to the prior uses shall be used to offset the total
number of daily trips generated by the uses proposed in the new development of
the site.
         (iii)   The offset allowed by subsection (d)(2)(ii) applies regardless
of whether any structures that contained the prior uses are demolished from the
site.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 10-17; Bill No. 64-20; Bill No. 65-21; Bill No. 64-23;
Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-5-402. Roads included.
   The following road facilities are considered as existing in the scheduled
completion year of the development when determining whether a proposed
development passes the test for adequate road facilities:
      (1)   road facilities in existence on the date the developer submits the
application for approval of the development;
      (2)   new road facilities or improvements that in combination with
existing roads and intersections would meet the adequacy standards if there is
an appropriation for at least 30% of the construction cost for the facilities
or improvements with the remainder programmed for construction in the County's
current adopted Capital Improvement Program or the current state consolidated
transportation program and all applicable federal, State, and County permits
have been approved and rights-of-way have been ensured through agreement,
dedication, or conveyance;
      (3)   new road facilities or improvements to existing road facilities in
approved mitigation plans; and
      (4)   the mitigation proposed for the development under §§
17-5-901 et seq.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-5-403. Impact area.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided in subsection (b), the impact area of a
proposed development includes all County roads and State roads located in the
County in all directions from each point of entrance to and exit from the
proposed development, through the intersection with the first arterial road,
and along that arterial road in both directions, to the second intersecting
arterial road, except that the impact area for the Odenton Town Center and the
Parole Town Center does not include roads outside the Town Centers. If access
to the proposed development is on an arterial road, that arterial road shall be
considered the first arterial road for purposes of identifying the impact area.
   (b)   Certain peninsulas and other areas. Notwithstanding the provisions
contained in §
17-5-401(a), the Planning and Zoning Officer may assess, in the aggregate, the
impact on roads of development in certain peninsulas and other areas, as
described below, for the purpose of determining whether mitigation under §
17-5-901 is appropriate. The impact area shall be extended through the second
intersecting arterial road and along that arterial road to the third
intersecting arterial road if the development is located:
      (1)   east of the intersection of Fort Smallwood Road (Route 173) and
Hogneck Road (Route 607) and will use Fort Smallwood Road as the sole route out
of the peninsula;
      (2)   east of the intersection of Mountain Road (Route 177) and Ritchie
Highway (Route 2) and will use Mountain Road as the sole route out of the
peninsula;
      (3)   east of the intersection of Bay Ridge Avenue and Bay Ridge Road and
will use Bay Ridge Road as the sole route out of the peninsula;
      (4)   east of the intersection of Central Avenue (Route 214) and Muddy
Creek Road (Route 468) and will use Central Avenue as the sole route out of the
peninsula; or
      (5)   east of the intersection of Deale-Churchton Road (Route 256) and
Shady Side Road (Route 468) and will use Shady Side Road as the sole route out
of the peninsula.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 61-07; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 83-11; Bill No. 84-23)
SUBTITLE 5. ADEQUATE SCHOOL FACILITIES
§ 17-5-501. Standards; report to the Board of Education.
   (a)   Standards. A development passes the test for adequate school
facilities if:
      (1)   each public elementary, middle, and high school is designated as
“open” on the school utilization chart described in §
17-5-502 for the geographical attendance areas for the development in the third
school year after the school year in which the determination is being made, and
the number of students projected to be generated by the development in the
third school year after the school year in which the determination is being
made does not exceed the available capacity of each open school after the
available capacity is adjusted to account for projected student generation from
each development that has been approved since the date of the last approved
school chart, as determined by the Office of Planning and Zoning;
      (2)   the Office of Planning and Zoning has received written notice via
certified mail from the Board of Education that the requirements for applicable
future capacity, as described in §
17-5-502(d)(2)(i) and (ii), have been satisfied, without formal adoption of a
school utilization chart, and with the applicable future capacity the
development will satisfy the requirements of subsection (a);
      (3)   the developer has executed an approved School Capacity Mitigation
Agreement under the provisions of §
17-5-901;
      (4)   the Planning and Zoning Officer and the Board of Education approve
a donation of land for future construction of school facilities as provided in
§
17-5-901(h)(2); or
      (5)   a public elementary, middle, or high school in a geographical
attendance area adjacent to a geographical attendance area with a closed public
elementary, middle, or high school has available capacity sufficient to render
the closed school of the corresponding educational level less than 100% of the
State-rated capacity.
   (b)   Report to Board of Education. If approved, the Office of Planning and
Zoning shall specify the number and type of dwelling units that are approved
and report the number and type to the Board of Education.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 47-12; Bill No. 105-15; Bill No. 85-21; Bill No. 52-
23)
   Editor’s note – Additional legislative history for this section may be found
in Bill No. 92-17 or Bill No. 15-18.
§ 17-5-502. School utilization chart.
   (a)   Chart defined. The Planning and Zoning Officer shall prepare a school
utilization chart for approval by ordinance of the County Council. The school
utilization chart:
      (1)   shall be revised at least once a year by the County Council upon
the annual recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Officer made no later than
March 1 each year, and the chart may be revised more often because of
significant changes in capacities;
      (2)   shall be based on enrollments projected by the Board of Education
and the capacities of schools as determined by the Board of Education as of
February 1 of each year; and
      (3)   shall determine for each public elementary, middle, and high school
whether, taking into account all enrollment and student generation data
provided by the Board of Education, including new students projected to be
generated by new development approved since the last school utilization chart
was approved, the school enrollment:
         (i)   for each public elementary, middle, and high school that is at
or less than 100% of the State-rated capacity during the third school year
after the school year in which the most recent revision of the school
utilization chart is adopted, and designate for that year each public
elementary, middle, and high school in the County as either “open”, if the
school enrollment is less than 100% of the State-rated capacity, or “closed”,
if the school enrollment is at or over 100% of the State-rated capacity; and
         (ii)   shall include the verified actual enrollment data for each
school as of September 30 of the year immediately preceding the date of the
school utilization chart.
   (b)   Appeal not allowed. The school utilization chart prepared by the
Planning and Zoning Officer is not an administrative or adjudicatory order and
may not be appealed.
   (c)   Projected enrollment. The projected enrollment of a school used in the
school utilization chart shall be based upon a student yield generation formula
and capacity determination method accepted by the Office of Planning and Zoning
and Anne Arundel County public schools and posted on a County website
accessible to the public. Projections shall be provided by the Board of
Education by February 1 of each year and shall include:
      (1)   any predicted increase in the number of students from new
development in the geographical attendance area of the school;
      (2)   a list of new development projects, including the number and type
of approved dwelling units as provided to the Board of Education by the Office
of Planning and Zoning; and
      (3)   other students expected by the Board of Education to enroll in the
school, including students assigned to the school for programmatic reasons.
   (d)   Capacity. The capacity of a school used in the school utilization
chart shall be based upon the most recent educational facilities master plan
prepared by the Board of Education and:
      (1)   shall include the existing capacity of the school based on the
program requirements of the Board of Education;
      (2)   shall include any applicable future capacity if:
         (i)   a contract for construction of the school or an addition to the
school necessary to achieve the future capacity has been awarded; and
         (ii)   the Board of Education estimates that the construction will be
completed in time to be used for the beginning of classes in the school year in
which the future capacity is included in the school utilization chart;
      (3)   capacity generated by a new school for which the contract has been
awarded but for which assignment of the geographical attendance area for the
new school has not yet occurred and shall be considered available capacity for
adjacent schools as provided for in §
17-5-501(a)(5); and
      (4)   may not include capacity based on temporary or relocatable
structures.
   (e)   Approval. A school utilization chart and any revisions to the chart
may not take effect until the County Council by ordinance has approved the
chart or the revisions to the chart. The ordinance shall establish the
effective date of the chart or revised chart, and the chart or revised chart
shall continue in effect until replaced or revised.
(Bill No. 85-21; Bill No. 52-23)
§ 17-5-503. Waiting list.
   (a)   Generally. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall establish a waiting
list for approval of the adequacy of public facilities for schools, with the
date of entry onto the list being the date of the determination by the Office
of the adequacy of public facilities for schools.
   (b)   No actions to be taken while on list. No further review or approval of
a development shall take place while the development is on the waiting list,
and no plans, applications, or other documents shall be submitted for review or
approval.
   (c)   Length of time on list. An applicant is not required to remain on the
waiting list for more than six years and, at the end of six years, the
applicant is entitled to approval of the development without regard to the
adequacy of public facilities for schools.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 7-06; Bill No. 91-07)
§ 17-5-504. Annual report.
   (a)   Requirement for report and contents. The Office of Planning and Zoning
shall prepare an annual report for use in preparing the County's capital
program. The report shall describe the number and type of dwelling units for
which approval has been given and the number and type of dwelling units that
are on the waiting list.
   (b)   To whom distributed. Copies of the annual report shall be submitted to
the Board of Education, County Executive, County Council, and Planning Advisory
Board.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 6. ADEQUATE SEWERAGE FACILITIES
§ 17-5-601. Standards.
   A development passes the test for adequate sewerage facilities if in the
scheduled completion year of the development the development will have a
private sewerage system approved by State and County authorities or, after
accounting for all existing flows and flows reserved by allocation:
      (1)   lateral systems will accommodate expected ultimate peak flows from
the proposed development;
      (2)   interceptors will accommodate ultimate peak gravity flows from the
proposed development with adjustment for pump flows if applicable;
      (3)   pumping stations and force mains tributary to the development
impact area will accommodate expected peak flows from the proposed development;
and
      (4)   water reclamation facilities in the service area will accommodate
the ultimate flows from the proposed development.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 7. ADEQUATE STORM DRAIN FACILITIES
§ 17-5-701. Standards.
   A development passes the test for adequate storm drain facilities if in the
scheduled completion year of the development:
      (1)   the onsite drainage system and stormwater management system
installed by the developer includes environmental site design to the maximum
extent practicable, complies with the stormwater requirements of this Code, and
is capable of conveying through and from the property the design flow of storm
water runoff originating in the subdivision to an adequate outfall; and
      (2)   offsite downstream drainage systems are capable of conveying to an
adequate outfall as defined in Article 16 the design flow of storm water
runoff; or
      (3)   the developer has an approved mitigation plan under §§
17-5-901 et seq., and has paid applicable fees due under Title 11.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-5-702. Storm drain facilities included.
   The following drainage facilities are considered as existing in the
scheduled completion year of the development when determining whether a
proposed development passes the test for adequate drainage facilities:
      (1)   drainage facilities in existence on the date the developer submits
the application for approval of the development;
      (2)   new drainage facilities and improvements to existing drainage
facilities that in combination with existing drainage facilities meet the
adequacy standards if a public works agreement has been executed and delivered
to the County or if the County has awarded a contract for the construction or
improvement of the facilities and the facilities will be available for use
before the issuance of the first building permit for the proposed development;
      (3)   new drainage facilities and improvements to existing drainage
facilities in all approved mitigation plans; and
      (4)   the mitigation proposed for the development under §§
17-5-901 et seq.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-5-703. Study impact area.
   The study impact area limits shall be to the point of investigation as used
in Article 16 of this Code.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 8. ADEQUATE WATER SUPPLY FACILITIES
§ 17-5-801. Standards.
   A development passes the test for adequate water supply facilities if in the
scheduled completion year of the development the development will have a
private water supply system approved by the appropriate State and County
authorities or, after accounting for all existing demands and demands reserved
by allocation:
      (1)   the source facilities in the impact area have sufficient available
capacity to provide maximum day demand to the proposed development;
      (2)   the storage tanks in the impact area have sufficient available
capacity to provide peak hour demand in addition to fire flow to the proposed
development;
      (3)   local pumping stations provide water to the proposed development
with sufficient available capacity to provide maximum day demand where storage
facilities are available on the discharge side or with sufficient capacity to
provide for fire flow where storage facilities are not available on the
discharge side; and
      (4)   the distribution system is capable of providing normal required
pressure and minimum residual pressure to the proposed development under fire
flow for the type of development planned.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 9. MITIGATION
§ 17-5-901. Mitigation.
   (a)   General requirement. Except as provided in this section, mitigation
consists of the construction or funding of improvements to offsite public
facilities by a developer that increase capacity, are compatible with the
function, safety, and capacity of multi-modal transportation infrastructure,
and improve environmental effectiveness or safety of each public facility that
is below the minimum standard in the impact area so that the capacity,
environmental effectiveness or safety of the facility in the scheduled
completion year will be equal to or greater than if the development had not
been constructed. A school capacity mitigation plan may also include donation
of land to the Board of Education for future school facilities construction. A
mitigation plan may include donation of land to the Board of Education for
future school facilities construction pursuant to subsection (h)(2), physical
improvements secured by bond, letter of credit or other security acceptable to
the County, which shall be provided under a public works agreement or grading
permit, or an agreement with the Board of Education to construct school
facilities, including a contract school, or payment of storm drain fees in
excess of those required by Title 11, or contributions to existing capital
projects and shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning Officer. The
developer shall submit the most recent tax assessment information for any land
to be donated to the Board of Education, a cost estimate to establish the value
of construction or off-site improvements offered in mitigation, and a cost
estimate for construction and improvements in conformance with County
specifications may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Officer, who may also
require a mitigation agreement to ensure compliance with the requirements of
this section. An agreement with the Board of Education to construct school
facilities or for the donation of land for a school site must comply with
applicable State law and be approved by resolution introduced by the County
Executive and adopted by the County Council.
   (b)   Freeway interchanges and freeway through lanes. If mitigation to an
intersection under subsection (a) would require the construction of or
improvements to freeway interchanges or freeway through lanes, the mitigation
required to pass the test for adequate road facilities shall increase the
capacity of the intersection to the fullest extent possible without
constructing the improvements to the freeway interchanges or freeway through
lanes.
   (c)   Parole Town Center Growth Management Area. In the Parole Town Center
Growth Management Area, mitigation consists of one or more of the following as
directed by the Office of Planning and Zoning:
      (1)   improvements to each substandard intersection that will have a
positive effect on the substandard intersection;
      (2)   construction of or improvements to one or more road links that will
have a positive effect on each substandard intersection;
      (3)   a significant capital improvement that will improve the County’s
ability to provide public transportation in the Parole Town Center Growth
Management Area; or
      (4)   an acceptable paratransit operation or ridesharing program to
mitigate traffic impact.
   (d)   Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area. In addition to other
mitigation allowed under this section, mitigation in the Glen Burnie
Sustainable Community Overlay Area for redevelopment in accordance with
Title 7, Subtitle 3 and
Article 18, Title 14, Subtitle 6, may include:
      (1)   improvements to a substandard intersection, construction of a new
road, improvements to other existing roads, provision of smart signalization
systems, or diversion of trips from automobile to other modes;
      (2)   contributions to a County capital project, a State project, or a
County fund earmarked for a State project for road improvements and
construction in the Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay;
      (3) improvement of the County’s ability to provide public transportation
in the Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay;
      (4)   the provision of or contribution to long-term satellite parking in
or in the vicinity of the Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay that is
served by public transit, shuttle service, or ride sharing; or
      (5)   the provision of traffic design and traffic directions using
intelligent transportation systems, transportation system management, or other
measures to direct traffic to alternate routes through less congested
intersections.
   (e)   Odenton Town Center. In the Odenton Town Center, mitigation consists
of one or more of the following as directed by the Office of Planning and
Zoning:
      (1)   improvements to a substandard intersection, construction of a new
road, improvements to other existing roads, provision of smart signalization
systems, or diversion of trips from automobile to other modes of
transportation;
      (2)   contributions to a County capital project, a State project, or a
County fund earmarked for a State project for road improvements and
construction in the Odenton Town Center;
      (3)   a significant capital improvement that will improve the County’s
ability to provide public transportation in the Odenton Town Center;
      (4)   the provision of or contribution to long-term satellite parking in
or in the vicinity of the Odenton Town Center that is served by public transit,
shuttle service, or ride sharing;
      (5)   the provision of traffic design and traffic directions using
intelligent transportation systems, transportation system management, or other
measures to direct traffic to alternate routes through less congested
intersections; or
      (6)   improvements to bicycle, pedestrian, and transit infrastructure.
   (f)   Development within one-half mile of existing or programmed bus or rail
transit. Mitigation for development within one-half mile of existing or
programmed bus or rail transit service may include the execution of an
agreement in a form acceptable to the County and binding on the developer and
the developer’s successors and assigns, to mitigate for six years from the date
of final plan approval. Mitigation may include the purchase of annual bus
passes, installation or construction and maintenance of bus stops and passenger
shelters at locations acceptable to the Office of Planning and Zoning, or
enrollment in a ride share program administered by the County. For purposes of
this subsection, programmed bus or rail transit service means routes with
available funding.
   (g)   Reports. Except when mitigation is not required, the developer or the
developer’s successors and assigns who provide mitigation pursuant to
subsection (d) shall file with the Office of Planning and Zoning an annual
report attesting to the purchase and average use of annual bus or rail transit
passes, the levels of participation in ride share programs, or other evidence
of mitigation as required by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (h)   Watershed management tool. The developer shall prepare a storm
drainage management plan using all available information from the watershed
management tool to avoid adverse environmental impacts and prioritize
improvements.
   (i)   School Capacity Mitigation Agreement.
      (1)   Pursuant to this section and §
17-5-501 a developer may enter into a School Capacity Mitigation Agreement
acceptable to the Planning and Zoning Officer to provide capital improvements
to increase school capacity, including construction of a contract school, to
resolve existing capacity deficiencies and to mitigate the predicted increase
in student enrollment in schools required to be adequate for the development,
as determined by the Board of Education, so that the capacity of the school in
the scheduled completion year will be equal to or greater than if the
development had not been constructed. Approvals of the development may not be
granted until the capital improvements are completed by the developer and
accepted by the Board of Education, or adequate security for completion of the
capital improvements is provided by the developer. The capital improvements
provided by the developer pursuant to a School Capacity Mitigation Agreement
shall be available to any portion of the developer’s specified property or
project and shall provide school capacity to allow approval of subdivision
sketch plan applications filed for the property or project within six years of
the date of the School Capacity Mitigation Agreement. The six year filing
deadline may be extended by the Planning and Zoning Officer for good cause
shown.
      (2)   If enrollment at an elementary, middle, or high school is in excess
of 95% but less than 100% of the State-rated capacity, then pursuant to this
section and §
17-5-501, a developer may enter into an agreement acceptable to the Planning
and Zoning Officer and approved by the Board of Education to donate land to the
Board of Education for future school facilities construction.
         (i)   Land donations as school mitigation may not be approved by the
Planning and Zoning Officer unless the Planning and Zoning Officer and the
Board of Education determine that:
            1.   the land to be donated is suitable for a school site in the
same feeder district as the development;
            2.   the land to be donated is suitable to be added to an existing
school site for a school that is over the State-rated capacity, in the same
school feeder district as the development, and suitable for expansion; or
            3.   the land to be donated is suitable for use as a portion of a
school site in the same feeder district as the development, and the Board of
Education reasonably expects other school mitigation land donations sufficient
to comprise a developable school site; and
            4.   that development of a donated site or partial site for new or
expanded school facilities can reasonably be expected to proceed to
construction no later than six years after the date of donation.
         (ii)   A land donation shall mitigate school capacity deficiencies
based on the following formula: the per-student school capacity created by a
land donation shall be calculated by dividing the State tax assessment at the
time of donation of the property donated by the current cost-per-student cost
of school construction (as provided by the Board of Education) of the same
class of school facility as that which was deficient in the feeder district.
         (iii)   Mitigation by land donation must be sufficient to mitigate
existing school deficiencies as well as the additional capacity generated by
the development.
         (iv)   The capacity created by a land donation shall be available to
any portion of the developer’s specified property or project and shall provide
school capacity to allow approval of subdivision sketch plan applications filed
for the property or project within six years of the date of the School Capacity
Mitigation Agreement. The six year filing deadline may be extended by the
Planning and Zoning Officer for good cause shown.
   (j)   Transportation Capacity Mitigation Agreement. Pursuant to this section
and §
17-5-401 a developer may enter into a Transportation Capacity Mitigation
Agreement to provide capital improvements to increase road capacity to resolve
existing roadway deficiencies and to mitigate the traffic impact of all phases
of a proposed development by providing roadways adequate for the project.
Approvals for development within the project may not be granted until the
capital improvements specified in the Transportation Capacity Mitigation
Agreement are completed by the developer and accepted by the County, or
adequate security for completion of the capital improvements is provided by the
developer. The capital improvements provided by the developer pursuant to a
Transportation Capacity Mitigation Agreement shall be available to any portion
of the developer’s specified property or project and shall provide roadway
capacity to allow approval of sketch plan or site development plan applications
filed for the property or project within six years of the date of the
Transportation Capacity Mitigation Agreement. The six year filing deadline may
be extended by the Planning and Zoning Officer for good cause shown.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 47-12; Bill No. 20-13;
Bill No. 78-18; Bill No. 64-20; Bill No. 65-21; Bill No. 85-21; Bill No. 84-23)
   Editor’s note – Additional legislative history for this section may be found
in Bill No. 92-17.
§ 17-5-902. Delay in or alternative method of accomplishing mitigation.
   If the Planning and Zoning Officer, after consultation with the Director of
Public Works and the Director of the Office of Transportation, determines that
the timing of capital projects or the need to ensure continuity in the
transportation network makes it more efficient to delay the construction of all
or part of proposed mitigation, the Planning and Zoning Officer shall require
the developer to:
      (1)   delay the construction of all or part of the improvements to a date
certain and sign a public works agreement guaranteeing the construction of the
delayed improvements; or
      (2)   agree to pay the County the current estimated cost of the
mitigation, which the County shall use to fund all or part of a capital project
to improve the facilities that were to have been mitigated by the developer.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 78-18)
SUBTITLE 10. PHASING
§ 17-5-1001. Phasing of development.
   Adequacy of public facilities for development may be tested and approved in
phases if:
      (1)   a plan for phased development is approved by the Planning and
Zoning Officer; and
      (2)   the Administrative Hearing Officer allows phasing in accordance
with that plan as a condition of special exception approval; or
      (3)   the decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer is appealed and
the Board of Appeals allows phasing in accordance with that plan as a condition
of special exception approval.
(Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 110-15)
TITLE 6. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
17-6-101.   Scope.
   
17-6-102.   Shore erosion control measures.
   
17-6-103.   Road design.
   
17-6-104.   Transfer of density.
   
17-6-105.   Wells.
   
17-6-106.   FEMA map revisions and amendments.
   
17-6-107.   Road frontage; road names; building numbers; addresses.
   
17-6-108.   Mobile home park relocation plans.
   
17-6-109.   Underground facilities.
   
17-6-110.   Setbacks from certain roads.
   
17-6-111.   Open area; active recreation area.
   
17-6-112.   Mailboxes.
   
17-6-113.   Bicycle, pedestrian, and transit infrastructure.
Subtitle 2. Landscaping
   
17-6-201.   Landscape Manual.
   
17-6-202.   Landscape plan.
Subtitle 3. Forest Conservation
   
17-6-301.   Scope.
   
17-6-302.   Forest stand delineation.
   
17-6-303.   Forest conservation plan.
   
17-6-304.   Afforestation and reforestation generally.
   
17-6-305.   Afforestation.
   
17-6-306.   Reforestation.
   
17-6-307.   Agreements.
   
17-6-308.   Forest Conservation Fund.
   
17-6-309.   Violations.
Subtitle 4. Natural Features
   
17-6-401.   Applicability.
   
17-6-402.   Nontidal wetlands.
   
17-6-403.   Streams.
   
17-6-404.   Steep slopes.
   
17-6-405.   Nontidal floodplains.
   
17-6-406.   Preservation in the development process.
Subtitle 5. Historic Resources, Archaeological Resources, and Cemeteries
   
17-6-501.   Historic resources.
   
17-6-502.   Archaeological resources.
   
17-6-503.   Cemeteries.
   
17-6-504.   Scenic or historic roads.
Subtitle 6. Parking and Stacking Capacity
   
17-6-601.   Reservation for use or structure.
   
17-6-602.   Size of parking spaces.
   
17-6-603.   Width of drive aisles.
   
17-6-604.   Parking design.
   
17-6-605.   Stacking capacity.
   
17-6-606.   Commuter park and ride areas.
   
17-6-607.   Parking in small business districts.
   
17-6-608.   Parking lots for townhouses, or commercial, industrial, or private
institutional uses.
Subtitle 7. Agreements
   
17-6-701.   Generally.
   
17-6-702.   Security.
   
17-6-703.   Release of security.
   
17-6-704.   Forfeiture of security.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 17-6-101. Scope.
   This title relates to development approved in the subdivision process or
through a site development plan.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-6-102. Shore erosion control measures.
   (a)   Preferred shore erosion control measures. Vegetation shall be used as
a shore erosion control measure unless it is demonstrated to be ineffective. In
that event, an alternative measure shall be used in the following order of
preference:
      (1)   vegetation in combination with a stone sill, groin, breakwater, or
similar wave dissipating structure;
      (2)   the establishment or expansion of a beach by placing sand fill
between the mean high-water line and mean low-water line;
      (3)   riprap and materials similar to riprap that are composed of loose,
permeable components; or
      (4)   a bulkhead, groin, jetty, revetment, or seawall if the erosion rate
is greater than two feet per year or when site constraints, such as water depth
or topography, make other measures impractical.
   (b)   Structures parallel to shoreline. Shore erosion control structures
built parallel to the shoreline may not extend beyond the natural shoreline at
mean high water except to achieve a stable slope behind the structure.
   (c)   Replacement of damaged bulkheads and seawalls. Existing damaged
bulkheads and seawalls may be replaced with a new structure within 18 inches of
the old structure.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-6-103. Road design.
   (a)   Subdivision roads generally. To the maximum extent practicable, roads
within a proposed subdivision shall be designed to minimize grading and impacts
to natural features, and impacts to adjoining properties.
   (b)   Road improvements for agricultural preservation subdivisions and
certain cluster developments. In an agricultural preservation subdivision, the
road improvements required by the DPW Design Manual apply with respect to the
road frontage of the owner's and the childrens' lots only. In a cluster
development in an RA or RLD Zoning District, the road improvements required by
the DPW Design Manual apply with respect to the road frontage of the cluster
lots only.
   (c)   Interconnections between subdivisions. Roads other than alleys shall
be designed to provide a connection between subdivisions of similar zoning and
use unless the Office of Planning and Zoning determines that the
interconnection will result in unnecessary impact to the environment or
adjacent residentially zoned and developed properties.
   (d)   Residential subdivisions. Access to residential subdivisions through
commercial and industrial development is allowed only if no other access is
available.
   (e)   Frontage on a collector or arterial road. If a proposed subdivision
has frontage on a collector or arterial road, the roads within the proposed
subdivision shall be designed to minimize driveway access to the collector or
arterial road.
   (f)   Orientation of proposed units. A proposed subdivision and road layout
shall be designed to minimize orienting the rear facades of proposed units
toward a public or private road other than an alley.
   (g)   When further subdivision allowed. If a proposed lot or bulk parcel
within a subdivision may be further subdivided, a right-of-way of adequate
width to accommodate the future development potential shall be provided for the
lot or parcel.
   (h)   Mixed use and high density residential developments. Roads within a
subdivision containing mixed use or high density residential developments shall
be designed to accommodate mass transit service by providing sidewalks,
crosswalks, stopping lanes, and bus waiting facilities at appropriate areas as
determined by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (i)   Public roads. Public roads within a proposed subdivision shall be
designed, to the maximum extent practicable, to minimize impervious surfaces,
grading, and impacts to natural features, and to enhance multi-modal
transportation options.
      (1)   The right-of-way for public roads shall be conveyed by dedicating
and deeding the land to the County or State in fee simple. If a proposed
subdivision other than an agricultural preservation subdivision borders a
County or State road that does not comply with County or State standards, the
developer shall dedicate and deed sufficient right-of-way to comply with the
standards and to accommodate pedestrian and bicycle facilities identified in
the current County Pedestrian and Bicycle Master Plan and other transportation
or development plans or programs adopted by the County, except that in a
cluster development in an RA or RLD District, the developer shall dedicate and
deed in fee simple sufficient right-of-way to comply with the standards on the
road frontage of the cluster lots only.
      (2)   Generally, roads within and serving commercial, industrial or
multifamily residential development shall be privately owned and shall be
served by privately owned stormwater management facilities.
      (3)   To the maximum extent practicable, roads in the R2, R1, RLD, and RA
Zoning Districts shall be open section roads and roads in all other zoning
districts shall be closed section roads with swales.
      (4)   The developer shall convey to the County a perpetual easement in
the clear sight triangle of pre-existing road intersections and new rights of
way.
   (j)   Private roads; declaration. Proposed new private roads shall be
designed to accommodate areas for mail delivery and the collection of
residents' garbage and recyclable materials and to encourage opportunities for
multi-modal transportation connections. Generally these areas shall be in close
proximity to public roads. The developer shall prepare and record a declaration
of covenants, conditions, and restrictions requiring that, in the absence of a
homeowners association or condominium regime legally responsible for
maintenance of the private road, owners of newly created lots abutting a
private road shall be responsible for the maintenance of the private road. For
private roads developed in connection with a subdivision requiring the creation
of a homeowners association, the declaration shall be binding on the homeowners
association and the homeowners association shall be responsible for maintenance
of the private road. For private roads developed in connection with a
condominium regime, the declaration shall be binding on the condominium
regime's council of unit owners and the council of unit owners shall be
responsible for maintenance of the private road. For development in the absence
of a homeowners association or condominium regime the declaration shall be
binding on all abutting property owners and those abutting property owners
shall be responsible for maintenance of the private roads. Any declaration
required by this section shall be recorded in the land records.
(Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 78-18)
§ 17-6-104. Transfer of density.
   A developer may transfer density from a portion of a lot located in one
zoning district to another portion of the same lot located in a more intense
zoning district if the portion from which density is transferred is placed in a
perpetual easement and designated for public use or held as open area by a
homeowners’ association.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-6-105. Wells.
   Wells located on residential lots shall be located at least 50 feet from
existing offsite agricultural land preservation easements and other farms that
have a complete soil conservation and water quality plan approved by the Anne
Arundel County Soil Conservation District.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-6-106. FEMA map revisions and amendments.
   When a floodplain analysis establishes a floodplain limit that differs from
the floodplain limit shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA)
Floodplain Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or proposed structure s are shown in the
FIRM floodplain but not in the floodplain limit established by the floodplain
analysis, the developer shall apply for a revision or amendment to the affected
FIRM and obtain a letter of acceptance from FEMA before recordation of the
record plat or issuance of a building or grading permit.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-6-107. Road frontage; road names; building numbers; addresses.
   (a)   Road frontage. Subdivisions consisting of six or more residential lots
for single-family detached dwellings and development consisting of six or more
single-family detached dwellings shall provide frontage for each single-family
detached dwelling on a public road. Subdivisions consisting of five or fewer
residential lots for five or fewer single-family detached dwellings and
development consisting of five or fewer single-family detached dwellings may
provide frontage on a private road.
   (b)   Road names and building numbers. The Office of Planning and Zoning
shall establish, maintain, and implement a system for the naming of roads and
the numbering of dwellings and structures. The Office shall assign numbers to
newly constructed dwellings and structures and names to new roads. The Office
may change the addresses of existing dwellings and structures. The Office may
change the names of existing roads, and may place or have placed at
intersections or crossings signs indicating the names of roads.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-6-108. Mobile home park relocation plans.
   (a)   Generally. Any applicant changing the use of a mobile home park shall
submit a mobile home park relocation plan for the park residents that meets the
requirements of Title 8A of the Real Property Article of the State Code, shall
comply with the plan as approved, and shall pay all fees established by this
section. Final plan approval for subdivisions and final site development plan
approval may not be granted until the applicant fully complies with the
relocation plan.
   (b)   Review and monitoring of plans. The County may contract with Arundel
Community Development Services, Inc. or a similarly qualified person or entity,
to review, approve and monitor compliance with mobile home park relocation
plans. A relocation plan, including any re-submittals, shall be reviewed and a
written approval or denial issued no later than 45 days after the date of
submittal. A denial shall include specific reasons for the denial.
   (c)   Fees. The mobile home park owner shall pay the fees due under §
17-11-101 for mobile home park relocation plan review and compliance monitoring
as follows.
      (1)   All fees shall be paid at the time of application.
      (2)   The fee for compliance monitoring of a relocation plan shall be due
for each mobile home occupied by a resident at the time of application for a
change of land use.
      (3)   If the County enters into a contract in accordance with subsection
(b), all fees due under this section shall be paid directly to the person or
entity with whom the County contracts. Otherwise, all fees shall be paid to the
County.
      (4)   An owner shall enter into an agreement with the County to provide
security in the form of a letter of credit to secure the payment of any
required relocation assistance not previously paid. An agreement to post
security shall provide for the release of the security when all relocation
assistance required to be paid pursuant to Title 8A of the Real Property
Article of the State Code has been paid. An agreement and security posted under
this subsection shall satisfy the requirement that the owner fully comply with
the relocation plan prior to final plan approval, but does not relieve the
owner of the obligation to pay the relocation assistance directly to qualified
park residents or to provide confirmation satisfactory to the Office of
Planning and Zoning that any relocation assistance required to be paid to
residents has been fully paid prior to plat recordation or a recommendation to
approve a site development plan.
(Bill No. 20-14)
§ 17-6-109. Underground facilities.
   A developer shall provide for underground facilities for utilities to serve
a development in accordance with applicable law for underground facilities. The
developer shall execute all required agreements relating to the underground
facilities, including easements, and provide proof to the County that the
agreements have been executed.
(Bill No. 53-06)
§ 17-6-110. Setbacks from certain roads.
   (a)   Setbacks from certain roads. Unless the Planning and Zoning Officer
approves a reduced setback under subsection (b), residential development shall
provide for a setback from the property line to the edge of the mainline
pavement of certain roads, exclusive of ramps, as follows:
      (1)   485 feet to I-97;
      (2)   600 feet to I-695;
      (3)   560 feet to US 50;
      (4)   440 feet to MD 10;
      (5)   455 feet to MD 100;
      (6)   450 to MD 32;
      (7)   445 feet to the Baltimore-Washington Parkway; and
      (8)   for residential development along MD 3 (Robert Crain Highway, south
of I-97), the minimum setback from the property line to the edge of the
mainline pavement shall be based on a noise study from an acoustical engineer.
The noise study shall determine if the sound level of the outdoor activity
areas is at, above, or below an average of 66 dBA. If the sound level is over
66 dBA, a setback of 150 feet from the property line to the edge of the
mainline pavement shall be imposed, subject to the provisions of subsections
(b) and (c).
   (b)   Reduction of required setback; noise study. A setback required under
subsection (a) may be reduced if:
      (1)   the site plan is designed to place outdoor activity areas in rear
yards that are shielded from highway noise by proposed dwelling units and
dwelling units are clustered to minimize front yards or to contain parking
areas; or
      (2)   the developer conducts a noise study using Federal Highway
Administration prediction methods and the study reflects that the highway
traffic sound level in outdoor activity areas is at or below 66 dBA or that
noise mitigation measures will bring the highway traffic sound level to a level
at or below 66 dBA in outdoor activity areas and 45 dBA in indoor residentially
occupied building spaces with highway traffic sound levels at the exterior
building facades that exceed 66 dBA.
   (c)   Noise mitigation measures. Outdoor noise mitigation measures provided
by the developer shall be noted on the proposed record plat and shall be
located in open space or open area maintained by a homeowners association,
community association, or council of condominium unit owners. In the absence of
open area, the developer shall provide a noise mitigation maintenance easement
to be recorded in the land records and noted on the proposed record plat.
Required indoor noise mitigation measures shall be noted on the building
architectural plans.
(Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 101-18; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-6-111. Open area; active recreation area.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to an agricultural preservation
subdivision or to a subdivision located in an RA District.
   (b)   Required open area generally. Unless the Planning and Zoning Officer
grants a modification to allow a reduction in the amount of required open area,
a minimum of 20% of the gross area of a residential site minus any floodplain
areas, and excluding the area of transmission line easements, shall be provided
as open area. Wetlands and stream buffers, forest conservation easements,
stormwater management or drainage facility easements, inlets, outfalls,
stormwater management credit areas, and steep slopes shall be located in the
open area on a site.
   (c)   Required active recreation area generally. Unless the Planning and
Zoning Officer under subsection (g) requires the developer to pay a fee in lieu
of active recreation area, a single-family detached, duplex, triplex, fourplex,
townhouse, or stacked townhouse subdivision shall have at least 350 square feet
of active recreation area for each dwelling unit. A multifamily or multiplex
subdivision shall provide 10% of the net area of the site as active recreation
area. Active recreation area shall be located within the required open area,
but may not be located within floodplains, wetland and stream buffers, forest
conservation easements, stormwater management or drainage facility easements,
inlets, outfalls, stormwater management credit areas, or steep slopes.
   (d)   Offsite active recreation area.
      (1)   (i)   For a development with 20 dwelling units or less, the
required active recreation area may be fulfilled by an offsite park if approved
by the Planning and Zoning Officer after considering comments from the
Department of Recreation and Parks.
         (ii)   For a development with more than 20 dwelling units, the
required active recreation area may be fulfilled by an offsite park through
approval of a modification by the Planning and Zoning Officer after considering
comments from the Department of Recreation and Parks.
      (2)   For all developments, an offsite park must:
         (i)   be owned by a public entity and be available for public use;
         (ii)   be located within one-quarter mile of the proposed development
and safely accessible by pedestrians from the proposed development without
crossing any road other than one local road; and
         (iii)   provide active recreation amenities, such as ball fields,
courts, swimming pools, playgrounds, picnic areas, trails, or similar
amenities.
   (e)   Characteristics of active recreation area generally. Active recreation
area:
      (1)   shall be designed to demonstrate ADA accessibility to the maximum
extent practicable, and may not include parking lot islands, transmission line
easements, or strips with a width of less than 20 feet, other than shared-use
paths;
      (2)   shall be integrated into the design to create focal points along
roads and at entrances;
      (3)   shall be square or rectangular in shape, to the extent practical,
and suitable for recreation uses such as tot lots, ball fields, and courts, or
for recreation in formal parks and squares;
      (4)   shall have at least 15 feet of frontage on a public or private
road;
      (5)   shall be centrally located among the lots it serves;
      (6)   shall be equitably distributed into two areas if the subdivision or
site contains at least 50 residential lots or contains at least 50 residential
units; and
      (7)   may include shared-use paths, which are not subject to the
restrictions set forth in paragraphs (1) through (6).
   (f)   Conveyance or dedication. At the discretion of the County and to the
full extent allowed by law, the County may require a developer to convey fee
simple title of open area to the County without charge. Alternatively, if the
property is adjacent to an existing State park and the State agrees to accept
title, the County may require conveyance of open area to the State. If open
area is not conveyed to the County or the State, a developer shall convey open
area in fee simple to, as applicable: an incorporated homeowners association a
residential subdivision; an association of condominium owners for a condominium
development; or a sole owner for a rental facility. Before recordation of the
proposed record plat, the Office of Planning and Zoning and the Office of Law
shall review and approve all documents deemed necessary to ensure that
membership in the homeowners association or condominium association is
mandatory and automatic upon conveyance of title to any lot or unit in the
subdivision and that the maintenance of open area owned by the homeowners
association is guaranteed. The conveyance to the homeowners association or
condominium association shall be concurrent with the recording of the proposed
record plat.
   (g)   Fee in lieu.
      (1)   A development containing ten or less dwelling units may pay a fee
in lieu of providing active recreation area.
      (2)   For a development containing more than ten units, the Planning and
Zoning Officer may require a developer to pay a fee in lieu of providing active
recreation area if the Planning and Zoning Officer determines that land is not
of significant quality or size for community purposes.
      (3)   The fees shall be used to provide public recreation areas and
facilities in the County.
   (h)   Characteristics of open area. Open area shall contain the active
recreation areas, environmentally sensitive areas, and stormwater management
areas identified in the preliminary plan and sketch plan. These areas shall be
incorporated into the site design to maximize views and accessibility from
proposed dwelling units and public spaces. To the maximum extent practicable,
open area shall be located so as to augment land on adjacent property that has
previously been identified as open space, open area, conservation or
preservation areas, or that has been identified by the Office of Planning and
Zoning as possible future open area, conservation or preservation areas. The
developer shall integrate open area into the site design to maximize
environmental protections while creating quality community and public spaces.
   (i)   Design of bikeways and shared-use paths. Bikeways and shared-use paths
shall be designed to be available for use by all lot or unit owners in the
development and in accordance with the Design Manual. Shared-use paths provided
as active recreation area may only be considered as complying with all or part
of the requirements of §
17-6-113 if the shared-use paths support the objectives of bicycle, pedestrian,
and transit infrastructure and connectivity to existing, planned, or future
offsite infrastructure, and if the shared-use paths are placed in a public
easement or public right-of-way.
(Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 78-18; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-6-112. Mailboxes.
   The developer shall provide and identify sufficient area for the location
and installation of mailboxes in conformance with requirements of the United
States Postal Service.
(Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-6-113. Bicycle, pedestrian, and transit infrastructure.
   (a)   Purpose. Each subdivision or development shall be designed to provide
interconnections to promote the circulation and flow of bicycles and
pedestrians between developments and existing uses and to incorporate bicycle,
pedestrian, and transit infrastructure, such as connectable public sidewalks,
crosswalks, bikeways, shared-use paths, and transit stops or transit stations
to facilitate the use of pedestrian transportation, bicycle transportation, and
public transit.
   (b)   Requirements.
      (1)   In addition to any other design requirements of this Code, each
development or subdivision shall provide public on- or off-site bicycle,
pedestrian, or transit infrastructure, that connects to or expands the
existing, planned, or future public bicycle, pedestrian, or transit
infrastructure. The developer shall provide the bicycle, pedestrian, and
transit infrastructure improvements in accordance with the approved bicycle
pedestrian and transit assessment.
      (2)   The developer may acquire property not already owned by the
developer to be dedicated for public use to implement the requirements of this
section.
   (c)   Plans and guidelines.
      (1)   A transportation functional master plan shall be prepared by the
Office of Transportation, in conjunction with other approving agencies, no
later than one year after November 23, 2018.
      (2)   Bicycle, pedestrian, and transit assessment guidelines shall be
prepared by the Office of Transportation, in conjunction with other approving
agencies, no later than 60 days after November 23, 2018.
   (d)   Limit. The cost to the developer for design and construction of public
bicycle, pedestrian, and transit infrastructure required under this section may
not be required to exceed the amount of the bicycle, pedestrian, and transit
fee-in-lieu that would be due for the subdivision or development under §
17-11-101.
   (e)   Fee-in-lieu.
      (1)   Authorized. Upon a finding by the Planning and Zoning Officer that,
due to specific existing site conditions, construction of connectable public
sidewalks, bikeways, shared-use paths, or transit stops, as required by this
section, that would facilitate connections or accessibility to nearby bicycle,
pedestrian, or transit infrastructure cannot reasonably be accomplished within
the cost limits of this section, or where a development is exempt from
providing a bicycle, pedestrian, and transit assessment under this article, a
developer may pay a fee-in-lieu in the amount provided in §
17-11-101 for bicycle, pedestrian, and transit infrastructure. The Bicycle,
Pedestrian, and Transit Infrastructure Fee-in-Lieu Fund shall be established by
the Office of Transportation no later than 60 days after November 23, 2018, and
shall be administered by that office. A fee-in-lieu shall be paid into the
Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Transit Infrastructure Fee-in-Lieu Fund prior to the
issuance of a grading permit or building permit when a grading permit is not
required.
      (2)   Use of funds. Funds in the Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Transit
Infrastructure Fee-in-Lieu Fund may only be utilized for the design and
construction costs associated with expanding existing bicycle, pedestrian, and
transit infrastructure, or creating new bicycle, pedestrian, and transit
infrastructure. The Director of the Office of Transportation may approve a
request to use funds from the Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Transit Infrastructure
Fee-in-Lieu Fund to expand existing or create new bicycle, pedestrian, or
transit infrastructure.
   (f)   Design requirements. The design of facilities for bicyclists and
pedestrians shall be in accordance with those provided in the Design Manual,
or, in the absence of information in the Design Manual, guidance from generally
recognized and commonly used transportation engineering and planning standards
including guidance from the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), the Maryland
Department of Transportation (MDOT), the American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE), and the National Association of City Transportation Officials
(NACTO).
   (g)   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all
development subject to this article, including development in the Odenton Town
Center, the Parole Town Center, and the Glen Burnie Town Center.
(Bill No. 78-18; Bill No. 84-23)
SUBTITLE 2. LANDSCAPING
§ 17-6-201. Landscape Manual.
   The Planning and Zoning Officer shall prepare regulations governing the
landscaping, screening, and buffering of all development and the regulations
shall be compiled in a document titled "Anne Arundel County Landscape Manual."
The Landscape Manual shall be submitted for approval of the County Council by
ordinance and may be changed only with the approval of the County Council by
ordinance.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-6-202. Landscape plan.
   Whenever landscaping, screening, or buffering is required by the Landscape
Manual, the developer shall submit to the Office of Planning and Zoning a
landscape plan and cost estimate that complies with the requirements of the
Landscape Manual. The plan shall be prepared by a registered landscape
architect or other qualified professional and shall include all information
required by the Office of Planning and Zoning. Landscaping approved by the
Office of Planning and Zoning, including recreation amenities and hardscape
features, shall be bonded as a line item in the grading permit bond.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
SUBTITLE 3. FOREST CONSERVATION
§ 17-6-301. Scope.
   (a)   In general. This subtitle applies to any public or private preliminary
plan, site development plan, subdivision plan or application for a grading or
sediment control permit by any person, including a unit of State government and
the County, on areas 40,000 square feet or greater.
   (b)   Exceptions. This subtitle does not apply to:
      (1)   highway construction activity that is subject to the Natural
Resources Article, § 5-103, of the State Code;
      (2)   cutting or clearing of forest in areas governed by the critical
area overlay contained in
Article 18, Title 13 of this Code;
      (3)   commercial logging and timber harvesting operations as provided in
the Natural Resources Article, § 5-1602(b)(3), of the State Code;
      (4)   any agricultural activity that does not result in a change in a
land use category, including agricultural support buildings and other related
structures built using accepted best management practices;
      (5)   the cutting or clearing of public utility rights-of-way or land for
electrical generating stations as provided in the Natural Resources Article, §
5-1602(b)(5), of the State Code;
      (6)   routine maintenance of public utility rights-of-way;
      (7)   development or a linear project if:
         (i)   it does not result in the cumulative cutting, clearing, or
grading of more than 20,000 square feet of forest on contiguous lots under
common ownership; and
         (ii)   it does not result in the cutting, clearing, or grading of any
forest that is subject to the requirements of a previous forest conservation
plan prepared under this subtitle;
      (8)   any strip or deep mining of coal regulated under the Environmental
Article, Title 15, Subtitle 5 or 6, of the State Code, and any non-coal surface
mining regulated under the Environmental Article, Title 15, Subtitle 8, of the
State Code;
      (9)   the cutting or clearing of trees to comply with the requirements of
14 CFR 77.25 relating to objects affecting navigable airspace if the Federal
Aviation Administration has determined that the trees are a hazard to aviation;
      (10)   a stream restoration project, as defined in the Natural Resources
Article, § 5-1601, of the State Code, provided the applicant has a binding
agreement with the owner to maintain the project for at least five years;
      (11)   maintenance or retrofitting of a stormwater management structure,
including clearing of vegetation or removal and trimming of trees, provided the
maintenance or retrofitting is within the original limits of disturbance for
construction of the existing structure or within any maintenance easement for
access to the structure; or
      (12)   previously developed areas covered by impervious surface and
located in priority funding areas at the time of an application for approval of
a subdivision plan or a grading or sediment control permit.
   (c)   Declaration of intent. A developer shall file a declaration of intent
for the exceptions set forth in subsection (b)(3), (b)(4), and (b)(7); whenever
a grading permit is required under
Article 16, Title 2, of this Code; and to the extent required by State law.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 57-16; Bill No. 68-19)
§ 17-6-302. Forest stand delineation.
   (a)   Required. A developer shall file with the Office of Planning and
Zoning a forest stand delineation plan prepared by a licensed forester,
licensed landscape architect, or other qualified professional who meets the
requirements of COMAR, Title 08. The purpose of the plan is to determine the
most suitable and practical areas for forest conservation.
   (b)   Contents. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a forest stand
delineation shall consist of a narrative and shall contain or be accompanied by
all information required by the Office of Planning and Zoning, including:
      (1)   a topographic map delineating intermittent and perennial streams
and steep slopes;
      (2)   a soils map delineating soils with structural limitations, hydric
soils, or highly erodible soils;
      (3)   forest stand data indicating the species, location, and size of
trees and showing dominant and co-dominant forest types;
      (4)   the location of 100-year floodplains; and
      (5)   information required by the State Forest Conservation Technical
Manual and COMAR Title 08, Subtitle 19 for a full forest stand delineation.
   (c)   Simplified forest stand delineation for sites other than linear
projects. The Office of Planning and Zoning may approve a simplified forest
stand delineation for sites other than linear projects if:
      (1)   (i)   No forest cover will be disturbed during a construction
activity;
         (ii)   All forest on the site will be protected under a long-term
protective agreement between the developer and the County; and
      (2)   A forest stand delineation map, meeting the requirements of COMAR
08.19.04.02 for a simplified forest stand delineation map, is included in and
approved as part of the application.
   (d)   Simplified forest stand delineation for linear projects. The Office of
Planning and Zoning may approve a simplified forest stand delineation for a
linear project if:
      (1)   disturbance to a forest area is less than 40 feet wide and the
total forest disturbance is less than 120,000 square feet;
      (2)   the project area does not impact sensitive environmental features,
such as floodplains, hydric soils, wetlands, perennial or intermittent streams,
critical habitat, steep slopes, or highly erodible soils; and
      (3)   the applicant demonstrates that reasonable efforts have been made
to utilize other routes.
   (e)   Map requirements. All maps required to be submitted under this section
shall be at the same scale.
   (f)   Effectiveness. A forest stand delineation shall remain in effect for
five years after approval. Thereafter, the Office of Planning and Zoning may
approve the forest stand delineation for an additional five years based on the
submission of such additional information as the Office may require.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 68-19)
§ 17-6-303. Forest conservation plan.
   (a)   Required. Upon receipt of notice that a forest stand delineation is
complete and correct, a developer shall file with the Office of Planning and
Zoning a proposed forest conservation plan.
   (b)   Priority retention areas. The following vegetation and areas are
considered priority retention areas and shall be left undisturbed unless the
Planning and Zoning Officer approves a modification described in §
17-2-108:
      (1)   trees, shrubs, and plants located in sensitive areas, including the
100-year floodplain, intermittent and perennial streams and their buffers,
steep slopes, non-tidal wetlands, and all associated buffers; and critical
habitat areas, as defined in § 5-1601 of the Natural Resources Article of the
State Code;
      (2)   contiguous forest that connects the largest undeveloped or most
vegetated tracts of land within and adjacent to the site;
      (3)   trees, shrubs, or plants determined to be rare, threatened, or
endangered under the Federal Endangered Species Act of 1973 set forth in 16
U.S.C. §§ 1531 - 1544 and in 50 CFR Part 17; the Maryland Nongame and
Endangered Species Conservation Act set forth in the Natural Resources Article,
§§ 10-2A-01 et seq., of the State Code; and COMAR, Title 08;
      (4)   trees that are champion trees, part of a historic site, or
associated with a historic structure;
      (5)   a tree that has a diameter measured at 4.5 feet above the ground of
30 inches or more or that is 75% or more of the diameter of the current State
champion tree of that species;
      (6)   forested areas at least 35 feet wide with a total area of 10,000
square feet; and
      (7)   habitats or potential habitats for forest interior dwelling birds
and other wildlife species that consist of:
         (i)   a minimum of 75 acres of contiguous forest with 10 or more acres
of contiguous forest located more than 300 feet from the nearest forest edge;
or
         (ii)   a minimum of 75 acres of contiguous riparian forests along a
perennial stream with an average width of at least 300 feet.
   (c)   Contents of forest conservation plan. A forest conservation plan shall
contain or be accompanied by all information required by the Office of Planning
and Zoning, including at least the following:
      (1)   an approved forest stand delineation;
      (2)   a table that lists the proposed values, measured to the nearest
one-tenth acre, of the site, including the area of required forest conservation
and the onsite and offsite areas of forest conservation that the developer will
provide, but excluding the 100-year floodplain and any previously developed
areas covered by impervious surfaces that are located in a priority funding
area;
      (3)   a graphic scale drawing of the site that shows the forest
conservation to be provided, areas where existing forest is to be retained,
areas proposed for afforestation or reforestation and their relationship to
priority areas, any offsite areas proposed for afforestation or reforestation
to meet forest conservation requirements, the limits of disturbance to the
site, and stockpile areas;
      (4)   an explanation of how the developer will give priority to the
retention of existing forests;
      (5)   an afforestation or reforestation plan, if applicable;
      (6)   information required by the State Forest Conservation Technical
Manual;
      (7)   a timetable for the sequence to implement the forest conservation
plan and a description of site and soil preparation, size and species of plants
and trees, and spacing between trees and plants;
      (8)   the locations and types of protective devices to be used during
construction activities to protect trees and forests designated for
conservation;
      (9)   a forestation agreement;
      (10)   a forest conservation easement that provides protection for areas
of retention, planting, replanting, afforestation, or reforestation and that
limits the use of those areas to uses that are consistent with forest
conservation, including passive recreational activities and forest management
practices.
   (d)   Retention not feasible; afforestation and reforestation; payment to
Forest Conservation Fund.
      (1)   If a developer proposes to modify the requirements of §
17-6-303(b) or to retain less of the existing forest than is required by the
forest conservation thresholds established in §
17-6-306, the developer shall apply to the Planning and Zoning Officer for a
modification of the forest conservation requirements of this subtitle pursuant
to §
17-2-108.
      (2)   If the Planning and Zoning Officer approves a modification pursuant
to paragraph (d)(1), the developer shall provide for afforestation in
accordance with § 17-6-305 and reforestation in accordance with §
17-6-306.
      (3)   If the Office of Planning and Zoning determines that neither
afforestation nor reforestation can reasonably be accomplished, the developer
shall make a payment to the County's Forest Conservation Fund as provided in
Title 11 before the signing of the proposed record plat for a development
involving subdivision or upon the issuance of a grading permit for a
development not involving subdivision.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 57-16; Bill No. 68-19)
§ 17-6-304.  Afforestation and reforestation generally.
   (a)   Methods. Unless a different method is necessary to achieve the
objectives of County land use policies and this article or to take advantage of
opportunities to consolidate forest conservation efforts, afforestation and
reforestation shall be undertaken in accordance with one or more of the
following methods in preferred sequence, as determined by the Office of
Planning and Zoning, based on site conditions or forestry practices that will
enhance wildlife or water quality values:
      (1)   onsite afforestation or reforestation using transplanted or nursery
stock that is at least 1.5 inches in diameter measured at 4.5 feet above the
ground and shrubs;
      (2)   onsite afforestation or reforestation using transplanted or nursery
stock that is at least 1.5 inches in diameter measured at 4.5 feet above the
ground;
      (3)   onsite afforestation or reforestation using whip and seedling
stock;
      (4)   offsite afforestation or reforestation using transplanted or
nursery stock that is at least 1.5 inches in diameter measured at 4.5 feet
above the ground and shrubs;
      (5)   offsite afforestation or reforestation using transplanted or
nursery stock that is at least 1.5 inches in diameter measured at 4.5 feet
above the ground;
      (6)   offsite afforestation or reforestation using whip and seedling
stock;
      (7)   natural regeneration onsite; or
      (8)   natural regeneration offsite.
   (b)   Location. All afforestation or reforestation shall occur in an area of
the County that is at least 10,000 square feet and at least 35 feet wide. If
practical, afforestation or reforestation shall occur in the watershed in which
the development is located.
   (c)   Native species. Tree species used for afforestation or reforestation
shall be native to the County and selected from a list of approved species
established by the County Forester.
   (d)   Credit for street trees, offsite area, easements. For projects located
in an area designated by the County pursuant to the Natural Resources Article,
§ 5-1607(b)(2), of the State Code, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall give
credit towards afforestation or reforestation for:
      (1)   street trees required by the Design Manual, based on the mature
canopy coverage of the street trees; and
      (2)   a transfer to the County of a fee simple or easement interest in an
offsite existing developable forest that is not otherwise protected, with the
credit not to exceed 50% of the area of forest cover protected.
   (e)   Credit for certain landscaping. The Office of Planning and Zoning
shall give credit towards afforestation or reforestation for landscaped
screening and buffer areas in accordance with an approved landscape plan
prepared under §§
17-6-201 et seq. if done in an area that covers at least 2,500 square feet and
is at least 35 feet wide.
   (f)   Forest mitigation banks. If reforestation or afforestation
requirements cannot reasonably be accomplished onsite or offsite, the Office of
Planning and Zoning may allow the use of credits from an approved forest
mitigation bank. Forest mitigation banks shall be located as required by the
Natural Resources Article, § 5-1610.1, of the State Code, and shall meet the
requirements set forth at COMAR, 08.19.03.01, Articles X-1 and X-2 of the Model
Forest Conservation Ordinance. A forest mitigation bank may not be used unless
approved in advance by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-6-305. Afforestation.
   (a)   Amount required. The amount of afforestation required under this
subtitle shall be determined according to the amount of existing forest cover
as provided in this section. For purposes of this section, the term "site"
excludes the 100-year floodplain. The amount required is as follows:
      (1)   a site that has less than 20% existing forest cover shall be
afforested up to at least 20% of the site for agricultural and resource areas
and medium density residential areas; and
      (2)   a site that has less than 15% existing forest cover shall be
afforested up to at least 15% of the site for institutional development areas,
high density residential areas, mixed use development areas or planned unit
development areas, and commercial or industrial areas.
   (b)   Clearing below afforestation level. If existing forest cover is cut or
cleared on a site that is below the afforestation levels set forth in this
section, the site shall be reforested at a ratio of two acres planted for every
acre cut or cleared, and this reforestation shall be in addition to the
afforestation required by this section.
   (c)   Exception for linear projects. Afforestation is not required for the
construction of linear projects where the utility crosses open, non-forested
areas and the same use will continue on the site after the project is complete.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 68-19)
§ 17-6-306. Reforestation.
   (a)   Amount required. The amount of reforestation required under this
subtitle shall be determined    (a)   Amount required. The amount of
reforestation required under this subtitle shall be determined according to the
amount of existing forest cover cleared in relation to the forest conservation
threshold for the site. For purposes of this section, the term "site" means any
lot or parcel of land, or combination of lots or parcels of land, that are
contiguous and being developed as part of a common subdivision or project, but
not including any area comprising a 100-year floodplain. The forest
conservation thresholds are as shown in the following chart:
 
               SITES 5 ACRES
               OR LESS IN SIZE
               IN A TARGETED   SITES GREATER   SITES GREATER   SITES GREATER
               GROWTH AREA,    THAN 5 ACRES IN THAN 5 ACRES IN THAN 5 ACRES IN
LAND USE TYPE  INSIDE A        SIZE INSIDE A   SIZE INSIDE A   SIZE OUTSIDE A
               PRIORITY        TARGETED GROWTH PRIORITY        PRIORITY FUNDING
               FUNDING AREA,   AREA            FUNDING AREA    AREA
               OR OUTSIDE A
               PRIORITY
               FUNDING AREA
Agricultural
and resource   50% of the site 50% of the site 50% of the site 50% of the site
areas
Medium density
residential    25% of the site 25% of the site 30% of the site 40% of the site
areas
Institutional
development    20% of the site 20% of the site 20% of the site 20% of the site
areas
High density
residential    20% of the site 20% of the site 25% of the site 35% of the site
areas
Mixed use
development
areas or       15% of the site 15% of the site 20% of the site 30% of the site
planned unit
development
areas
Commercial or
industrial     15% of the site 15% of the site 20% of the site 30% of the site
areas
 
   (b)   Retention above the threshold. If existing forest cover is cut or
cleared and the remaining forest cover is above the forest conservation
threshold, the site shall be reforested at a ratio of one-half acre planted for
each acre of forest cover cut or cleared except that each acre of the site
remaining in forest cover above the forest conservation threshold shall be a
credit against the amount of reforestation required.
   (c)   Retention below the threshold. If existing forest cover is cut or
cleared and remaining forest cover is below the forest conservation threshold,
the site shall be reforested at a ratio of two acres planted for each acre of
forest cover cut or cleared below the forest conservation threshold and one-
half acre planted for each remaining acre of forest cover cut or cleared above
the forest conservation threshold.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 68-19)
§ 17-6-307. Agreements.
   (a)   Forestation agreements and forest conservation easements. A developer
shall execute a forestation agreement for planting, replanting, reforestation,
or afforestation in areas of 1,000 square feet or more. A developer also shall
execute a forest conservation easement, and the easement shall be located in
areas that are at least 35 feet wide with a total area of at least 10,000
square feet. At the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Officer, the easement
may be located on any open area created under §
17-6-111, in a limited common element of a condominium regime, or in an
agricultural preservation easement, but it may not otherwise be located on a
residentially zoned lot of less than one acre. Forest conservation easements
shall preserve existing forest and developed woodland.
   (b)   Abandonment of forest conservation easements. If a property owner
believes that it is appropriate for the County to abandon a forest conservation
easement, the owner shall file a request with the Office of Planning and Zoning
that explains why the abandonment is believed to be appropriate. The County may
abandon the easement if:
      (1)   the Planning and Zoning Officer agrees that abandonment is
appropriate;
      (2)   the easement or portion of the easement sought to be abandoned is
no larger than one-half acre per lot and the cumulative area of all
abandonments on the lot does not exceed one-half acre;
      (3)   the property owner pays into the Forest Conservation Fund the fee
required by Title 11; and
      (4)   an amended record plat and other appropriate documentation, in a
form acceptable to the County, are recorded among the land records.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-6-308. Forest Conservation Fund.
   (a)   Time frame for spending. Money paid into the County's Forest
Conservation Fund shall remain in the Fund in accordance with Natural Resources
Article, § 5-1610, of the State Code and applicable State regulations.
   (b)   Use.
      (1)   Money in the Forest Conservation Fund may only be spent on:
         (i)   costs associated with reforestation or afforestation, including
those costs directly related to site identification, acquisition, prepurchase,
preparation of conservation property, maintenance of existing forests, and
achieving urban canopy goals; and
         (ii)   resource staff and equipment for project and plan review and
approval that are directly related to the County forest conservation program in
an annual amount not to exceed one-third of the Forest Conservation Fund.
      (2)   Money deposited in the Fund may not revert to any other local
general fund.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 50-10)
§ 17-6-309. Violations.
   A person who clears in violation of this subtitle shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   replant at two times the area cleared with trees and vegetative
cover approved by the Office of Planning and Zoning; or
      (2)   pay a fee into the Forest Conservation Fund as required by §
17-11-101.
(Bill No. 77-05)
SUBTITLE 4. NATURAL FEATURES
§ 17-6-401. Applicability.
   The provisions of this subtitle do not apply to a water quality improvement
project, as defined in §
16-1-101 of this Code.
(Bill No. 10-23)
§ 17-6-402. Nontidal wetlands.
   Development may not occur within a nontidal wetland or within a 25-foot
buffer of a nontidal wetland, except that commercial harvesting of trees is
permitted if sound silvacultural methods are used, the harvesting is undertaken
in accordance with a forest management plan approved by the State, and the
following requirements are met:
      (1)   the harvesting utilizes forest harvest best management practices
recognized by State forest programs;
      (2)   mitigation is done onsite through revegetation methods contained
within the approved plan; and
      (3)   any clear cutting is approved as part of the approved plan.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 10-23)
§ 17-6-403.  Streams.
   Development may not occur within a stream bed or within a 100-foot non-
disturbance stream buffer.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 10-23)
§ 17-6-404.  Steep slopes.
   Development may not occur within steep slopes or within 25 feet of the top
of the steep slopes where the onsite and offsite contiguous area of the steep
slopes is greater than 20,000 square feet unlessdevelopment will facilitate
stabilization of the slope or the disturbance is necessary to allow connection
to a public utility.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 19-05; Bill No. 10-23)
§ 17-6-405.  Nontidal floodplains.
   Development in a nontidal floodplain is regulated by
Article 16, Title 2 of this Code. The nontidal floodplain shall be conveyed to
the County in accordance with §
17-3-701.
(Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 10-23)
§ 17-6-406. Preservation in the development process.
   The layout and design of a development shall comply with environmental site
design criteria and shall preserve natural features to the maximum extent
practicable. Factors that the Office of Planning and Zoning shall consider
include the size and shape of the lot; other applicable requirements of this
Code, such as lot coverage, setbacks, and buffers; the nature of the natural
features in relation to the amount of usable property; and the layout and
design of neighboring properties and the extent to which the natural features
of those properties have been preserved.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 10-23)
SUBTITLE 5. HISTORIC RESOURCES, ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES, AND CEMETERIES
§ 17-6-501. Historic resources.
   (a)   Evaluation of historic resources. The developer shall identify all
historic resources on property that is subject to an application for
subdivision or an application for site development plan review associated with
a building or grading permit, and the Planning and Zoning Officer shall
evaluate and determine the extent to which each historic resource can be
retained and preserved based on whether the historic resource retains its
structural and historic integrity and can still convey historic significance.
   (b)   Preservation. When an historic resource is to be retained and
preserved, the following criteria shall apply to the maximum extent
practicable:
      (1)   access shall be by an existing driveway unless the Office of
Planning and Zoning determines that relocation of the driveway results in an
improved design;
      (2)   new development shall be sited so that the layout does not impact
the historic resource and shall be oriented so that the view of the historic
property's primary facade from the public road is not impaired;
      (3)   grading, filling, construction, and landscaping on a commonly owned
adjacent lot shall be designed to enhance views to and from the historic
resource and to buffer views of new development;
      (4)   the Office of Planning and Zoning may require architectural design
covenants for new development within close visual proximity to the historic
resource; and
      (5)   the developer shall grant to the County a preservation easement and
shall execute an agreement, as necessary, to protect and preserve to the extent
feasible historic resources on properties listed on the County Inventory of
Historic Properties.
   (c)   When preservation not feasible. Demolition or removal of an historic
resource listed on the County Inventory of Historic Properties is allowed only
when the Planning and Zoning Officer finds that preservation is not feasible
and the developer has complied with all other applicable State and federal laws
and regulations regarding the historic resource.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-6-502. Archaeological resources.
   (a)   Generally. Except as otherwise authorized under this section,
development shall avoid disturbance of significant archaeological resources
listed on the Maryland Inventory of Historic Properties (Archaeology)
maintained by the Maryland Historical Trust. All phases of archaeological work
under this section shall adhere to the current version of the published
“Standards and Guidelines for Archeological Investigations in Maryland.” If the
Office of Planning and Zoning determines that there is a known or high
potential for the existence of an archaeological resource on a property, the
developer shall have a “Phase I” preliminary or intensive archaeological survey
conducted, as required by the Office of Planning and Zoning. If an
archaeological site is found as a result of a “Phase I” investigation, the
developer shall conduct a Phase II survey to determine the extent of the site
and the level of its significance.
   (b)   Significant resource. If the Office of Planning and Zoning determines
that an archaeological resource is significant based on review and acceptance
of the Phase II survey, the developer shall either:
      (1)   plan development to preserve or mitigate adverse impacts to the
resource and execute and deliver to the Office of Planning and Zoning a
preservation easement to protect it; or
      (2)   request approval from the Office of Planning and Zoning to submit a
Phase III data recovery plan and to impact the significant resource. The
request shall identify the proposed impacts to the significant archaeological
resource. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall approve the request upon
finding that:
         (i)   the impact to the significant archaeological resource is
necessary to avoid practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship that would
result from complete avoidance of the significant archaeological resource and
to enable development of the property as otherwise authorized under this Code;
         (ii)   the Phase III data recovery plan proposal is in accordance with
the current version of the published “Standards and Guidelines for
Archeological Investigations in Maryland”; and
         (iii)   any adverse effect on, or destruction of all or part of, the
significant archaeological resource cannot be avoided and has been minimized
through full or partial redesign of the development in the area that would
impact the significant archaeological resource.
      (c)   Phase III data recovery. If the Office of Planning and Zoning
approves a request under subsection (b)(2), the developer may submit a “Phase
III” data recovery plan, prepared by a qualified archaeologist, which shall
adhere to the current version of the published “Standards and Guidelines for
Archeological Investigations in Maryland”. The data recovery plan shall be
reviewed by the Office of Planning and Zoning for approval. If approved, the
developer may proceed to impact the resource and complete the approved data
recovery investigation prior to commencing development. Any significant
archaeological resource remaining on the property after completion of the
approved data recovery plan shall be placed under a preservation easement.
      (1)   Any artifacts, field notes, reports, photographs, and similar data
collected or generated during the Phase II and Phase III data recovery process
shall be delivered to and stored in a repository acceptable to the Office of
Planning and Zoning, such as the Anne Arundel County Archaeology Laboratory or
the Maryland Archaeological Conservation Laboratory.
      (2)   Representatives of the Office of Planning and Zoning shall be
permitted to enter the property during any Phase III data recovery work to
conduct inspections for compliance with a Phase III data recovery plan; and
      (3)   The artifacts, field notes, reports, photographs, and similar data
collected or generated during any Phase II or Phase III data recovery process
shall be made available to the public for further archaeological study.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 14-25)
§ 17-6-503. Cemeteries.
   (a)   Cemetery identification. The location and boundary of an onsite
cemetery shall be determined by one of the following methods, in consultation
with the Office of Planning and Zoning:
      (1)   a survey using professionally acceptable methods and techniques,
including archival research, archaeology, geophysical survey methods, oral
history, or other approved techniques;
      (2)   observations in the field including visible grave stones or
markers, a pattern of depressions indicative of graves or associated fence
boundaries; or
      (3)   reference to a modern map or plat or evidence found on historic
maps or documents.
   (b)   Preservation. A developer shall preserve an onsite cemetery, as
follows:
      (1)   grading, construction, or subsurface disturbance within 25 feet of
the cemetery boundary is prohibited;
      (2)   appropriate measures shall be taken to protect the cemetery during
construction, such as a field-delineated limit of disturbance zone, temporary
fencing, or other appropriate physical markings;
      (3)   a 15-foot right-of-way from the nearest public or private road
shall be required to maintain public or family access to the cemetery; and
      (4)   a preservation and maintenance easement shall be provided that
designates a homeowner's association or other person or organization as the
party responsible for care, maintenance, and protection of the site.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-6-504. Scenic or historic roads.
   Development along a scenic or historic road shall preserve, maintain, and
enhance the scenic or historic character of the landscape viewed from the road,
and the achievement of maximum possible density is not a sufficient
justification to allow impacts on a scenic or historic road. Development along
a scenic or historic road shall occur in accordance with the following:
      (1)   structures and roads shall be designed to retain the open character
of the site and to minimize the impact of the development on views from the
road;
      (2)   structures and uses shall be located away from the road right-of-
way unless sufficiently screened by topography or vegetation;
      (3)   development shall minimize tree and vegetation removal and protect
existing vegetation adjacent to the road;
      (4)   the design shall minimize grading and retain existing slopes along
the road frontage;
      (5)   development shall avoid having a rear facade oriented towards the
road but, if that is unavoidable, the structure shall be set back as far as
possible from the road;
      (6)   utilities, storm water management facilities, drainage structures,
bridges, lighting, fences, and walls shall be located and designed to have the
least impact, be unobtrusive, and harmonize with the surroundings and character
of the road;
      (7)   the primary access or entrance to new development shall not be
located on a scenic or historic road if any reasonable alternative access is
available and, if unavailable, the primary access or entrance shall be located
in an area that has the least impact to the scenic or historic qualities of the
road;
      (8)   entrance features shall be low, open, and in keeping with the
scenic or historic character of the surrounding area;
      (9)   road improvements required as a result of new development shall
preserve, maintain, and enhance existing road alignments and be limited to
those minimal improvements required for purposes of safety;
      (10)   there shall be a buffer of existing forest between the road and
the proposed development that is sufficiently wide to preserve, maintain, or
enhance the visual character of the road and, when there is inadequate existing
forest to screen the development from the road, reforestation or landscaping
shall be required to create a buffer;
      (11)   new structures shall be located to the extent practical behind
natural screening or in or along the edges of forests, at the edges of fields
and hedgerows, or near existing buildings;
      (12)   the development shall preserve the existing forest, tree canopy,
foreground meadow, pasture, crop land, and other natural screening and shall be
designed to place development in the background as viewed from the road;
      (13)   the scenic or historic character of each road shall guide the
design of visible shoulders, curbs, and sidewalks; and
      (14)   the design shall include select materials for guardrails and
bridges that are compatible with the surrounding character.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 6. PARKING AND STACKING CAPACITY
§ 17-6-601. Reservation for use or structure.
   All parking spaces shall be reserved for the particular uses or structures
for which they are required.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-6-602. Size of parking spaces.
   The size of a parking space shall be as follows:
 
Compact car parking space     8' by 14' (with 2' overhang) or 8' by 16'
Non-compact car parking space 9' by 16'
Parallel parking space        7' by 20'
Loading space                 12' by 30'
Residential lot parking space 9' by 18'
Handicapped parking space     12' by 18' (or as required by the current ADA
                              criteria)
 
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-6-603. Width of drive aisles.
   Two-way drive aisles shall be 24' in width. One-way drive aisles shall be no
less than 15' for angled parking and 20' for perpendicular parking.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-6-604. Parking design.
   (a)   Public road right-of-way. Parking spaces may not be located on or
extend into a public road right-of-way, unless approved by the Planning and
Zoning Officer through the modification process.
   (b)   Direct access from interior driveway required; exceptions. Except for
a single-family residential use in an RA, RLD, R1, R2, or R5 District, all
parking spaces shall have direct access from an interior driveway and may not
necessitate backing into a road right-of-way.
   (c)   Location. Parking spaces shall be located within 600' of the use or
structure for which they are required.
   (d)   Compliance with stormwater management requirements and County
Landscape Manual. All parking lots shall be designed in full compliance with
the stormwater management requirements of this Code and the County Landscape
Manual.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-6-605. Stacking capacity.
   A use that provides a drive-through service or that tends to draw lines of
traffic shall provide adequate onsite stacking capacity, as determined by the
Office of Planning and Zoning.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-6-606. Commuter park and ride areas.
   The Planning and Zoning Officer may authorize a commuter park and ride area
in the design and layout of a parking area if the commuter park and ride area:
      (1)   does not impair the availability of parking for a principal use of
the property;
      (2)   is located on a lot that contains at least 50 parking spaces; and
      (3)   is limited to not more than 15% of the total number of parking
spaces required for a principal use.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-6-607. Parking in small business districts.
   Parking in a small business district shall generally be located in a rear or
side yard to the extent practical or in an approved joint use parking area as
authorized by the Office of Planning and Zoning. Up to 60% of required parking
may be provided on a separate lot that is within 200 feet of the lot line and
accessible along an established walkway. In small business districts and on
residentially zoned sites, parking and paving surfaces for walkways and
driveways shall be consistent with a residential character.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 59-10)
§ 17-6-608. Parking lots for townhouses, or commercial, industrial, or private
institutional uses.
   Parking lots serving townhouse dwelling units or commercial, industrial, or
private institutional uses shall be privately owned and maintained.
(Bill No. 59-10)
SUBTITLE 7. AGREEMENTS
§ 17-6-701. Generally.
   (a)   Form and contents. The form and contents of an agreement, deed,
easement, or other document required by this article shall be acceptable to the
County.
   (b)   Right of entry. An agreement required by this article may provide for
a right of entry to allow County officials to enter upon property or into
structures at reasonable times for purposes of inspection.
   (c)   Inspection fees. An agreement shall provide for inspection fees to the
extent provided for in
Title 11.
   (d)   Fee reductions. An agreement shall be executed with the County for all
fee reductions approved by the Planning and Zoning Officer relating to this
article.
   (e)   Warranty. A public works agreement shall include a warranty on the
quality of the work performed that runs for a period of two years from the date
of the County's acceptance of the public improvements. Any repair or
restoration during the warranty period shall cause the warranty to run for one
additional year beyond the original two-year period.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-6-702. Security.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided in subsection (b), a public works
agreement and forestation agreement shall be accompanied by security in the
amount required by
Title 11. The security shall be in the form of a cash deposit, certified check,
cashier's check, irrevocable letter of credit, or bond from a bonding company
or financial institution acceptable to the County. When security is required to
be in the amount of the estimated cost of improvements, the developer shall
provide to the Office of Planning and Zoning for its consideration and approval
a cost estimate for completion of the improvements required by the agreement.
   (b)   Exceptions. A public works agreement for minor utility work, as
determined by the County, or for a Mayo Tank System need not be accompanied by
security.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05)
§ 17-6-703. Release of security.
   (a)   Full release. Security may be released in full only upon full
performance of all obligations secured by the agreement. The County shall
retain the security for maintenance until the warranty provided for in the
public works agreement expires. The County shall retain the security for a
forestation agreement for two years to ensure that planting, replanting,
afforestation, or reforestation is undertaken and maintained in accordance with
the approved forest conservation, buffer management, or bog protection plan.
   (b)   Partial release. Upon the completion of all utility work under a
public works agreement, the County may allow a partial release of security in
the amount of the approved cost estimate for the utilities. With respect to the
remainder of the improvements to be made under a public works agreement and a
forestation agreement, the County may allow a partial release of security, not
to exceed 50% of the total security required by an agreement, if the developer
has performed at least 50% of the obligations or remaining obligations secured
by the agreement and the County determines that a partial release of the
security will not impair implementation of the agreement. The security for
plantings in connection with a forest conservation plan, buffer management
plan, or bog protection plan may not be released until the expiration of at
least one growing season.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-6-704. Forfeiture of security.
   (a)   Generally. If a developer fails to comply with any term or condition
of a public works agreement or forestation agreement, the security for the
agreement shall be forfeited to the County. If the County's cost to complete
the work is greater than the amount of the security, the excess cost shall
constitute a lien on any properties of record owned by the developer.
   (b)   Forestation agreements. If a developer fails to request in writing a
return of the security for a forestation agreement within 180 days after the
expiration of the two-year period that the security is held under this
subtitle, the security shall be forfeited by operation of law to the County's
Forest Conservation Fund or to the Critical Area Fund described in §
17-8-603, as determined by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
(Bill No. 3-05)
TITLE 7. DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR PARTICULAR TYPES OF DEVELOPMENT
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
17-7-101.   Scope.
Subtitle 2. Commercial and Industrial Development
   
17-7-201.   Site development for commercial and industrial.
Subtitle 3. Redevelopment In the Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area
   
17-7-301.   Applicability; conflict with other laws.
   
17-7-302.   Concept plan.
   
17-7-303.   Concept plan review process.
   
17-7-304.   Subdivision or site development application.
   
17-7-305.   Recreation area, open area, landscaping.
Subtitle 4. Condominiums
   
17-7-401.   Condominiums of single-family detached dwellings.
Subtitle 5. Age Restricted Development
   
17-7-501.   Age restricted residential development.
Subtitle 6. Mixed Use Development Under the Optional Method of Development
   
17-7-601.   Scope; definition.
   
17-7-602.   Method of development for the alteration, reconstruction,
expansion, and conversion of existing development.
   
17-7-603.   Election required.
   
17-7-604.   Development and design standards.
Subtitle 7. (Reserved)
Subtitle 8. Odenton Town Center
   
17-7-801.   Definitions.
   
17-7-802.   Scope; applicability.
   
17-7-803.   Compliance with other laws and manuals.
   
17-7-804.   Transportation.
   
17-7-805.   Trail connections and construction.
   
17-7-806.   Green area.
   
17-7-807.   Activity space.
   
17-7-808.   Historic preservation.
   
17-7-809.   Redevelopment sites.
   
17-7-810.   Incentive program.
Subtitle 9. Parole Town Center
   
17-7-901.   Definitions.
   
17-7-902.   Scope; applicability.
   
17-7-903.   Compliance with other laws and manuals.
   
17-7-904.   Bulk regulations.
   
17-7-905.   Allowed uses; prohibited uses; conditions.
   
17-7-906.   Inclusionary housing.
   
17-7-907.   Reservation of land for public facilities.
   
17-7-908.   Parking; modes of transportation; site access
   
17-7-909.   Incentive program.
Subtitle 10. Planned Unit Development
   
17-7-1001.   Scope.
   
17-7-1002.   General principles.
   
17-7-1003.   Processing.
   
17-7-1004.   Effect of special exception approval.
Subtitle 11. Small Business Districts
   
17-7-1101.   Architectural features.
Subtitle 12. Redevelopment
   
17-7-1201.   Definitions.
   
17-7-1202.   Notice; application; meetings.
   
17-7-1203.   Subdivision and site development.
   
17-7-1204.   Redevelopment modifications.
   
17-7-1205.   Open space, recreation area, open area, landscaping, and natural
features.
   
17-7-1206   Redevelopment in the critical area.
   
17-7-1207.   Adequate public facilities for redevelopment.
   
17-7-1208.   Reporting.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 17-7-101. Scope.
   This title applies to the particular types of development specified and is
in addition to other requirements of this Code. If a provision of this title
conflicts with any requirements of this article other than those contained in
Titles 8 and
9, the provisions of this title prevail.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05)
SUBTITLE 2. COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
§ 17-7-201. Site development for commercial and industrial.
   (a)   Compatibility. The layout and design of a commercial or industrial
development, including signage, shall be architecturally compatible with
neighboring properties without creating a sameness in appearance through mere
repetition of design and architecture.
   (b)   Linkages. Convenient functional linkages shall be achieved in
commercial and industrial development by providing vehicular, bicycle, and
pedestrian connections to promote the circulation and flow of vehicles,
bicycles, and pedestrians between the development and existing uses.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 3. REDEVELOPMENT IN THE GLEN BURNIE SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY OVERLAY AREA
§ 17-7-301. Applicability; conflict with other laws.
   (a)   Applicability. This subtitle applies to redevelopment, as defined in §
18-14-601 of this Code, in the Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area
if the developer elects to redevelop under this subtitle and Article 18, Title
14, Subtitle 6.
   (b)   Conflict with other law. If any provision of this subtitle conflicts
with other provisions in this article, the provision of this subtitle shall
prevail.
   (c)   Option. A developer proceeding under this subtitle may utilize the
provisions of §
17-7-1205 in addition to the provisions of this subtitle and Subtitle 6 of
Title 14 of Article 18 of this Code if the existing impervious area of the
redevelopment site exceeds 40% of the total area of the site.
(Bill No. 64-20; Bill No. 65-21; Bill No. 2-25)
§ 17-7-302. Concept plan.
   (a)   Generally. A developer who wishes to redevelop within the Glen Burnie
Sustainable Community Overlay Area shall initiate the process by filing an
application for approval of a concept plan with the Office of Planning and
Zoning.
   (b)   Contents. The concept plan shall contain:
      (1)   the general site layout;
      (2)   the approximate location of structures and parking;
      (3)   the proposed building types and uses;
      (4)   the approximate number of dwelling units or and the approximate
square footage of structures, as applicable;
      (5)   3d massing images;
      (6)   proposed pedestrian connections and circulation;
      (7)   a tabulation of the existing density, the density allowed in the
underlying zoning district, the existing floor area ratio, the floor area ratio
allowed in the underlying zoning district, the number of existing parking
spaces, and the parking spaces required in the underlying zoning district,
contrasted with a tabulation of the density, floor area ratio, and number of
parking spaces proposed in the redevelopment;
      (8)   a narrative description of how the redevelopment will be compatible
with surrounding land uses;
      (9)   a narrative description of how the redevelopment meets one or more
of the purposes contained in §
18-14-601(b) of this Code;
      (10)   a description of any community enhancements, as defined in §
18-14-601 of this Code, to be provided with the redevelopment; and
      (11)   the location of any environmental features on the site based on
existing natural resource inventories and mapping.
(Bill No. 64-20)
§ 17-7-303. Concept plan review process.
   (a)   Concept plan review meeting. After filing the concept plan, the
developer shall schedule a meeting with the Office of Planning and Zoning to
discuss the concept plan. Within 45 days after the meeting, the Office of
Planning and Zoning shall provide the developer with written comments on the
plan and the developer shall revise the concept plan to address the comments.
   (b)   Concept plan community meeting. Within 45 days after the Office of
Planning and Zoning provides written comments on the concept plan, the
developer shall hold a community meeting for the purpose of presenting the
revised concept plan, providing information regarding the redevelopment, and
allowing the community to ask questions and provide comments. Staff from the
Office of Planning and Zoning and other County agencies as needed shall attend
the meeting. The meeting shall be held in the County, Monday through Thursday,
beginning between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m., at an ADA accessible
facility located within five miles of the redevelopment site. The Planning and
Zoning Officer may extend the five mile limit if necessary.
   (c)   Notice. The developer shall provide notice of the concept plan
community meeting in accordance with §
17-2-107(d).
   (d)   Record of attendees; comprehensive minutes. The developer shall
maintain a record of the names, addresses, and email addresses, if available,
of the concept plan community meeting attendees and compile comprehensive
minutes of the meeting. The developer shall email or mail, by first class mail,
a copy of the minutes to all attendees, including County staff.
   (e)   Revised concept plan. After the concept plan community meeting, if the
developer chooses to submit a revised concept plan or if the Office of Planning
and Zoning requests a revised concept plan, within 45 days after the concept
plan community meeting, the developer shall file a revised concept plan which
addresses, to the extent practical, concerns or issues raised at the community
meeting.
   (f)   Preliminary decision. Within 45 days after the concept plan community
meeting or the filing of a revised concept plan, if one is filed, the Office of
Planning and Zoning and other reviewing agencies shall meet to review the
concept plan or revised concept plan, as applicable. The Office of Planning and
Zoning shall confirm in writing to the developer a summary of the meeting and a
preliminary decision to:
      (1)   approve the concept plan or revised concept plan;
      (2)   approve the concept plan or revised concept plan with specified
conditions or revisions; or
      (3)   disapprove the concept plan or revised concept plan, in which event
the developer may file a new concept plan or otherwise pursue development.
(Bill No. 64-20; Bill No. 65-21)
§ 17-7-304. Subdivision or site development application.
   (a)   Filing of application. Within six months after approval of the concept
plan, with or without conditions or revisions, the developer may file an
application for approval of a sketch plan under §
17-3-201 or a preliminary plan under §
17-4-201. The application shall incorporate the provisions of the approved
concept plan.
   (b)   Final plan or site development plan. The developer may omit submittal
of an application for approval of a sketch plan or preliminary plan and may
instead proceed with an application for approval of a final plan or site
development plan in accordance with this article, without the need for a
modification.
   (c)   Community meeting. Within 45 days after the submission of a final plan
or site development plan, the developer shall hold a community meeting in
accordance with §
17-2-107(c) and (d), but without reference to the limitations contained in §
17-2-107(a). The previous concept plan community meeting shall serve as the
required pre-submission community meeting.
(Bill No. 64-20)
§ 17-7-305. Recreation area, open area, landscaping.
   (a)   Recreation area; open area. To the extent practical, and as provided
in this subsection, the developer shall comply with the requirements of §
17-6-111. If the requirements create a practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship in achieving one or more of the purposes of the overlay, the developer
may submit an alternative proposal for active recreation area and open area,
and the Planning and Zoning Officer may approve the alternative proposal
without the need for a modification.
   (b)   Landscape plan. To the extent practical, and as provided in this
subsection, the developer shall comply with the requirements of §
17-6-202. If the requirements create a practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship in achieving one or more of the purposes of the overlay, the developer
may submit an alternative landscape plan, and the Planning and Zoning Officer
may approve the alternative landscape plan without the need for a modification.
(Bill No. 64-20; Bill No. 72-24)
SUBTITLE 4. CONDOMINIUMS
§ 17-7-401. Condominiums of single-family detached dwellings.
   A site proposed for development with single-family detached dwellings under
a condominium form of ownership need not be subdivided, but the development
shall otherwise comply with all requirements of this Code as if lot lines
existed. To comply with lot size requirements, structures shall be located on a
discrete area of land that is equivalent in size to the lot size required for
the use under other forms of ownership.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05)
SUBTITLE 5. AGE RESTRICTED DEVELOPMENT
§ 17-7-501. Age restricted residential development.
   (a)   Generally. Subdivision and site development plans consisting of adult
independent dwelling units:
      (1)   may not be revised to permit any other classification of dwelling
units on the site until a new application for subdivision or a new site
development plan is filed and the new application is tested and approved for
adequacy of public facilities as required by §
17-5-202 and a new record plat is approved by the Planning and Zoning Officer;
and
      (2)   shall be located on land that is subject to a declaration of
covenants, conditions, and restrictions, declaration of condominium, or other
document that requires the occupied units to be occupied by at least one person
who is 55 years of age or older and prohibits resident minor children, and such
declaration or other document shall be in a form acceptable to the County
Office of Law, recorded in the County land records and referenced on the record
plat.
   (b)   Elimination of age restriction. Upon approval of an application for
the subdivision, resubdivision, or development of land occupied by adult
independent dwelling units, the developer shall provide:
      (1)   a proposed record plat identifying the property, signed by all
owners of record and removing all references to age restriction;
      (2)   an amended declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions,
declaration of condominium, or other document that removes the age limitation
on use and occupancy of the land, and such declaration or other document shall
be in a form acceptable to the County Office of Law and shall be recorded in
the County land records as necessary; and
      (3)   school impact fees as required by Title 11, which shall be paid
prior to record plat approval, except in instances where no residential
dwelling units have been constructed and the required school impact fees may be
collected upon issuance of a building permit.
   (c)   Minimum requirements. A residential subdivision that is subject to
covenants, conditions, or restrictions imposing an age restriction on occupancy
shall consist of no fewer than six lots with no fewer than six dwelling units.
   (d)   Prohibition. A residential subdivision containing adult independent
dwelling units may not contain any other classification of dwelling units.
   (e)   Enforcement. The homeowners association, community association,
council of condominium owners, or other appropriate private entity owning the
site or the adult independent dwelling units shall publish and strictly enforce
age restriction limitations on the use of property developed pursuant to this
section, in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 3601, et seq.
(Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 106-15)
SUBTITLE 6. MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT UNDER THE OPTIONAL METHOD OF DEVELOPMENT
§ 17-7-601. Scope; definition.
   This subtitle applies to mixed use development under the optional method of
development. Mixed use development under the standard method of development is
governed by
Article 18, Title 8 of this Code. For purposes of this subtitle, "optional
method of development" has the meaning stated in §
18-8-102 of this Code.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-7-602. Method of development for the alteration, reconstruction,
expansion, and conversion of existing development.
   (a)   Definition. For purposes of this section, "existing development" means
development that was present at the time a property was placed in a mixed use
development district.
   (b)   When optional method of development inapplicable. The alteration,
reconstruction, or expansion of an existing single-family detached dwelling is
governed by the standard method of development as defined in §
18-8-102 of this Code and shall comply with the bulk regulations contained in §
18-4-501. The alteration, reconstruction, expansion, or conversion of existing
development other than a single-family detached dwelling that does not result
in a floor area ratio that exceeds 0.1 is also governed by the standard method
of development.
   (c)   When optional method of development applies. The conversion of an
existing single-family detached dwelling to another use is governed by the
optional method of development. The alteration, reconstruction, expansion, or
conversion of existing development other than a single-family detached dwelling
that results in a floor area ratio that exceeds 0.1 is also governed by the
optional method of development.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-7-603. Election required.
   Before beginning any activity that requires a building or other construction
permit in a mixed use district, the owner shall make an election in the form
required by the Office of Planning and Zoning to proceed under the standard
method of development or the optional method of development.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-7-604. Development and design standards.
   Development and design standards shall be proposed in a preliminary plan or
sketch plan for approval by the Planning and Zoning Officer in the final plan
or site development plan. Development and design standards shall create a
unified and cohesive development and shall include bulk requirements relating
to lot size, setbacks, spacing between structures, building heights, or other
bulk requirements as well as standards for landscaping, parking, architecture,
and signage. The following are required as part of the proposed development and
design standards.
      (1)   All elements of the development, including uses, structures,
parking, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, open area, public
activity areas, landscaping, and other amenities, shall be integrated by a
plan. Residential uses shall be integrated in a manner that does not isolate
them from the remainder of the development and that maintains an appropriate
degree of privacy for the residents. Open area, active recreation area, and
public activity areas shall be integrated in a manner that provides convenient
pedestrian access and enhances the overall quality of the development.
      (2)   Structures shall be constructed from high quality materials, and
structures in the development shall complement each other. Structure facades
shall contain architectural detail that promotes visual interest. Structure
mass shall be countered by the use of architectural detail, landscaping, open
areas, and public activity areas. Structures shall be located close to streets
or walkways and the primary accesses to the structures shall be from those
streets or walkways. The pedestrian levels of structures shall provide easy
access. Structures shall contain focal points that are visual or functional,
and shall include structures to protect pedestrians from the weather.
      (3)   The pedestrian circulation system shall be continuous, direct, and
convenient. Walkways shall be designed to accommodate bicycles as well as
pedestrians to the maximum extent practicable, with facilities for the
temporary storage of bicycles. The system shall incorporate design features to
enhance convenience and safety, including illumination; appropriate grade
separations on the site where practicable; appropriate at-grade, above-grade,
or below-grade street and road crossings; varying paving patterns; grade
differences; and landscaping. Paved pedestrian access to open areas shall have
a design that enhances the visual interest of the open areas.
      (4)   Public activity areas may be outdoors or indoors. If indoors, they
shall be accessible to the public during the normal business hours of the
establishment. Open area may include land that is designated for active
recreation area and may include land within an exterior outdoor public activity
area. Open area may not include land used for the required buffering,
screening, and landscaping of parking areas or the vehicular or pedestrian
circulation systems.
      (5)   Front building facades shall include the main entry, windows,
architectural detailing, signage, and other features to create an active street
frontage.
      (6)   Buildings shall have a primary entrance door facing a sidewalk.
Other building entrances may include doors to individual businesses, or
entrances to lobbies, pedestrian plazas, or courtyards.
      (7)   Any outdoor storage or service areas including sheds, loading
areas, or trash receptacles shall be:
         (i)   placed behind or between buildings and shielded from view of
adjacent properties, public streets, and activity spaces, or screened with
landscaping or fencing; and
         (ii)   incorporated into the overall design of the buildings and
landscaping to minimize the visual and acoustic impacts.
      (8)   Highly visible facades of structured parking shall be
architecturally consistent with, or transition to, the surrounding development.
Shared parking lots and parking structures shall be used where practicable to
concentrate parking over a smaller area.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 72-24; Bill No. 75-24; Bill No. 31-25)
SUBTITLE 7. (RESERVED)
SUBTITLE 8. ODENTON TOWN CENTER
§ 17-7-801. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   “Activity space” means a public or private area designed for
strolling, gathering, playing, cultural activity, community activity, or other
social event, and may include features such as a village green, plaza or
square, courtyard, pocket park, rooftop garden, usable lawn or terrace, pool
area, playground, ballfield, and other similar spaces.
         (i)   “Activity space, private” means an area designed for the
exclusive use of residents in an individual development or defined customers or
clients in a commercial or office site.
         (ii)   “Activity space, public” means an area that is designed for
public activities on sites with non-residential uses. These areas are intended
for the shared use of the public, site occupants, and site residents.
         (iii)   “Activity space” does not mean required public sidewalks and
pedestrian or bicycle facilities, unless designed as integrated components of
an on-site or adjacent activity space, driveways, parking spaces, passenger
drop-offs, or loading areas.
      (2)   “Community amenity” means a feature in a public activity space that
improves the community’s aesthetic, character, or quality of life, including
public art, monuments, decorative fountains, multi-modal transportation
amenities or facilities, bikeshares, picnic tables and benches, parks or other
recreational facilities, educational or directional kiosks, or amenities listed
in the “Suggested Proffers” section of the Odenton Town Center Master Plan.
      (3)   “Green area” means pervious areas including lawns, planters, green
roofs, landscaped areas, forest and sensitive preservation areas, buffers,
nonstructural stormwater management facility areas, planted parking lot strips
and islands, floodplains, streams, wetlands, tree pits, exterior planted areas
that contribute to creating green relief, infiltration or evapotranspiration;
and other similar areas regardless of usability or accessibility.
      (4)   “Odenton Town Center" means the area established by the Odenton
Town Center Master Plan, which was formerly titled as the Odenton Growth
Management Area.
(Bill No. 84-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-7-802. Scope; applicability.
   (a) When applicable. Except as provided in subsection (b), this subtitle
applies in the Odenton Town Center to an application for approval of a sketch
plan, final plan, a preliminary plan, site development plan, or a building
permit or grading permit.
   (b)   When inapplicable. This subtitle does not apply to the following in
the Odenton Town Center:
      (1)   a building permit to:
         (i)   renovate or redevelop existing developed sites and increase
developed floor area that existed as of June 5, 2016, by less than 50%;
         (ii)   construct an ancillary building of less than 2,000 square feet;
or
         (iii)   alter, renovate, or reconstruct one existing dwelling unit; or
      (2)   a limit of disturbance of 5,000 square feet or less.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-7-803. Compliance with other laws and manuals.
   (a)   Urban design and architectural requirements. Development shall comply
with the urban design and architectural requirements set forth in the Odenton
Town Center Master Plan. Any structure that is greater than 1,000 square feet
in floor area shall comply with the architectural requirements.
   (b)   Landscape requirements. Development shall comply with the Landscape
Manual and supplemental landscaping requirements in the Odenton Town Center
Master Plan, except that when a specific landscaping requirement in the Odenton
Town Center Master Plan differs from the Landscape Manual, the landscaping
requirement in the Odenton Town Center Master Plan shall apply.
   (c)   Design requirements. Development shall comply with the DPW Design
Manual.
   (d)   Historic preservation design requirements. Development shall comply
with the historic preservation design requirements in the Odenton Town Center
Master Plan.
   (e)   Conflicts.
      (1)   If any provision of this subtitle conflicts with a provision of the
Odenton Town Center Master Plan, the stricter provision applies.
      (2)   Except as provided in this subtitle or the Odenton Town Center
Master Plan, this subtitle or the Odenton Town Center Master Plan supersedes
any other provision of this Code or any County manuals to the extent of any
conflict.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-7-804. Transportation.
   (a)   Pre-submittal meeting; planned roads.
      (1)   A pre-submittal meeting for a development adjacent to or fronting
on roads identified as planned in the Odenton Town Center Master Plan shall be
scheduled with the Department of Public Works and the Office of Planning and
Zoning to determine the extent of required road improvements.
      (2)   After the pre-submittal meeting, the Planning and Zoning Officer
may require the developer to design, construct, and dedicate roads identified
as planned in the Odenton Town Center Master Plan as a condition of approval of
a development application.
   (b)   Reservation of land. Land in a proposed development application shall
be reserved as future rights-of-way for transportation infrastructure or other
public facilities not related to the development if a County or State project
has been funded for design in the County’s current approved capital budget and
program or the current State Consolidated Transportation Program, and at least
60% of the project is designed.
   (c)   Public roads; dedications. If a proposed development borders a County
road that does not comply with the DPW Design Manual, the developer shall
improve to the center of the County road to comply with the DPW Design Manual
and dedicate and deed in fee simple sufficient property to the County to
include all required improvements. If a developer is required by this Code to
improve a County road and the developer cannot acquire the necessary property
after exhausting all reasonable efforts to the satisfaction of the County, the
County may acquire the property at the developer’s expense prior to approval of
the grading permit.
   (d)   Phased development. A phased development shall include establishment
of a continuous road frontage pedestrian network as part of the first phase of
improvements. Internal connections to buildings should be provided as buildings
are constructed. Phased development may include an interim standard for
streetscape design initially and construction of final streetscape treatments
proportional to the site construction of each phase.
   (e)   Site access and circulation.
      (1)   All circulation patterns shall be designed to minimize curb cuts
onto arterial and collector roads. Adjoining properties may be required to
share or coordinate curb cuts, service alleys, frontage roads, and other
features to achieve this standard.
      (2)   Site entrances or new roads shall be located to align with existing
intersections and existing or planned median openings to the maximum extent
practicable.
      (3)   New roads other than alleys shall be designed to provide a
connection between subdivisions of similar zoning and use unless the Office of
Planning and Zoning determines that the interconnection will result in
unnecessary impact to the environment or adjacent residentially zoned and
developed properties.
      (4)   Drive-through establishments, including car washes and restaurants,
shall provide adequate stacking capacity that does not impede vehicle
circulation through the site or result in vehicles stacking into the road. A
developer shall provide documentation indicating peak times and how traffic
will be mitigated.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-7-805.  Trail connections and construction.
   (a)   Planned trails. If a planned County or regional trail or a planned
extension of an existing trail abuts a development, a developer shall provide
for onsite and offsite connections to construct the planned trail, unless the
Office of Planning and Zoning determines that the connection will result in
unnecessary impact to the environment.
   (b)   Existing trails. If an existing County or regional trail abuts a
development, the developer shall construct a paved connection to the trail from
the development, unless the Office of Planning and Zoning determines that the
connection will result in unnecessary impact to the environment.
   (c)   Dedication. A developer shall provide the necessary right-of-way
dedications or public pedestrian easements to accommodate the improvements
required by this section.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-7-806. Green area.
   A minimum of 10% of the gross area of the site shall be provided as green
area.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-7-807. Activity space.
   (a)   Exemptions. Development is exempt from §§
17-6-110(a)(6) and
17-6-111.
   (b)   Requirements. For non-residential and residential uses, excluding
single-family detached dwellings, at least one square foot of activity space
per every 10 square feet of floor area shall be provided. Activity space may be
apportioned between public activity space and private activity space.
   (c)   Accessibility. Public activity space shall be accessible from a public
road.
   (d)   Community amenities. Each public activity space in the OTC-C and OTC-
T zoning districts shall include at least one community amenity. The community
amenity shall be provided to fill in any gaps as indicated in the community
amenity map published by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (e)   Adjacent property agreements. Upon approval of the Planning and Zoning
Officer adjacent property owners may, by agreement or joint easement,
cooperatively provide public activity space that in total meets or exceeds the
requirements of this subtitle.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-7-808. Historic preservation.
   (a)   Application. Except as provided in subsection (b), development in the
OTC-H zoning district, including single-family detached dwelling renovations
and redevelopment, shall comply with the historic preservation design
requirements in the Odenton Town Center Master Plan, regardless of the increase
in floor area on the site.
   (b)   Exemptions. Properties identified in the Odenton Town Center Master
Plan as being exempt from historic preservation requirements are exempt from
this section.
   (c)   Contributing historic structures; inside OTC-H zoning district.
Contributing historic structures identified in the Odenton Town Center Master
Plan within the OTC-H zoning district shall be retained.
   (d)   Contributing historic structures; outside OTC-H zoning district.
Contributing historic structures identified in the Odenton Town Center Master
Plan located outside of the OTC-H zoning district shall be retained and are
subject to the same requirements as contributing historic structures within the
OTC-H zoning district, except that relocation may be permitted if there is no
other viable alternative for preservation, as approved by the Office of
Planning and Zoning. If a contributing historic structure is approved for
relocation, it shall be sited on property in the OTC-H zoning district.
   (e)   Alterations or other changes to contributing historic structures.
Exterior changes, alterations, additions, or reconstruction of contributing
historic structures shall comply with the historic preservation design
requirements in the Odenton Town Center Master Plan. The historic preservation
design standards apply only to building exteriors, unless the property is
encumbered by, or is required to be encumbered by, a preservation easement
pursuant to §§
17-6-501 or
17-6-502.
   (f)   New development in historic district. New development in the OTC-
H zoning district shall comply with the historic preservation design
requirements in the Odenton Town Center Master Plan.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-7-809. Redevelopment sites.
   Flexibility to design standards for parking, frontage, façades, minimum
building height, building entrances and building setbacks may be granted by the
Planning and Zoning Officer in cases where redevelopment of certain sites
involves environmental remediation or other constraints, or requires special
planning and design considerations.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-7-810. Incentive program.
   (a)   Creation and purpose. For development that provides a public benefit
that achieves a mixture of desirable land uses, quality design, and public
amenities that create the sense of a unified community and an enhanced quality
of life in the Odenton Town Center, there is an incentive program to allow for
additional development capacity or other relief from the requirements of this
article other than those contained in Title 5, Article 18 of this Code, the
Odenton Town Center Master Plan, the Landscape Manual, or the DPW Design
Manual.
   (b)   Application. Before submitting an incentive program application, a
developer may request to meet with the Office of Planning and Zoning to review
the proposed public benefits and incentives. If requested, a pre-application
meeting shall be scheduled. An incentive program application may be made by a
property owner or developer and shall include a description of the proposed
public benefits and the specific incentives requested, a site plan with
calculations, drawings, and documentation to demonstrate how each public
benefit and each requested incentive will be met.
   (c)   Evaluation of application. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall
evaluate the application based on the following criteria:
      (1)   consistency with the Odenton Town Center Master Plan, region plan,
general development plan, other adopted plans and studies by County or State
agencies, and current County capital program;
      (2)   public access to uses and amenities;
      (3)   community benefit;
      (4)   compatibility and quality of design;
      (5)   pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation;
      (6)   environmental enhancement and mitigation; and
      (7)   whether the proposed public benefits are comparable in scope and
cost to the incentive requested.
   (d)   Public benefits. Public benefits may include site design,
architectural features, streetscape improvements, community amenities,
environmental restoration projects, or other elements that exceed the
requirements set forth in this Code or the Odenton Town Center Master Plan.
Suggested proffers are set forth in the Appendix of the Odenton Town Center
Master Plan. A developer may propose other innovative public benefits or
community amenities not listed in the Odenton Town Center Master Plan that
assist in achieving the vision of the Odenton Town Center Master Plan.
   (e)   Granting of application. After reviewing an application and
considering the criteria in subsection (c), the Planning and Zoning Officer may
grant various incentives to a developer based on the proposed public benefit,
including:
      (1)   increased residential density;
      (2)   relief from any requirements of this article, other than those
contained in Title 5, Article 18 of this Code, the Odenton Town Center Master
Plan, the Landscape Manual, or the DPW Design Manual;
      (3)   additional building height; and
      (4)   reduction in green area requirements.
(Bill No. 84-23)
SUBTITLE 9. PAROLE TOWN CENTER
§ 17-7-901. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
   (1)   (i)   “Activity space” means an area designed for strolling,
gathering, playing, cultural activity, community activity, or other social
event, and may include features such as a village green, plaza or square,
courtyard, pocket park, rooftop garden, useable lawn or terrace, pool area,
playground, ballfield, and other similar spaces.
      (ii)   “Activity space” does not mean required public sidewalks and
pedestrian or bicycle facilities, unless designed as integrated components of
an on-site or adjacent activity space.
   (2)   “Green area” means pervious areas including lawns, planters, green
roofs, landscaped areas, forest and sensitive preservation areas, buffers,
nonstructural stormwater management facility areas, planted parking lot strips
and islands, floodplains, streams, wetlands, tree pits, exterior planted areas
that contribute to creating green relief, infiltration or evapotranspiration;
and other similar areas regardless of usability or accessibility.
   (3)   “Open area” means all areas on a site not covered by structures,
roadways, or parking.
   (4)   “Parole Town Center” means the area established in the Parole Town
Center Master Plan, which was formerly titled as the Parole Town Center Growth
Management Area.
   (5)   “Site” means any lot or parcel of land, or combination of lots or
parcels of land, that are contiguous and being developed as part of a common
subdivision or site development plan.
   (6)   “Subarea” means a part of the Parole Town Center as delineated in the
Parole Town Center Master Plan.
(Bill No. 64-23)
§ 17-7-902. Scope; applicability.
   (a)   When applicable. Except as provided in subsection (b), this subtitle
applies in the Parole Town Center to an application for approval of a sketch
plan, final plan, a preliminary plan, site development plan, or a building or
grading permit.
   (b)   When inapplicable. This subtitle does not apply in the Parole Town
Center to the following:
      (1)   a building permit to alter, renovate, or reconstruct one existing
dwelling unit;
      (2)   anything exempted from the site development provisions of Title 4,
as set forth in §
17-4-101; or
      (3)   a hospital licensed under Title 19 of the Health-General Article of
the State Code.
(Bill No. 64-23)
§ 17-7-903. Compliance with other laws and manuals.
   (a)   Site design and architectural requirements. Development shall comply
with the site design and architectural requirements set forth in the Parole
Town Center Master Plan.
   (b)   Landscape requirements. Development shall comply with the Landscape
Manual, except that when a specific landscaping requirement in the Parole Town
Center Master Plan differs from the Landscape Manual, the landscaping
requirement in the Parole Town Center Master Plan shall apply.
   (c)   Design requirements. Development shall comply with the DPW Design
Manual, except that when a specific design requirement in the Parole Town
Center Master Plan differs from the DPW Design Manual, the Parole Town Center
Master Plan design requirement shall apply.
   (d)   Conflicts.
      (1)   If any provision of this subtitle conflicts with a provision of the
Parole Town Center Master Plan, the stricter provision applies.
      (2)   Except for development in the critical area, if any provision of
this subtitle or the Parole Town Center Master Plan conflicts with another
provision of this Code or any County manuals, the stricter provision of this
subtitle or the Parole Town Center Master Plan applies.
(Bill No. 64-23)
§ 17-7-904. Bulk regulations.
   (a)   Exemptions. Development is exempt from §§
17-6-110(a)(3) and
17-6-111, and any other bulk regulations required by this Code, unless
specifically stated in this subtitle.
   (b)   Maximum height and minimum open area. Maximum height and minimum open
area requirements shall apply as follows:
                                 Maximum Height, if Adjacent
                                 to and within 100 Feet of
                                 Property not in the Parole
Subarea Maximum Height (Building Town Center and in the RA,  Minimum Open Area
        Stories)                 RLD, R1, R2 or R5 Zoning
                                 Districts and is a
                                 Residential Use (Building
                                 Stories)
                                         Maximum Height, if
                                         Adjacent to and
                                         within 100 Feet of
                                         Property not in the
Subarea               Maximum Height     Parole Town Center  Minimum Open Area
                      (Building Stories) and in the RA, RLD,
                                         R1, R2 or R5 Zoning
                                         Districts and is a
                                         Residential Use
                                         (Building Stories)
Core                  8                  8                   15%
Parole North District 6                  6                   15%
Church Creek District 6                  5                   20%
Hudson Street         6                  5                   20%
Transition
Housley Road Village  5                  3                   20%
Gateway Business Mix  5                  3                   20%
Defense Highway       5                  3                   20%
Corridor
 
   (c)   Building height.
      (1)   Only building stories at street level or higher are included when
calculating the number of building stories.
      (2)   Unoccupied rooftop mechanical space, decorative rooftop treatments,
and any exposed walk-out basements below the grade of the primary entrance at
street level are not included when calculating the number of building stories.
      (3)   In the Core, a minimum height of two building stories is required
for all structures, except for buildable lots or parcels less than two acres in
size existing as of December 8, 2023.
      (4)   Unenclosed rooftop amenity areas and enclosed rooftop spaces
stepped back at least 20 feet from the building facade and comprising less than
25% of a full story floor area are not included when calculating the number of
building stories.
   (d)   Open area requirements.
      (1)   Open area is calculated based on the gross area of the site.
      (2)   A minimum of 50% of the required open area shall be green area.
   (e)   Activity space requirements.
      (1)   Activity space and open area may overlap.
      (2)   For nonresidential uses:
         (i)   one square foot of activity space per 10 square feet of
nonresidential structure floor area shall be provided.
         (ii)   all public outdoor activity space shall be designed and
improved to enhance pedestrian circulation areas and to provide effective
buffers and visual relief between roads, parking, and buildings. where
possible, activity space should connect to any adjacent public pedestrian
network.
         (iii)   where possible, outdoor activity space should be designed to
provide effective buffers and visual relief between roads, parking, and
buildings.
      (3)   For residential uses, excluding single-family detached dwellings,
one square foot of activity space per four square feet of residential floor
area shall be provided.
      (4)   Activity space may include up to 50% of publicly accessible
interior concourses or walkways within an enclosed shopping mall.
   (f)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Except as provided in paragraph (2), the following setbacks apply
to all buildings:
Subarea Front           Side Rear
        Minimum Maximum
Subarea                  Front           Side Rear
                         Minimum Maximum
Core                     None    35 feet None None
Parole North District    None    35 feet None None
Church Creek District    None    35 feet None None
Hudson Street Transition None    35 feet None None
Housley Road Village     None    35 feet None None
Gateway Business Mix     15 feet 60 feet None None
Defense Highway Corridor 15 feet 75 feet None None
 
      (2)   Any setback from U.S. Route 50 or Maryland Route 665 shall be 35
feet.
      (3)   In determining the measurements for setbacks, the following
applies:
         (i)   Front setbacks are calculated from the property line in the
location as it will exist after any required dedication of right-of-way.
         (ii)   Setbacks for a corner lot are subject to §
18-2-304 of this Code, and a side setback may be increased to accommodate a
clear sight triangle.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Officer may approve a setback other than
one set forth in this subsection in accordance with §§
17-2-108 or
17-7-909 to accommodate roadway improvements, pedestrian or bicycle facilities,
utilities, buffers, preservation of natural environmental features, stormwater
management facilities, open area amenities, or other elements in conformance
with the Parole Town Center Master Plan.
   (g)   Noise mitigation; U.S. Route 50 and Maryland Route 665. For
residential development or nonresidential development with activity spaces
adjacent to U.S. Route 50 or Maryland Route 665, the developer shall:
      (1)   conduct a noise study using Federal Highway Administration
prediction methods to identify the noise mitigation measures that are necessary
to reduce highway traffic sound level:
         (i)   to be at or below 66 dBA in activity areas and at or below 45
dBA in indoor residentially occupied building spaces; and
         (ii)   where possible, to be at or below 66 dBA in nonresidential
activity spaces; and
      (2)   subject to the results of the noise study, if noise mitigation is
required:
         (i)   include any required indoor noise mitigation measures on the
building architectural plans; and
         (ii)   provide outdoor noise mitigation measures to meet the noise
levels set forth in item (1) in an open area maintained by a homeowners
association, community association, or council of condominium unit owners and
noted on the final plan or the final record plat to be recorded in the land
records, or in the absence of an open area, provide a noise mitigation
maintenance easement that shall be noted on the final plan or the final record
plat to be recorded in the land records.
(Bill No. 64-23)
§ 17-7-905. Allowed uses; prohibited uses; conditions.
   (a)   Uses allowed.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, the uses allowed on a property:
         (i)   are the permitted, conditional, and special exception uses
allowed in the underlying zoning district as set forth in
Article 18 of this Code.
         (ii)   in the C2, C3, C4, TC, W1, W2, or W3 Zoning Districts, are any
use allowed in the R22 District not otherwise allowed in those districts, as
allowed in the R22 District.
      (2)   Regardless of whether allowed in the underlying zoning district,
the following uses are:
         (i)   permitted uses:
            1.   dwelling, townhouse and dwelling, stacked townhouse;
            2.   civic facilities, community centers, libraries, and museums;
            3.   conference centers;
            4.   country clubs, private clubs, and service and nonprofit
charitable organizations;
            5.   cultural centers and exhibits;
            6.   parks, public or private;
            7.   restaurants, taverns, retail sales, and consumer services in a
multifamily structure;
            8.   solar energy generating facility – community, rooftop-mounted,
or solar canopies over parking lots or garages; and
            9.   multi-modal transportation centers.
         (ii)   conditional uses, subject to the conditions set forth:
            1.   housing for elderly of moderate means shall consist of rental
dwelling units only; shall comply with the conditions set forth in §
18-10-142(8) of this Code; and shall be encumbered by a recorded covenant,
enforceable by the county or its designee, that shall comply with the
conditions set forth in §
18-10-142(1)(i) and (iii) of this Code.
            2.   workforce housing consisting of dwelling units of any type or
mixture shall:
               A.   be encumbered by a recorded covenant enforceable by the
County or its designee that shall comply with the conditions set forth in §
18-10-175(2)(i) through (iv) of this Code;
               B.   comply with the conditions set forth in §
18-10-174(8) of this Code; and
               C.   have home prices set at rates certified by the County or
its designee to be affordable to a household with an income that does not
exceed 80% of the median income adjusted for household size for the Baltimore
Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area, as defined and published annually by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
            3.   dwellings, duplex may be part of development with townhouses,
and shall constitute no more than 10% of the total number of dwelling units.
      (3)   When the following conditional or special exception uses are
allowed in the underlying zoning district, the following conditions apply in
addition to any conditions in
Article 18 of this Code.
         (i)   For automobile gasoline stations, gasoline pumps shall be
located to the side or rear of a building for properties in the Core, Parole
North District, and Church Creek District. Existing or redeveloped gasoline
stations are not required to locate gasoline pumps or loading areas to the side
or rear of the site.
         (ii)   Self-service storage facilities in the Core, Parole North
District, and Church Creek District shall be located within an enclosed
structure with no external access to individual storage units, and on-site
loading and unloading facilities shall be located at the rear of a building.
Existing self-storage facilities are not required to locate loading areas to
the rear of the site.
         (iii)   Automobile, truck, and recreational vehicle sales in the Core
and Parole North Districts shall be located within an enclosed showroom with
limited outdoor display of vehicles to the side or rear of the site and
screened from the public right-of-way.
      (4)   When the following are allowed as a conditional or special
exception use in the underlying zoning district, the following conditions apply
in lieu of any conditions in
Article 18 of this Code:
         (i)   An assisted living facility shall comply with the following
requirements:
            1.   The minimum setback from all property lines shall be 35 feet;
            2.   An assisted living facility may be operated in conjunction
with a nursing home or adult independent dwelling units or both, whether or not
owned by the same entity;
            3.   A nursing home or adult independent dwelling units may be
located on the same lot as the assisted living facility or on one or more
abutting lots, and, if located on one or more abutting lots, subparagraph (i)1.
does not apply to the lot lines shared by such abutting lots;
            4.   Comprehensive care units may be provided; and
            5.   Activity spaces shall be located in a manner to shield
surrounding residential property from the effects of noise, hazards, or other
offensive conditions.
         (ii)   A child care center other than as a home occupation shall
comply with the following requirements:
            1.   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least one acre
for a center with less than 60 children and on a lot of at least two acres for
a center with 60 children or more;
            2.   Outdoor play areas or activity spaces shall be fenced and
located to the side or rear of the principal structure, except when adjacent to
U.S. Route 50; and
            3.   Activity spaces shall be located in a manner to shield
surrounding residential property from the effects of noise, hazards, or other
offensive conditions.
         (iii)   A nursing home shall comply with the following requirements:
            1.   The minimum setback from all property lines shall be 35 feet;
            2.   A nursing home may be operated in conjunction with an assisted
living facility or adult independent dwelling units or both, whether or not
owned by the same entity;
            3.   An assisted living facility or adult independent dwelling
units may be located on the same lot as the nursing home or on one or more
abutting lots, and, if located on one or more abutting lots, subparagraph
(iii)1. does not apply to the lot lines shared by such abutting lots;
            4.   Each access drive shall be located at least 40 feet from any
residentially zoned property; and
            5.   Activity space shall be located in a manner to shield
surrounding residential property from the effects of noise, hazards, or other
offensive conditions.
   (b)   Mix of uses. A development may contain a mix of any allowed
residential, commercial, light industrial, and civic or institutional uses. The
mix of uses may be in a single building or throughout the property and are not
required to comply with any other requirements for mix of uses in this Code.
   (c)   Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited, regardless of
whether allowed in the underlying zoning district, unless the use was lawfully
in existence prior to December 8, 2023:
      (1)   heavy manufacturing, industrial materials storage or processing,
including bone distillation, cement manufacturing, clay and borrow pits and
sand and gravel operations, coke or coke products manufacturing, fertilizer
manufacturing, latex fabrication, lumber yards, ore storage, petroleum product,
storage in excess of 1,000,000 gallons for use by W3 District uses or public
utilities, processing sites for clay, sand, and similar materials, rendering
plants, rubble processing facilities, and storage of atmospheric gas, coal, or
grain;
      (2)   outside storage as a principal use;
      (3)   agritourism, bulk storage for agricultural products, and farm
tenant houses;
      (4)   adult bookstores or adult movie theaters;
      (5)   airports and airfields;
      (6)   contractor and construction shops and yards;
      (7)   dwellings, single-family detached, and mobile home parks;
      (8)   kennels, commercial;
      (9)   automobile and truck dismantling and recycling facilities;
      (10)   automobile and truck towing storage yards;
      (11)   truck stops;
      (12)   bus storage facilities that are not part of a multi-modal
transportation center;
      (13)   golf courses;
      (14)   rifle, pistol, skeet, and archery ranges, outdoor;
      (15)   stables, commercial or community, and riding clubs;
      (16)   except for rooftop-mounted or solar canopies over parking lots or
garages, solar energy generating system – utility scale and community;
      (17)   composting facilities;
      (18)   natural wood waste recycling facilities;
      (19)   recyclables recovery facilities; and
      (20)   solid waste transfer stations.
(Bill No. 64-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-7-906. Inclusionary housing.
   For development on a site with 20 or more dwelling units, 10% of the
dwelling units shall:
      (1)   be encumbered by a recorded restrictive covenant enforceable by the
County or its designee that shall:
         (i)   require home ownership units be occupied by a household with an
income that does not exceed 100% of the median income adjusted for household
size for the Baltimore Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area, as defined and
published annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development;
         (ii)   require rental units be occupied by a household with an income
that does not exceed 60% of the median income adjusted for household size for
the Baltimore Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area, as defined and published
annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; and
         (iii)   comply with the conditions set forth in §
18-10-175(2)(i), (iii), and (iv), of this Code;
      (2)   comply with the conditions set forth in §
18-10-175(8) of this Code; and
      (3)   have home prices set at rates certified by the County or its
designee to be affordable to a household with an income that does not exceed
80% of the median income adjusted for household size for the Baltimore Primary
Metropolitan Statistical Area, as defined and published annually by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(Bill No. 64-23)
§ 17-7-907. Reservation of land for public facilities.
   Land in a proposed development application shall be reserved as future
rights-of-way for transportation infrastructure or other public facilities not
related to the development if a County or State project has been funded for
design in the County’s current approved capital budget and program or the
current State Consolidated Transportation Program, and at least 60% of the
project is designed.
(Bill No. 64-23)
§ 17-7-908. Parking; modes of transportation; site access.
   (a)   Parking requirements.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, the number of required parking
spaces shall be in accordance with
Title 3 of Article 18 of this Code.
      (2)   A developer may request reduced parking requirements or a joint use
parking arrangement in accordance with §
18-3-105 of this Code.
      (3)   An enclosed shopping mall may be exempt from subsection (a)(1) if a
parking program is submitted to and approved by the Planning and Zoning
Officer. A parking program for an enclosed shopping mall shall include a
parking needs study that includes an estimate of the parking needs for the use,
a thorough explanation of the basis for the estimate, and data used in
calculating the estimate, including parking generation studies and previous
experience with similar uses, and an explanation of any other relevant
considerations.
   (b)   Structured parking requirements.
      (1)   On sites greater than two acres, parking for professional and
general offices or retail and service businesses in excess of 1 car per 200
square feet of floor area shall be in a garage structure, unless otherwise
authorized under §
17-7-909.
      (2)   Except for a limited number of short-term spaces or handicapped
parking spaces, parking for multifamily dwellings with 100 dwelling units or
more shall be in a garage structure, unless otherwise authorized under §
17-7-909.
   (c)   Electric vehicle charging stations. For multifamily dwellings and
mixed use development, an electric vehicle charging station shall be required
at a rate of one electric vehicle charging station for every 50 vehicle parking
spaces required. For a business complex with three or more uses, an electric
vehicle charging station shall be required at a rate of one electric vehicle
charging station for every 75 vehicle parking spaces required. Electric vehicle
charging station spaces shall count towards the total number of
parking spaces.
   (d)   Bicycle and pedestrian facilities.
      (1)   A developer shall provide the necessary on-site improvements to
accommodate the pedestrian and bicycle amenities as required in the DPW Design
Manual and additional rights-of-way or pedestrian easements shall be dedicated
to the County as needed to accommodate these improvements.
      (2)   In addition to any DPW Design Manual requirements, the developer
shall:
         (i)   at the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Officer, provide
additional width for pedestrian easements where required on-street sidewalk
section widths exceed five feet, with a minimum of five feet completely clear
of obstructions; and
         (ii)   include one bicycle parking space for every 20 parking spaces.
   (e)   Site access points; interconnectivity. When determined to be feasible
by the Office of Planning and Zoning, site access shall be from alleys, shared
access between adjacent sites, or local service roads to minimize direct access
points along major roadways. adjoining properties may be required to share or
coordinate improvements for access to achieve the requirement of this
subsection.
(Bill No. 64-23)
§ 17-7-909. Incentive program.
   (a)   Creation and purpose. For development that provides a public benefit
that achieves a mixture of desirable land uses, quality design, and public
amenities that create the sense of a unified community and an enhanced quality
of life in the Parole Town Center, there is an incentive program to allow for
additional development capacity or other relief from the requirements of this
article other than those contained in Titles
5 or
8, Article 18 of this Code other than those contained in Title 13, the Parole
Town
Center Master Plan, the Landscape Manual, or the DPW Design Manual.
   (b)   Application. Before submitting an incentive program application, a
developer may request to meet with the Office of Planning and Zoning to review
the proposed public benefits and incentives. If requested, a pre-application
meeting shall be scheduled. an incentive program application may be made by a
property owner or developer and shall include a description of the proposed
public benefits and the specific incentives requested, a site plan with
calculations, drawings, and documentation to demonstrate how each public
benefit and each requested incentive will be met.
   (c)   Evaluation of application. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall
evaluate the application based on the following criteria:
      (1)   consistency with the Parole Town Center Master Plan, region plan,
general development plan, other adopted plans and studies by County or State
agencies, and current County capital program.
      (2)   public access to uses and amenities;
      (3)   community benefit;
      (4)   compatibility and quality of design;
      (5)   pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation;
      (6)   environmental enhancement and mitigation; and
      (7)   whether the proposed public benefits are comparable in scope and
cost to the incentive requested.
   (d)   Public benefits. Public benefits may include site design,
architectural features, streetscape improvements, open area, community
amenities, environmental restoration projects, or other elements that exceed
the requirements set forth in this Code or the Parole Town Center Master Plan.
The following list serves as a guide, and applicants may propose other
innovative public benefit items that assist in achieving the vision of the
Parole Town Center Master Plan:
      (1)   Land use public benefits may include:
         (i)   quasi-public and institutional uses, including child or senior
care centers, community centers, and public libraries provided as part of the
development;
         (ii)   land for, significant contribution toward, or development of a
high quality public amenity, including gathering space, recreational amenity,
amphitheater, garden, plaza, natural resource protection, community landmark,
or similar amenity;
         (iii)   land for, significant contribution toward, or development of a
multi-modal transportation center; or
         (iv)   workforce or other affordable housing above any minimum set by
County, State, or federal requirements.
      (2)   Transit and parking public benefits may include:
         (i)   contribution to a bicycle, pedestrian, road, or transit network
or facility above any requirement in this Code or consistent with adopted plans
and studies by County or State agencies, or with the County’s capital
improvement program. Contributions may be in the form of right-of-way
dedication, construction of a planned network segment with a logical start and
end point and lying either within or on the approach to the Parole Town Center,
or a financial contribution to a fund designated for specified improvements;
         (ii)   public transportation, including shuttle buses to a park-and-
ride lot, if not otherwise required by this Code;
         (iii)   structured parking beyond the minimum required by this Code,
or contribution toward the construction of structured parking; or
         (iv)   public parking amenities, including electric vehicle charging
stations beyond the requirements of this subtitle or enhanced bicycle parking
amenities, including storage lockers, changing rooms, and showers.
      (3)   Conservation public benefits may include:
         (i)   additional open areas allowing for public access or providing
environmental enhancement or other public benefit;
         (ii)   regional stormwater management, stream or outfall restoration,
or regional water quality improvements beyond the minimum required by current
stormwater management requirements;
         (iii)   preservation of naturally vegetated areas by dedication or
easement to protect surface waters; or
         (iv)   site design to meet the criteria to obtain Leadership in Energy
and Environmental Design (“LEED”) certification or equivalent certification as
accepted by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
      (4)   In the Core and the Parole North District, public benefits shall be
considered significant if:
         (i)   the applicant makes a financial commitment for the support of
public institutions, such as child care centers, senior care centers, hospital
or medical clinics, drug treatment centers or programs, social services
centers, community centers, public libraries, public schools, multi-modal
transportation centers, or other institutional uses;
         (ii)   the development includes significant transportation and
environmental enhancements; or
         (iii)   the development exhibits exemplary quality of design and
architecture above the requirements of this Code or the Parole Town Center
Master Plan, establishes a positive image as a gateway to the City of
Annapolis, and is in harmony with the overall design concept for the Parole
Town Center.
   (e)   Granting of application. After reviewing an application and
considering the criteria in subsection (c), the Planning and Zoning Officer may
grant various incentives to a developer based on the proposed public benefit,
including:
      (1)   increased residential density up to 44 dwelling units per acre,
based on the size of the entire development;
      (2)   relief from any requirements of this title, Article 17 other than
those contained in Titles
5 and
8, Article 18 of this Code other than those contained in Title 13, the Parole
Town Center Master Plan, the Landscape Manual, or the DPW Design Manual;
      (3)   additional building height, if determined by the Planning and
Zoning Officer to be compatible with surrounding development, up to the maximum
provided for in item (5);
      (4)   reduction in open area requirements, down to the minimum provided
for in item (5); and
      (5)   application of the following maximum height and minimum open area
requirements:
                                 Maximum Height, if Adjacent
                                 to Property not in the
Subarea Maximum Height (Building Parole Town Center and in   Minimum Open Area
        Stories)                 the RA, RLD, R1, R2 or R5
                                 Zoning Districts (Building
                                 Stories)
                                         Maximum Height, if
                                         Adjacent to Property
                                         not in the Parole
Subarea               Maximum Height     Town Center and in   Minimum Open Area
                      (Building Stories) the RA, RLD, R1, R2
                                         or R5 Zoning
                                         Districts (Building
                                         Stories)
Core                  12; or 16 if                            12.5%; or 10% if
                      significant                             mixed use
Parole North District 8; or 10 if        6                    12.5%
                      significant
Church Creek District 8                  5                    12.5%
Hudson Street         8                  5                    12.5%
Transition
Housley Road Village  6                  3                    18.75%
Gateway Business Mix  6                  3                    18.75%
Defense Highway       6                  3                    18.75%
Corridor
 
(Bill No. 64-23)
SUBTITLE 10. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 17-7-1001. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to a planned unit development, referred to in this
subtitle as a PUD.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-7-1002. General principles.
   A PUD shall be developed in accordance with the following general
principles.
      (1)   Provisions concerning the number of dwelling units allowed in a
given area of land shall be applied in the aggregate rather than separately to
the individual lots or sites.
      (2)   Provisions concerning public improvements, such as sewer laterals,
roads, and sidewalks, shall be applied to the development in its entirety.
      (3)   Open area requirements shall be calculated for the entire area of
the PUD except that individual lots used exclusively for nonresidential uses
shall be excluded.
      (4)   The developer shall demonstrate unified control of the entire
development and the capability to provide for completion and continuous
operation and maintenance of the development.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-7-1003. Processing.
   (a)   Submittal by developer. Before the pre-filing meeting required by §
18-16-201(c) of this Code, the developer of a PUD shall provide to the Office
of Planning and Zoning:
      (1)   an administrative site plan;
      (2)   a site inventory plan; and
      (3)   a report on the proposed development.
   (b)   Review and recommendations to the developer. The Office of Planning
and Zoning shall review the developer's submittal and determine whether it
considers the proposed PUD to be compatible with existing development in the
surrounding area and the General Development Plan. In the course of its review,
the Office may request the developer to supply additional material. The Office,
with the advice of reviewing agencies, shall make recommendations to the
developer as to the desirability of the proposed development.
   (c)   Developer's response. Within 14 days after the date of recommendations
provided by the Office of Planning and Zoning, the developer shall:
      (1)   notify the Office that the recommendations will not be contested or
that the submittal will not be modified and notify the Administrative Hearing
Officer that the application as submitted is ready to be heard;
      (2)   submit revised plans in accordance with the recommendations; or
      (3)   notify the Office of the applicant's intent to submit revised
plans.
Upon the receipt of any revised plans, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall
review the plans and obtain comments from reviewing agencies. The developer's
failure to respond in accordance with this subsection is by operation of law a
withdrawal of the application for a special exception.
   (d)   Staff recommendation. Promptly after the conclusion of the process
described in this section, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall issue in
writing a recommendation that the PUD be approved as submitted, approved with
specified conditions, or denied. The Office shall transmit the recommendation
to the Administrative Hearing Officer.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-7-1004. Effect of special exception approval.
   Approval of an application for a special exception for a PUD shall have the
following effects and be subject to the following:
      (1)   Alignments of major utilities, storm drain facilities, and arterial
roads and roads of greater classifications at their intersection with the
boundaries of the development shall be fixed as approved in the special
exception and may not be varied, except that if the fixed locations and
alignments are subsequently directed to be changed by governmental action, the
change does not affect the status of the special exception approval.
      (2)   Alignments of major utilities, storm drain facilities, and arterial
roads and roads of greater classifications that are not at the intersection
with the boundaries of the development may vary inside the boundaries of the
development unless an express condition of the approval of the special
exception provides to the contrary.
      (3)   Development shown in the administrative site plan at the boundaries
of the development may be varied only if changed to a less intense use than
approved.
      (4)   Land use areas shown in the administrative site plan do not have
exact boundaries and are fixed only if they relate to adjoining roads or other
areas shown on the plan.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 11. SMALL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
§ 17-7-1101. Architectural features.
   Except for religious facilities, exterior architectural features for
development in a small business district shall be generally compatible with the
style of architectural features of residential structures in the neighborhood
in which the development is located or in the neighborhoods closest to the
development, and shall have a similar appearance to development in those
neighborhoods, and may include architectural features typical of residential
development, such as peaked roofs, cornices and eaves, chimneys, door and
window openings and projections, porches, dormers, and awnings.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 92-23; Bill No. 14-24)
SUBTITLE 12. REDEVELOPMENT
§ 17-7-1201. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Redevelopment” means:
         (i)   substantial improvement of an existing structure; or
         (ii)   new construction on a lot, or on contiguous lots when one or
more of the lots:
               1.   has or had pre-existing structures, uses, or paved parking;
and
               2.   A.   the existing impervious area of the site exceeds 40%
of the total area of the site;
                  B.   the site is subject to a reclamation plan under State or
federal requirements; or
                  C.   the site is subject to environmental remediation under
State or federal requirements.
      (2)   (i)   “Substantial improvement” has the meaning stated in §
16-1-101(93) of this Code.
         (ii)   “Substantial improvement” does not mean repairs needed to
correct violations of State or County health, safety, or sanitary codes.
      (3)   “Total area of the site” as used in subsection (1) means the area
of the site less any area subject to preservation or conservation easement, and
less the area of natural features and their associated buffers.
(Bill No. 2-25)
§ 17-7-1202. Notice; application; meetings.
   (a)   Concept plan; pre-application meeting. Prior to submitting an
application for redevelopment, the applicant shall provide a concept plan that
meets the requirements of the redevelopment concept plan checklist provided by
the Office of Planning and Zoning and shall schedule and attend a pre-
application meeting with the Office of Planning and Zoning and the Department
of Inspections and Permits to review and obtain feedback on conservation
strategies and the location and function of stormwater management practices.
   (b)   Application. An application for redevelopment must respond to the
feedback provided at the pre-application meeting, and must satisfy the
redevelopment application checklist provided by the Office of Planning and
Zoning.
   (c)   Community meeting.
      (1)   If a community meeting would be required under §
17-2-107, then:
         (i)   in the six-month period before the submission of a concept plan
pursuant to subsection (a) for redevelopment under this subtitle, the developer
shall hold a community meeting for the purpose of presenting information
regarding the proposed redevelopment and allowing the community to ask
questions and provide comments; and
         (ii)   within 45 days after the submission of a final plan or site
development plan, the developer shall hold a community meeting for the purpose
of presenting information regarding changes made to the information presented
at the initial submission meeting and allowing the community to ask questions
and provide comments.
      (2)   The developer shall record or cause to be recorded, by audio or
audio-visual means, the proceedings of each community meeting and, promptly
after the meeting, shall provide a copy of the recording to the Office of
Planning and Zoning. The meeting may be held virtually, in-person, or a
combination of and virtual and in-person participation. Any in-person portion
of a meeting shall be held in the County at an ADA accessible facility located
within five miles of the proposed development site. Meetings shall be scheduled
on a day between Monday through Thursday, beginning between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 8:00 p.m. If the Planning and Zoning Officer determines that the five
mile restriction is impracticable, then the in-person meeting shall be held at
a location as may be authorized by the Planning and Zoning Officer in writing.
   (d)   Notice.
      (1)   At least 21 days prior to a community meeting, the applicant shall
give notice, by first class mail, of the meeting to: all lot owners within 300
feet of the property subject to the application; the president of any community
or homeowners’ association of any subdivision that is located within 300 feet
of the property subject to the application that is on the list of community
associations, persons, and organizations maintained in the Office of the County
Executive; the Office of Planning and Zoning; the County Executive or the
County Executive’s designee; and the councilmembers of the councilmanic
districts in which the property subject to the application is located and any
councilmanic district it abuts.
      (2)   The notice shall include a description of the planned
redevelopment, as well as copy of or an online link to the concept plan for the
redevelopment required under subsection (a).
(Bill No. 2-25)
§ 17-7-1203. Subdivision and site development.
   A redevelopment application for subdivision or site development may proceed
directly from a concept plan to a final plan or a site development plan.
(Bill No. 2-25)
§ 17-7-1204. Redevelopment modifications.
   (a)   Applicability. This section does not apply to modifications of the
requirements of Subtitle 3 of Title 6, which shall be subject to the
modification procedures set forth in §
17-2-108.
   (b)   Generally.
      (1)   Subject to paragraph (2), for a redevelopment application, the
Planning and Zoning Officer may approve an application for a modification to:
         (i)   any provision of this article or
Article 18 of this Code other than §
17-2-107, §
18-2-106, Titles
5,
8, or
9 of this article, and Title
13 of
Article 18 of this Code, except as allowed by §§
17-5-203(b),
17-5-205(b),
17-8-201(b),
17-8-203(c),
17-8-403,
17-8-601(b)(2),
17-8-601(c),
17-8-901, and
17-9-401; and
         (ii)   any applicable regulations, manuals, or specifications,
including the DPW Design Manual and the Landscape Manual.
      (2)   When approving a modification request under paragraph (1), the
Planning and Zoning Officer shall make specific findings, enumerated in writing
that the modification request satisfies the following criteria:
         (i)   the modification is not detrimental to the public health,
safety, or welfare;
         (ii)   the modification is not injurious to other properties;
         (iii)   the modification does not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of this article,
Article 18 of this Code, or the General Development Plan; and
         (iv)   the applicant has submitted written verification to the Office
of Planning and Zoning that a notice with a copy of the request for
modification was mailed to: all lot owners within 300 feet of the property
subject to the application; the president of any community or homeowners’
association of any subdivision that is located within 300 feet of any boundary
of the property subject to the application that is on the list of community
associations, persons, and organizations maintained in the Office of the County
Executive.
   (c)   Modification not required.
      (1)   At the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Officer, demolition of
existing structures may proceed upon issuance of a permit without a
modification to the site development plan requirements to abate a violation of
this Code in accordance with a notice of violation or to protect the public
health, safety, or welfare.
      (2)   The requirements of §§
17-6-402 through
17-6-405 may be waived without a modification to the extent that the existing
development on the site is located within the natural features or buffers
protected by those sections.
   (d)   Uses. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a
modification may not be granted to allow a use that is not a permitted,
conditional, or special exception use in the underlying zoning district under
any provision of this Code.
   (e)   Conditions. In granting a modification, the Planning and Zoning
Officer may require conditions to secure the objectives of the provision that
is being modified.
(Bill No. 2-25)
§ 17-7-1205. Open space, recreation area, open area, landscaping, and natural
features.
   (a)   Open space; recreation area; open area. The developer shall comply
with the requirements of §
17-6-111. If the developer establishes that the requirements create a practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship for redevelopment, the developer may submit
an alternative proposal for open space, recreation area, or open area, and the
Planning and Zoning Officer may approve the alternative proposal on that basis
without the need for a modification.
   (b)   Landscape plan. The developer shall comply with the requirements of §
17-6-202. If the developer establishes that the requirements create a practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship for redevelopment, the developer may submit
an alternative landscape plan, and the Planning and Zoning Officer may approve
the alternative landscape plan without the need for a modification.
   (c)   Natural features. Areas subject to preservation or conservation
easement and natural features and their associated buffers shall remain
undisturbed.
   (d)   Impervious surface. If impervious surface is added during
redevelopment, the added impervious surface must meet all applicable stormwater
management requirements of Articles
16 and
17 of this Code.
(Bill No. 2-25)
§ 17-7-1206. Redevelopment in the critical area.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this subtitle, redevelopment in the
critical area shall comply with Title 8 of this Article and Title 13 of
Article 18 of this Code.
(Bill No. 2-25)
§ 17-7-1207. Adequate public facilities for redevelopment.
   (a)   Road facilities.
      (1)   Redevelopment under this subtitle passes the test for adequate road
facilities if, in the scheduled completion year of the redevelopment, the
redevelopment creates 250 or fewer new daily trips, or if each intersection
from site access points to and including the first intersection with an
arterial or higher classification road operates with an acceptable level of
service as defined in §
17-5-401(a).
      (2)   A traffic impact study for redevelopment under this subtitle may
take into account the most recent use on the site that existed within 10 years
prior to the submission of the traffic impact study. If the property is vacant
at the time of the traffic impact study, the applicant shall provide supporting
information to demonstrate assumptions made regarding trip generation from the
prior use. If the Planning and Zoning Officer determines that the supporting
information is sufficient, the trips assumed generated from prior use will be
considered “background traffic” for purposes of the traffic impact study, and
any increase in trips resulting from the redevelopment use will be considered
to be “future traffic” for purposes of the traffic impact study.
   (b)   School facilities. Redevelopment under this subtitle passes the test
for adequate schools facilities if:
      (1)   the redevelopment consists of multifamily dwellings, with at least
50% of the dwelling units consisting of efficiency or one-bedroom units and no
dwelling units with more than two bedrooms; or
      (2)   the redevelopment satisfies the standards set forth in §
17-5-501(a).
   (c)   Other facilities. All other facilities subject to testing for adequacy
shall comply with the standards set forth in Title 5.
(Bill No. 2-25)
§ 17-7-1208. Reporting.
   By January 1 of each year, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall submit a
report to the County Council including the following:
   (a)   a current redevelopment concept plan checklist;
   (b)   the number of redevelopment applications received; and
   (c)   the number of redevelopment applications approved.
(Bill No. 2-25)
TITLE 8. CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
17-8-101.   Scope.
   
17-8-102.   Conflict with other law.
   
17-8-103.   Variance provisions apply.
   
17-8-104.   Violations and enforcement.
   
17-8-105.   Relocation of development potential.
   
17-8-106.   Reasonable accommodations for physical disability.
Subtitle 2. General Development Requirements
   
17-8-201.   Development on slopes of 15% or greater.
   
17-8-202.   Environmental Site Design (ESD) to the Maximum Extent Practicable
(MEP).
   
17-8-203.   Septic requirements.
   
17-8-204.   Structural stormwater management practices in the RCA.
   
17-8-205.   Development in the IDA.
Subtitle 3. Buffers
   
17-8-301.   Development.
Subtitle 4. Lot Coverage in the LDA and RCA
   
17-8-401.   Scope.
   
17-8-402.   Lot coverage limits in the critical area.
   
17-8-403.   Reconfiguration of lot coverage or impervious surfaces outside the
buffer and expanded buffer.
   
17-8-404.   Pervious areas.
   
17-8-405.   Stormwater management.
Subtitle 5. Habitat Protection Areas
   
17-8-501.   Scope.
   
17-8-502.   Development in habitat protection areas.
   
17-8-503.   Public roads, bridges, outfalls, and utilities.
Subtitle 6. Clearing, Reforestation, Replanting, and Afforestation
   
17-8-601.   Clearing in the LDA and RCA.
   
17-8-602.   Clearing mitigation and afforestation.
   
17-8-603.   Mitigation for Forest Interior Dwelling Species ("FIDS") habitat.
   
17-8-604.   Fees in lieu of replanting.
Subtitle 7. Buffer Modification Areas
   
17-8-701.   Scope.
   
17-8-702.   Development requirements for single family residential uses.
   
17-8-703.   Development requirements for commercial, industrial, institutional,
recreational, and duplex, townhouse, semi-detached and multifamily uses.
   
17-8-704.   Development requirements for government reuse facilities.
   
17-8-705.   Development requirements for marinas.
Subtitle 8. Growth Allocation Areas
   
17-8-801.   Planting and vegetation.
   
17-8-802.   Development requirements for re-designated property.
Subtitle 9. Agreements
   
17-8-901.   Forestation agreement and forest conservation easement.
Subtitle 10. Consolidation and Reconfiguration of Lots in the Critical Area
   
17-8-1001.   Definitions.
   
17-8-1002.   Lot consolidation and reconfiguration.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 17-8-101. Scope.
   This title is an overlay that applies to all land located in the critical
area as defined in
Article 18 of this Code and the requirements of this title are in addition to
other requirements of this Code.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-8-102. Conflict with other law.
   If any provision of this title conflicts with other County or State law, the
more restrictive provision shall prevail.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-103. Variance provisions apply.
   The requirements of this title may be altered only by variance as provided
in §
18-16-305 of this Code.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-8-104. Violations and enforcement.
   Violations of this title shall be enforced by the Department of Inspections
and Permits under the provisions of Article 16 of this Code and
Article 18 of this Code.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-8-105. Relocation of development potential.
   This title permits the relocation of development potential from land within
the critical area to land outside of the critical area in accordance with §
17-6-104. This process may supersede the density provisions of Article 18 of
this Code to create bonus lots with the approval of the Planning and Zoning
Officer.
(Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-106. Reasonable accommodations for physical disability.
   Any request for reasonable accommodations as a result of a physical
disability shall meet the standards for disability as defined in the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.
(Bill No. 93-12)
SUBTITLE 2. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
§ 17-8-201. Development on slopes of 15% or greater.
   (a)   Development in the LDA. Development in the limited development area
(LDA) or in the resource conservation area (RCA) may not occur within slopes of
15% or greater unless development will facilitate stabilization of the slope;
is to allow connection to a public utility; or is to provide direct access to
the shoreline. All disturbance shall be limited to the minimum necessary.
   (b)   Development in the IDA. Development in the intensely developed area
(IDA) may not occur within slopes of 15% or greater unless development will
facilitate stabilization of the slope or the disturbance is necessary to allow
connection to a public utility. The Planning and Zoning Officer may grant
modification to the prohibition of this subsection for slopes outside of the
buffer and buffer modification area.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-202. Environmental Site Design (ESD) to the Maximum Extent Practicable
(MEP).
   Development shall be located to maximize ESD design criteria.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-203. Septic requirements.
   (a)   Septic system technology. A new or replacement private septic system
in the critical area shall include the best available technology as required by
the Health Department.
   (b)   Septic location in RCA. Land may not be subdivided, and previously
platted lots may not be combined or altered, to create a lot outside the RCA
that is to be served by a new or replacement private septic system any part of
which is located in the RCA. This includes replacement systems for new
construction, additions, expansions of use, and demolitions and rebuilds.
   (c)   Septic upgrades to public or community waste treatment systems. The
Planning and Zoning Officer may grant a modification to the requirements of §§
17-8-405 and 17-8-602 for development to connect lawful dwellings currently
served by individual waste disposal systems to public or community waste
treatment systems.
   (d)   Connection to public sewer.
      (1)   The owner of a lot or parcel that directly adjoins or abuts an
existing road right of way, street, or alley that contains a public sewer main
within 100 feet of any portion of the subject property, shall connect all new
buildings intended for human habitation, occupancy, or use, or a replacement or
repaired private septic system to the public sewer, including, for any new
septic system, extension of the public sewer, if necessary.
      (2)   For purposes of this subsection, any alteration, change, or
addition to an existing septic system that requires a permit under section
106.6.2 of the Anne Arundel County Plumbing Code shall be considered a repair.
The repair or replacement of piping due to clogged or broken lines does not
constitute a repair.
      (3)   For purposes of this subsection, when determining and calculating
the distance from the public sewer main to the adjoining or abutting property,
the measurement shall commence from the terminus of the public sewer main and
extend along the centerline of the road, street, or alley containing the public
sewer main and extend to the nearest side property line of the subject parcel.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 67-08; Bill No. 27-12; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-204. Structural stormwater management practices in the RCA.
   A structural stormwater management practice or disturbance related to a
structural stormwater management practice, other than a natural runoff
conveyance system, may not be located in the RCA if the purpose of the practice
is to serve development outside the RCA, except that outfalls are allowed in
the RCA.
(Bill No. 67-08; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 76-13)
§ 17-8-205. Development in the IDA.
   Development in the IDA shall comply with the following criteria in
accordance with COMAR requirements:
      (1)   All development in the IDA shall be subject to the habitat
protection area criteria of COMAR, Title 27.
      (2)   Pollutant loadings from impervious surfaces shall be reduced at
least 10% below the level of pollution from the site prior to development. This
requirement shall be met by maximizing ESD design criteria. Offsets permitted
by the design standards and technical report may be used either onsite or
offsite in the same critical area watershed to reach 10% pollutant reduction
requirements of this section after maximizing ESD design criteria. For
disturbance less than 5,000 square feet, the methods specified in § 17-8-405
may be utilized.
      (3)   If practicable, permeable areas shall be established in vegetation.
      (4)   Proposed development shall use cluster development as a means to
reduce lot coverage and maximize areas of vegetation.
      (5)   Buffer modification areas in the IDA are subject to such additional
requirements as provided in Articles 17 and 18 of this Code.
      (6)   Lot coverage may not exceed the lot coverage limitations of the
underlying zoning district.
(Bill No. 93-12)
SUBTITLE 3. BUFFERS
§ 17-8-301. Development.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to a buffer modification area.
   (b)   Development on properties containing buffers. Development on
properties containing buffers shall meet the requirements of COMAR, Title 27.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
SUBTITLE 4. LOT COVERAGE IN THE LDA AND RCA
§ 17-8-401. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to the placement of lot coverage in the LDA and the
RCA, except that lot coverage associated with a lot that has been used
continuously since December 1, 1985 as a mobile manufactured home park and an
in-kind replacement are exempt from the requirements of this subtitle.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-402. Lot coverage limits in the critical area.
   (a)   General limitation. Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), lot
coverage shall be limited to 15% of the area of each critical area designation
on a site based on the acreage of each designation.
   (b)   Lots created before December 1, 1985.
      (1)   Lots created on or before December 1, 1985 are subject to the lot
coverage limits set forth on the following chart:
 
Lot Size (Square Feet) Allowable Lot Coverage
0 - 8,000              25% of parcel plus 500 square feet
8,001 - 21,780         31.25% of parcel
21,781 - 36,300        5,445 square feet
36,301+                15% of parcel
 
      (2)   All new lot coverage added to lots created before December 1, 1985
shall be minimized.
   (c)   Lots less than one acre created after December 1, 1985. Lot coverage
associated with a lot of one acre or less that is part of a subdivision
approved after December 1, 1985 is subject to coverage limitations as indicated
on the recorded subdivision plat. Overall subdivision coverage is limited to
15%.
   (d)   Lots created after November 19, 2012. For new subdivisions created
after November 19, 2012, the proposed overall lot coverage limit shall be no
more than 14% for the subdivision to allow additional coverage to be designated
on each lot and shown in a chart on the record plat in accordance with §
17-3-302(21)(ii) for future lot owners that will not result in a violation of
the maximum limit of 15%.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-403.  Reconfiguration of lot coverage or impervious surfaces outside the
buffer and expanded buffer.
   Existing impervious surfaces outside the buffer and expanded buffer may be
reconfigured using the following criteria.
      (1)    In-kind replacement of lot coverage is exempt from the
reconfiguration requirements of this section.
      (2)   Except as provided in paragraph (1), reconfiguration of lot
coverage shall result in a 10% reduction of the amount of impervious surfaces
that exceed the maximum permitted lot coverage set forth in this subtitle.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Officer may grant a modification to the
reconfiguration requirements of this section.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-404. Pervious areas.
   Pervious areas shall be established in vegetation, and innovative
development techniques shall be used to the extent practical as a means to
reduce impervious surface and to maximize areas of natural vegetation.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-405. Stormwater management.
   (a)   Generally. Site design considerations or best management practices
shall be designed to improve water quality in the manner approved by the Office
of Planning and Zoning in accordance with the Anne Arundel County Stormwater
Management Practices and Procedures Manual.
   (b)   Disturbance of less than 5,000 square feet in the buffer, expanded
buffer, or buffer modification area buffer other than new single family
dwellings. For development sites on which disturbance is less than 5,000 square
feet in the buffer, expanded buffer, or buffer modification area buffer, that
are not new single family dwellings, stormwater from new impervious surface
shall be managed as follows and in the following order of priority:
      (1)   for disturbance of less than 1,000 square feet:
         (i)   payment of a fee-in-lieu in accordance with §
17-11-101;
         (ii)   planting onsite in the buffer, expanded buffer, or buffer
modification area buffer at a ratio of two times the area of new impervious
surface;
         (iii)   planting onsite in the critical area outside the buffer,
expanded buffer, or buffer modification area buffer at a ratio of two times the
area of new impervious surface; or
         (iv)   planting at an offsite location in the critical area at a ratio
equal to the area of new impervious surface; and
      (2)   for disturbance of at least 1,000 but less than 5,000 square feet:
         (i)   planting onsite in the buffer, expanded buffer, or buffer
modification area buffer at a ratio of two times the area of new impervious
surface;
         (ii)   planting on site in the critical area outside the buffer,
expanded buffer, or buffer modification area buffer at a ratio of two times the
area of new impervious surface;
         (iii)   planting at an offsite location in the critical area at a
ratio of two times the area of new impervious surface; or
         (iv)   payment of a fee-in-lieu in accordance with §
17-11-101.
   (c)   Disturbance of less than 5,000 square feet outside the buffer,
expanded buffer, or buffer modification area buffer other than new single
family dwellings. For development sites on which disturbance is less than 5,000
square feet outside the buffer, expanded buffer, or buffer modification area
buffer that are not new single family dwellings, stormwater from new impervious
surface shall be managed as follows and in the following order of priority:
      (1)   for disturbance of less than 1,000 square feet:
         (i)   payment of a fee-in-lieu in accordance with §
17-11-101;
         (ii)   planting onsite in the critical area at a ratio equal to the
area of new impervious surface; or
         (iii)   planting at an offsite location in the critical area at a
ratio equal to the area of new impervious surface; and
      (2)   for disturbance of at least 1,000 but less than 5,000 square feet:
         (i)   planting onsite in the critical area at a ratio equal to the
area of new impervious surface;
         (ii)   planting offsite in the critical area at a ratio equal to the
area of new impervious surface; or
         (iii)   payment of a fee-in-lieu in accordance with §
17-11-101.
   (d)   Fees-in-lieu. Fees paid in lieu under this section shall be maintained
in a separate fund to be used by the County for projects that improve water
quality within the same major watershed as the property for which the fees were
collected, or for a purpose that will facilitate watershed improvement on a
Countywide basis.
(Bill No. 93-12)
SUBTITLE 5. HABITAT PROTECTION AREAS
§ 17-8-501. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to all habitat protection areas as defined in COMAR,
Title 27.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-502.  Development in habitat protection areas.
   Development in habitat protection areas must be in accordance with COMAR,
Title 27.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-503.  Public roads, bridges, outfalls, and utilities.
   Public roads, bridges, outfalls, and utilities may not be located in a
habitat protection area unless there is no other feasible alternative and the
public roads, bridges, outfalls, and utilities are located, designed,
constructed, and maintained to:
      (1)   provide maximum erosion protection;
      (2)   minimize negative impacts to wildlife and aquatic life and their
habitats;
      (3)   maintain hydrologic processes and water quality; and
      (4)   ensure that development that crosses or affects streams is designed
to:
         (i)   reduce increases in flood frequency and severity that are
attributable to development;
         (ii)   retain tree canopy so as to maintain stream water temperature
within normal variations;
         (iii)   provide a natural substrate for streambeds; and
         (iv)   minimize the adverse water quality and quantity impacts of
storm water.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 67-08; Bill No. 93-12)
SUBTITLE 6. CLEARING, REFORESTATION, REPLANTING, AND AFFORESTATION
§ 17-8-601.  Clearing in the LDA and RCA.
   (a)   Forest clearing for lots created before December 1, 1985.
      (1)   Lots one-half acre or less. Forest clearing on lots in the LDA and
RCA that are one-half acre or less in size and that were in existence on or
before December 1, 1985 shall be limited to the minimum necessary to
accommodate a house or other structure, initial septic system, driveway, and
reasonable amount of yard or required parking, but the clearing may not exceed
6,534 square feet.
      (2)   Lots greater than one-half acre. Forest clearing on lots in the LDA
and RCA greater than one-half acre in size that were in existence on or before
December 1, 1985, shall be limited to the minimum necessary to accommodate a
house or other structure, initial septic system, driveway, and reasonable
amount of yard or required parking and may not exceed 20% of the forest, except
that the Office of Planning and Zoning may approve clearing up to 30% for the
installation of a required septic system. Clearing above 30% requires a
variance.
   (b)   Developed woodland clearing for lots created before December 1, 1985.
      (1)   Lots one-half acre or less. Developed woodland clearing on lots in
the LDA and RCA that are one-half acre or less in size and that were in
existence on or before December 1, 1985, shall be limited to the minimum
necessary to accommodate a house or other structure, initial septic system,
driveway, and reasonable amount of yard or required parking.
      (2)   Lots greater than one-half acre up to one acre. Developed woodland
clearing on lots in the LDA and RCA that are greater than one-half acre and up
to one acre in size that were in existence on or before December 1, 1985 shall
be limited to the minimum necessary to accommodate a house or other structure,
initial septic system, driveway, and reasonable amount of yard or required
parking, and may not exceed 30% without a modification by the Planning and
Zoning Officer.
      (3)   Lots greater than one acre. Developed woodland clearing on lots in
the LDA and RCA greater than one acre in size that were in existence on or
before December 1, 1985, shall be limited to the minimum necessary to
accommodate a house or other structure, initial septic system, driveway, and
reasonable amount of yard or required parking, and may not exceed 30% without a
variance.
   (c)   Clearing for subdivisions created after December 1, 1985. Clearing on
subdivisions in the LDA and RCA created after December 1, 1985 may not exceed
30% of the forest or developed woodland, except by approval of a variance.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-602. Clearing mitigation and afforestation.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to afforestation and mitigation
for clearing of forest or developed woodland for development on all lots
located in the LDA and RCA.
   (b)   Forest mitigation for lots created before December 1, 1985. Forest
clearing on lots in the critical area that were in existence before December 1,
1985 is subject to forest mitigation as follows.
      (1)   Lots one-half acre or less. Forest mitigation on lots that are one-
half acre or less in size shall equal the area to be cleared.
      (2)   Lots greater than one-half acre. Forest mitigation on lots that are
greater than one-half acre in size for clearing less than 20% shall equal the
area to be cleared. Mitigation for clearing between 20% and 30% shall be
calculated at a rate of 1.5 times the area to be cleared.
   (c)   Developed woodland mitigation for lots created before December 1,
1985. Developed woodland clearing on lots in the critical area that were in
existence before December 1, 1985 is subject to developed woodland mitigation
as follows.
      (1)   Lots one-half acre or less. Developed woodland mitigation on lots
one-half acre or less in size shall equal the area to be cleared.
      (2)   Lots greater than one-half acre and up to one acre. Developed
woodland mitigation on lots that are greater than one-half acre and up to one
acre in size shall equal the area to be cleared.
      (3)   Lots greater than one acre. Developed woodland mitigation greater
than one acre in size with less than 30% clearing shall equal the area to be
cleared.
   (d)   Mitigation for subdivisions created after December 1, 1985. Mitigation
for subdivisions created after December 1, 1985 for clearing less than 20%
shall equal the area to be cleared. Mitigation for clearing between 20% and 30%
shall be calculated at a rate of 1.5 times the area to be cleared.
   (e)   Mitigation for variances to clearing limitations. Mitigation for
variances to the required clearing limitations shall be calculated at a rate of
three times the additional area to be cleared granted by the variance decision.
   (f)   Mitigation for forest or developed woodland to be cleared. Mitigation
for forest or developed woodland shall be undertaken in the following order of
priority in accordance with COMAR, Title 27 and "The Green Book for the Buffer"
published by the Critical Area Commission:
      (1)   onsite reforestation;
      (2)   offsite reforestation; or
      (3)   payment to the County of the fee required by Title 11, or, for land
within the buffer or expanded buffer, as required by COMAR, Title 27.
   (g)   Afforestation on a site with less than 15% forest or developed
woodland. For a site with less than 15% forest or developed woodland,
afforestation shall occur to the extent required in the following table and be
maintained through protective easements.
 
New subdivision or new development on a Afforestation equal to 15% of the site
vacant lot
Substantial alteration, new lot with an
existing dwelling unit or the           Afforestation based on total lot
conversion of a land use on a parcel or coverage, not to exceed 15% of the site
lot to another land use
                                        Afforestation based on net increase in
Addition or accessory structure         lot coverage, not to exceed 15% of the
                                        site
 
   (h)   Reforestation and afforestation planting. Reforestation and
afforestation planting shall be established first within the 100-foot buffer,
if feasible, and shall include a combination of native species of trees,
shrubs, and ground cover approved by the Office of Planning and Zoning, or, for
land within the buffer, in accordance with COMAR, Title 27. Reforestation and
afforestation areas shall be placed under easement in accordance with §
17-8-901.
   (i)   Clearing in violation of the law. Forests, woodlands, woody
vegetation, or individual non- hazardous trees cleared without a grading permit
or other required approval, or in excess of allowed clearing limits, shall be
replanted at three times the area of the cleared forest, woodlands or woody
vegetation, and for individual trees cleared, three times the number of
individual trees cleared, or a fee shall be paid at the rate set forth in Title
11, or, for land within the buffer, in accordance with COMAR, Title 27.
   (j)   Replacement planting. For land located within the buffer, forests,
developed woodlands, woody vegetation, or individual trees that are replaced
shall be in accordance with COMAR, Title 27. All other forests, woodlands,
woody vegetation, or individual trees that are replaced shall:
      (1)   have trees with a trunk diameter of at least 1.5 inches as measured
at 4.5 feet;
      (2)   have trees that are at least six feet high above ground level;
      (3)   include bushes and ground cover, and for individual trees replaced,
shall include a minimum of three small shrubs (minimum 18" high) per tree
replaced; and
      (4)   be replanted with native vegetation.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 76-13)
§ 17-8-603. Mitigation for Forest Interior Dwelling Species ("FIDS") habitat.
   Mitigation for Forest Interior Dwelling Species ("FIDS") habitat shall occur
in the following order of priority in accordance with guidelines established in
"A Guide to the Conservation of Forest Interior Dwelling Birds in the
Chesapeake Bay Critical Area" published by the Critical Area Commission:
      (1)   onsite reforestation;
      (2)   offsite reforestation within the critical area or outside of the
critical area on property within the OS-C Overlay; or
      (3)   payment to the County of the fee required by Title 11.
(Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-604. Fees in lieu of replanting.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies when planting cannot be performed
onsite or offsite in accordance with §
17-8-602 or §
17-8-603.
   (b)   Time for payment. Fees paid in lieu of replanting shall be paid before
the signing of the record plat for a development involving subdivision or upon
the issuance of a permit or plan for a development not involving subdivision.
   (c)   Use. Fees paid in lieu of replanting shall be maintained in a separate
fund and may be spent on:
      (1)   those costs directly related to replanting within the critical
area, including site identification and the acquisition of land or easements;
and
      (2)   resource staff for project and plan review and approval.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
SUBTITLE 7. BUFFER MODIFICATION AREAS
§ 17-8-701. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to all development on land that is designated as a
buffer modification area on buffer modification maps permanently on file in the
Office of Planning and Zoning and is in addition to other consistent
requirements of this title.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-702. Development requirements for single family residential uses.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to all single family detached residential
development in a buffer modification area.
   (b)   Expansion of existing lot coverage. Lot coverage added during the
expansion or replacement of an existing structure shall meet the following
criteria:
      (1)   No new lot coverage shall be placed nearer to the shoreline than
the closest facade of the existing principal structure; landscape or retaining
walls, pergolas, patios, and swimming pools may not be considered as part of
the principal structure.
      (2)   The structure or expansion shall be designed and located to
maximize the distance from the shoreline and to enhance and protect the
environmentally sensitive features on the site, taking into account the natural
features.
      (3)   Variances to the setback requirements of the underlying zoning
shall be considered before buffer disturbance.
   (c)   In-kind replacement. In-kind replacement of existing lot coverage
shall meet the following criteria:
      (1)   In-kind replacement of existing lot coverage is allowed when
reconstruction occurs on the same foundation or within the same footprint as
previously existing development and meets the criteria for reconfiguration
specified under §
17-8-403.
      (2)   In-kind replacement or reconstruction of the existing foundation is
allowed when necessary for structural stability.
   (d)   New structure. The design and location of a new structure shall
maximize ESD design criteria and shall:
      (1)   maximize the distance between the shoreline and the structure,
taking into account the natural features of the site and the required placement
of utilities on the site;
      (2)   accommodate the location of existing or proposed septic systems,
storm drains, wells, and other utilities;
      (3)   be compatible with existing patterns of residential, industrial,
commercial, or recreational development;
      (4)   maximize the ability of the buffer to provide for the removal or
reduction of sediments, nutrients, and potentially harmful or toxic substances,
including non-structural stormwater management practices, in runoff entering
the bay and its tributaries;
      (5)   minimize the adverse effects of human activities on wetlands,
shorelines, stream banks, tidal waters, and aquatic resources;
      (6)   maintain an area of transitional habitat between aquatic and
terrestrial communities;
      (7)   maintain the natural environment of streams; and
      (8)   protect riparian wildlife.
   (e)   Mitigation for lot coverage in the buffer modification area.
Mitigation for new lot coverage or for replacement of existing lot coverage in
the buffer modification area is required as follows:
      (1)   For every square foot of additional lot coverage within 100 feet of
the mean high water line, a vegetated buffer shall be planted within the buffer
modification area at a ratio of two times the amount of lot coverage.
      (2)   If a variance is required, a vegetated buffer shall be planted
within the buffer modification area at a ratio of 3:1 for the additional area
of disturbance granted under the variance.
      (3)   If the Office of Planning and Zoning determines that space for
onsite mitigation within the buffer is insufficient, mitigation may be located
according to the following order of preference:
         (i)   onsite location outside the buffer modification area;
         (ii)   offsite location within the critical area; or
         (iii)   payment to the County of a fee as required by
Title 11.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-703. Development requirements for commercial, industrial, institutional,
recreational, and duplex, townhouse, semi-detached and multifamily uses.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to all development in a buffer
modification area relating to commercial, industrial, institutional,
recreational, and duplex, townhouse, semi-detached and multifamily uses, except
that the section does not apply to development in a government reuse facility.
   (b)   Development within the buffer modification area. Development is
prohibited in the buffer modification area unless there is no reasonable
alternative available and buffer disturbance is minimized as follows.
      (1)   Development shall be located as far as possible from mean high
tide, the edge of tributary streams, and the landward edge of tidal wetlands
and must meet the criteria for reconfiguration specified under §
17-8-403.
      (2)   Variances to the setback requirements of the underlying zoning
shall be considered before buffer disturbance.
      (3)   Construction of a new structure on the footprint of an existing
structure or on existing lot coverage shall be considered first.
   (c)   Evaluating reasonableness of buffer disturbance. When determining
whether disturbance within the buffer modification area is the only reasonable
alternative available, the Office of Planning and Zoning may not consider
convenience or, for construction of a new principal structure only, expense.
   (d)   Development of sites with less than 15% lot coverage. Development of
sites with less than 15% lot coverage shall minimize buffer intrusion and shall
be located at least 50 feet from mean high tide and tidal wetlands.
   (e)   Development of structures on sites with more than 15% lot coverage.
Development of principal or accessory structures on sites with more than 15%
lot coverage shall minimize buffer intrusion and shall be located at least 25
feet from mean high tide and tidal wetlands.
   (f)   Protection of native species. Native species may not be removed,
except as necessary for construction or for maintenance and enhancement of the
buffer.
   (g)   Development planting. On all development sites, a 25-foot waterfront
buffer shall be densely planted with native trees and shrubs.
   (h)   Mitigation. When any development occurs in a buffer modification area,
the mitigation requirements of §
17-8-702(e) shall apply.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-704. Development requirements for government reuse facilities.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to all development in a buffer
modification area of a government reuse facility, except that the buffer
modification criteria described in this section do not apply to a site or any
part of a site that:
      (1)   no longer meets the definition of a government reuse facility under
this Code;
      (2)   is not developed in accordance with an overall development plan
that satisfies the requirements for a government reuse facility set forth in
this article; or
      (3)   is rezoned to a zoning classification that does not meet the
requirements for a government reuse facility.
   (b)   Criteria. Within a government reuse facility, the overall development
plan shall comply with the following criteria:
      (1)   development within the buffer modification area shall minimize
impact to the buffer;
      (2)   a vegetated buffer shall cover no less than 25% of the total area
within the buffer modification area, but vegetated areas less than 10 feet wide
may not be counted toward the 25% minimum;
      (3)   the vegetated buffer may vary in width;
      (4)   existing building footprints and other lot coverage may be
relocated if the relocation results in a net reduction in total lot coverage
within the buffer modification area and does not locate any building closer to
the water than existing buildings, 25 feet from the landward edge of a
waterfront revetment, or 25 feet, whichever is greater;
      (5)   mitigation for all development within the buffer modification area
shall be required and may be accomplished by:
         (i)   complying with the mitigation requirements for new lot coverage
in §
17-8-702(e);
         (ii)   removing lot coverage in an amount equal to the lot coverage
added, replaced, or otherwise disturbed; or
         (iii)   a combination of (i) and (ii) above;
      (6)   existing native vegetation may not be removed from the buffer
modification area except in accordance with an approved buffer management plan
designed to enhance the buffer; and
      (7)   there shall be a net decrease of at least 10% of the total lot
coverage within the 100-foot buffer.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 17-8-705 Development requirements for marinas.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to all marina development in a buffer
modification area.
   (b)   Criteria. Within a buffer modification area in a marina, development
shall comply with the following criteria:
      (1)   New building footprints and new lot coverage shall maximize and
enhance the environmental features in the buffer modification area and be at
least 25 feet from the landward edge of mean high tide and tidal wetlands.
      (2)   Mitigation for all new development within the buffer modification
area shall consist of:
         (i)   vegetated buffer at least 25 feet wide and no less in area than
the square footage of the new building footprint and new lot coverage within
the buffer modification area;
         (ii)   removal of lot coverage in the 25’ buffer in an amount equal to
lot coverage added; or
         (iii)   a combination of (i) and (ii) above.
      (3)   Existing native vegetation may not be removed from the buffer
modification area except in accordance with an approved buffer management plan.
      (4)   Mitigation for replacement development for an existing structure
where existing coverage is not increased shall be at 25% of the existing
coverage.
      (5)   A marina that relocates legal lot coverage from the buffer
modification area to an area outside the buffer modification area, without
creating additional lot coverage overall, is not subject to the 10% reduction
requirement contained in §
17-8-403(2) for the relocation.
      (6)   A marina that constructs improvements on top of existing legal lot
coverage outside the buffer modification area is not subject to the 10%
reduction requirement contained in §
17-8-403(2) for the relocation if the marina is a certified Clean Marina by the
Maryland Department of Natural Resources at the time of the application.
(Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 110-21)
SUBTITLE 8. GROWTH ALLOCATION AREAS
§ 17-8-801.  Planting and vegetation.
   A site approved for growth allocation shall be vegetated in all pervious
areas other than beaches, paths, and walkways, and approved native species
shall be used for all new planting.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-8-802. Development requirements for re-designated property.
   (a)   From RCA to IDA. A site re-designated from RCA to IDA shall maintain a
300-foot buffer, be not less than 15% forested, and provide parking structures,
if practical.
   (b)   From RCA to LDA. A site re-designated from RCA to LDA shall maintain a
300-foot buffer and limit impervious surface to not more than 10% of the site.
   (c)   From LDA to IDA. A site re-designated from LDA to IDA shall maintain a
100-foot buffer, be not less than 15% forested, create an additional 10-foot
vegetated area beyond the 100-foot buffer, and provide parking structures, if
practical.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 9. AGREEMENTS
§ 17-8-901. Forestation agreement and forest conservation easement.
   (a)   In general. For all afforestation, reforestation, and replanting
required by this title, a developer shall enter into a forestation agreement. A
forest conservation easement shall be required for lots one-half acre or
greater for any onsite planted area or coterminous area of onsite plantings and
woodland that totals 3,000 square feet or greater. The Planning and Zoning
Officer may grant a modification of the requirements of this section for a
stream restoration project.
   (b)   Reconveyance of forest conservation easement. Upon a written request
from the property owner made on or after October 8, 2021, the County shall
promptly convey a forest conservation easement back to the owner if all permits
and plan applications and approvals related to the development have expired,
been terminated, or are otherwise null and void.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 62-21)
SUBTITLE 10. CONSOLIDATION AND RECONFIGURATION OF LOTS IN THE CRITICAL AREA
§ 17-8-1001. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Conforming" means a lot or parcel of land that meets all critical
area requirements, but does not include a lot or parcel of land for which a
critical area variance has been sought or granted or that is located in the RCA
and is less than 20 acres.
      (2)   "Consolidation" means a combination of any recorded, legally
buildable lots or legal parcels of land into fewer lots or parcels of land.
      (3)   "Reconfiguration" means a change of the arrangement of the existing
lot or parcel lines of any recorded, legally buildable lots or legal parcels of
land.
      (4)   "Site" means any lot or parcel of land, or combination of lots or
parcels of land, that are contiguous and being developed as part of a common
subdivision or project.
(Bill No. 9-19)
§ 17-8-1002. Lot consolidation and reconfiguration.
   (a)   Consolidation and reconfiguration of lots in the critical area. An
application seeking lot consolidation and reconfiguration on a site located in
the critical area must comply with the lot consolidation and reconfiguration
requirements of COMAR, Title 27 and be approved by the Office of Planning and
Zoning prior to approval of a sketch plan or preliminary plan, provided that:
      (1)   lots located in the LDA or IDA may not be reconfigured into the
RCA; and
      (2)   lots located outside the critical area may not be reconfigured into
the critical area.
   (b)   Notice to Critical Area Commission. A copy of the final written
decision of the Office of Planning and Zoning granting or denying the
application shall be sent to the Critical Area Commission no later than five
days after the date of the decision.
   (c)   Prohibition on approval. A sketch plan or preliminary plan application
that includes an application for lot consolidation or reconfiguration may not
be approved by the Office of Planning and Zoning until 30 days after the
Critical Area Commission receives a copy of the final written decision granting
or denying the application seeking lot consolidation or reconfiguration.
   (d)   Exception. This subtitle does not apply to a conforming lot or parcel.
(Bill No. 9-19)
TITLE 9. BOG OVERLAY
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
17-9-101.   Scope.
   
17-9-102.   Conflict with other law.
   
17-9-103.   Variance required.
   
17-9-104.   Violations and enforcement.
Subtitle 2. Disturbance and Development Requirements
   
17-9-201.   Discharge prohibited.
   
17-9-202.   Disturbance prohibited in bog and contributing streams.
   
17-9-203.   Actions required when disturbance allowed.
   
17-9-204.   Disposal of vegetative waste.
   
17-9-205.   Septic requirements.
   
17-9-206.   Development within the 100-foot upland buffer.
   
17-9-207.   Development within the limited activity area.
   
17-9-208.   Development within the contributing drainage area.
   
17-9-209.   Subdivision in the contributing drainage area.
Subtitle 3. Forest and Woodlands
   
17-9-301.   Forest, woodland, and habitat protection.
   
17-9-302.   Forest and woodland clearing.
   
17-9-303.   Clearing in violation of the law.
   
17-9-304.   Lots without existing forest.
   
17-9-305.   Replacement planting.
Subtitle 4. Agreements
   
17-9-401.   Forestation agreement and forest conservation easement.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 17-9-101. Scope.
   This title is an overlay that applies to all land located within a bog
protection area as defined in
Article 18 of this Code and the requirements of this title are in addition to
other requirements of this Code.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-102. Conflict with other law.
   If any provision of this title conflicts with other County law, the
provisions of this title prevail, except that §
17-8-102 shall apply if a property subject to one or more of the overlays in
this title is located in the critical area.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-103. Variance required.
   The requirements of this title may be altered only by variance as provided
in §
18-16-305 of this Code.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-104. Violations and enforcement.
   Violations of this title shall be enforced by the Department of Inspections
and Permits under the provisions of Article 16 of this Code and
Article 18 of this Code.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 2. DISTURBANCE AND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
§ 17-9-201.  Discharge prohibited.
   Storm water from development within a bog protection area may not discharge
directly into a bog, the contributing streams, or the 100-foot upland buffer.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-202. Disturbance prohibited in bog and contributing streams.
   Disturbance of any kind is prohibited within a bog and the contributing
streams.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-203.  Actions required when disturbance allowed.
   When disturbance in the 100-foot upland buffer, limited activity area, or
contributing drainage area is allowed by this title, each disturbed area shall
be stabilized and maintained daily; have appropriate sediment controls around
the perimeter of the disturbance, including super silt fences or other measures
required by the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District; and be permanently
stabilized with noninvasive native vegetation upon completion of the
disturbance.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-204.  Disposal of vegetative waste.
   Except when waste is composted or recycled, all vegetative waste, such as
yard waste, grass clippings, and leaves, shall be disposed of outside the 100-
foot upland buffer.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-205. Septic requirements.
   A new private septic system on a lot that meets standard percolation
requirements for a conventional septic system shall include nitrogen removal
technology.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-206. Development within the 100-foot upland buffer.
   (a) Development generally prohibited. Except as provided in subsections (b)
and (c), new development, including septic systems, structures, roads, parking
areas, or other impervious surfaces, is prohibited in the 100-foot upland
buffer and natural vegetation shall be maintained.
    (b)   Decks. A deck no larger than 288 square feet may be constructed on a
lot within the 100-foot upland buffer if the deck:
      (1)   is constructed with gaps between the boards to achieve
perviousness;
      (2)   is located in an area that does not require clearing of woodland;
      (3)   has gravel six inches deep spread under the deck; and
      (4)   is surrounded by native plantings to prevent runoff.
   (c)   Sheds. A single shed is allowed on a lot within the 100-foot upland
buffer if the shed is no larger than 150 square feet and is located in an area
that does not require clearing of woodland.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-207. Development within the limited activity area.
   (a)   Development generally prohibited. Except as provided in subsection
(b), new development, including septic systems, structures, roads, parking
areas, and other impervious surfaces, is prohibited within the limited activity
area.
   (b)   Exceptions. The prohibition of subsection (a) does not apply to a lot
that was legally in existence on December 3, 2001 or that was part of a family
conveyance subdivision of land owned by an applicant on October 7, 2003 if the
development:
      (1)   maximizes the distance between the bog and each structure, taking
into account the natural features of the site and placement of utilities on the
lot;
      (2)   meets the requirements of §
17-9-208(b);
      (3)   limits impervious surface to 15% of a lot unless one of the
following exceptions applies:
         (i)   on a lot of one-half acre or less, impervious surfaces may be
increased to 25%; or
         (ii)   on a lot between one-half acre and one acre, impervious
surfaces on the lot shall be minimized and the total impervious surface may not
exceed the greater of 15% or 5,445 square feet.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-208. Development within the contributing drainage area.
   (a)   Development allowed if requirements met. Development is allowed in the
contributing drainage area if the requirements of this section are met.
   (b)   Stormwater management. All development within the contributing
drainage area shall comply with the following storm water requirements.
      (1)   Nonstructural storm water management practices, such as
infiltration and retention of forest, wetlands and associated buffers,
undisturbed floodplains, open space and open area, and slopes of 15% or
greater, shall be used to the extent practical.
      (2)   Structural storm water management shall be used only when use of
nonstructural storm water management practices is not practical.
      (3)   Runoff shall be managed in a manner that does not permit direct
discharge of storm water into a bog, contributing stream, or 100-foot upland
buffer.
   (c)   Impervious surface limitations. Impervious surface on lots in
existence on December 3, 2001 shall be limited to 15% of a lot unless one of
the following exceptions applies.
      (1)   On a lot of one-half acre or less that existed on or before
December 3, 2001, impervious surface may be increased to 25%.
      (2)   On a lot between one-half acre and one acre that existed on or
before December 3, 2001, impervious surface on the lot shall be minimized and
the total impervious surface may not exceed the greater of 15% or 5,445 square
feet.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 19-05; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-9-209. Subdivision in the contributing drainage area.
   In a new subdivision, impervious surface within the contributing drainage
area may not exceed 10%.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 3. FOREST AND WOODLANDS
§ 17-9-301. Forest, woodland, and habitat protection.
   Development shall minimize destruction of forest and woodland vegetation and
shall conserve or protect existing riparian forests and forest areas utilized
as breeding areas by forest interior dwelling birds and other wildlife species,
natural heritage areas, plant habitats of local significance, and individual
trees of significant size as determined by the Maryland Department of Natural
Resources and the Office of Planning and Zoning.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-302. Forest and woodland clearing.
   (a)   Forest or developed woodland clearing limits. Except as provided in
subsection (b), no more than 20% of any forest or developed woodland may be
cleared for development, and replacement planting shall cover not less than an
equal area.
   (b)   Additional clearing allowed. An additional 10% up to a total of 30% of
the forest or developed woodland on a lot may be disturbed if approved by the
Office of Planning and Zoning and replaced at one and one-half times the total
acreage of disturbed forest or developed woodland.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-303. Clearing in violation of the law.
   Forest or woodland cleared without a grading permit shall be replanted at
three times the total area of cleared forest.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-304. Lots without existing forest.
   A lot without existing forest shall be planted to provide a forest or
developed woodland cover of at least 15% of the lot.
(Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-9-305. Replacement planting.
   Forests and woodlands that are replaced shall meet the following
requirements:
      (1)   trees shall have a trunk diameter of at least 1.5 inches as
measured at 4.5 feet above the ground;
      (2)   trees shall be at least six feet high above ground level;
      (3)   bushes and ground cover shall be native species approved by the
Office of Planning and Zoning;
      (4)   all replanting shall be in accordance with a plan approved by the
Office of Planning and Zoning; and
      (5)   when a location for reforestation cannot be located on the site,
the developer shall provide an alternative offsite location within a bog
protection area.
(Bill No. 3-05)
SUBTITLE 4. AGREEMENTS
§ 17-9-401. Forestation agreement and forest conservation easement.
   For all afforestation, reforestation, and replanting, a developer shall
enter into a forestation agreement and provide a forest conservation easement.
The Planning and Zoning Officer may grant a modification of the requirements of
this section for a stream restoration project.
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 93-12)
TITLE 10. AGRICULTURAL LAND PRESERVATION
Section
Subtitle 1. State Program
   
17-10-101.   Agricultural land preservation areas.
   
17-10-102.   Agricultural land preservation program.
Subtitle 2. Local Program
   
17-10-201.   Definitions.
   
17-10-202.   Agricultural Preservation Advisory Board.
   
17-10-203.   Procedures, requirements for establishment of County agricultural
district.
   
17-10-204.   Use of land in County agricultural district.
   
17-10-205.   Procedure to terminate County agricultural or woodland district.
   
17-10-206.   Program to purchase easements.
   
17-10-207.   Application for sale of easement.
   
17-10-208.   Valuation, priority of easement purchase.
   
17-10-209.   Easement donation.
   
17-10-210.   Right to sell.
   
17-10-211.   Public access.
   
17-10-212.   Executive regulations.
Subtitle 3. Nuisance Actions
   
17-10-301.   Agricultural operations as a defense in private nuisance action.
SUBTITLE 1. STATE PROGRAM
§ 17-10-101. Agricultural land preservation areas.
   (a)   Establishment; uses. In accordance with the Agriculture Article, Title
2, Subtitle 5, of the State Code, agricultural land preservation areas may be
established in the County. Each agricultural land preservation area shall
provide for the protection of and permit the following normal agricultural
activities:
      (1)   any farm use of land;
      (2)   operation at any time of machinery used in farm production or the
primary processing of any agricultural products;
      (3)   any normal agricultural activities and operations, in accordance
with good husbandry practices, that do not cause bodily injury or directly
endanger human health, including activities that may produce normal
agriculturally related noise and odors; and
      (4)   the sale of farm products produced on the farm where the sales are
made.
   (b)   Official maps. Official maps of agricultural land preservation areas
shall be located at the Office of Planning and Zoning. The official maps shall
be made current at least once a year by June 30 of each year and shall be
published at the same scale as the tax maps of the Department of Assessments
and Taxation.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-101)
§ 17-10-102. Agricultural land preservation program.
   In accordance with the Agriculture Article, Title 2, Subtitle 5, of the
State Code, the County agricultural land preservation area program is
established by this title, on formal notification to the County Council by the
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation. Each district agreement,
together with property descriptions of the property in each agricultural land
preservation area, shall be maintained in an official file and shall be
available from the Office of Planning and Zoning.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-102)
SUBTITLE 2. LOCAL PROGRAM
§ 17-10-201. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   "Agricultural Land Coordinator" means an individual appointed by
the Planning and Zoning Officer to assist the landowner concerning the
establishment of a County agricultural district or the sale of an easement and
to administer the provisions of this subtitle.
      (2)   "Agricultural Preservation Advisory Board" means a board that is
established in accordance with the Agriculture Article, § 2-504.1, of the State
Code, and contains at least one member with a forestry background or
experience.
      (3)   "Agriculture" means the science, art, and business of cultivating
the soil; producing crops; breeding, boarding, or training of animals;
horticulture; apiaries; hydroponics; viticulture; forestry; and related
agricultural activities as approved by the Agricultural Preservation Advisory
Board.
      (4)   "County agricultural district" means a district that contains
agricultural land or woodlands and is established in accordance with §
17-10-203.
      (5)   "Easement" means a covenant running with the land that limits the
uses permitted on a property to agriculture and woodlands uses.
      (6)   "Foundation" means the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation
Foundation.
      (7)   "Landowner" means a person owning or having an interest in land
situated within Anne Arundel County.
      (8)   "Productive agricultural land" means land eligible to be included
in a State agricultural district in accordance with regulations promulgated by
the Foundation.
      (9)   "State agricultural district" means an agricultural district
established in accordance with the provisions of the Agriculture Article, Title
2, Subtitle 5, of the State Code.
      (10)   "Woodland" means a land area dominated by trees and other woody
plants including trees and woody plants that have been cut but not cleared and
managed under an approved forest management plan prepared by a registered
forester.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-201) (Bill No. 45-90; Bill No. 56-99; Bill No. 20-00;
Bill No. 3-05)
§ 17-10-202. Agricultural Preservation Advisory Board.
   (a)   Establishment; duties. There is an Agricultural Preservation Advisory
Board with the following duties and responsibilities:
      (1)   to advise the County concerning the establishment of County
agricultural districts and purchases of easements by the County;
      (2)   to assist the County government in reviewing the status of County
agricultural districts and land under easement;
      (3)   to advise the County concerning County priorities for agricultural
and woodland preservation;
      (4)   to promote preservation of agriculture within the County by
fostering such activities as a farmers' market and by offering information and
assistance to farmers concerning establishment of County agricultural districts
and the purchase of easements;
      (5)   to make recommendations to the County Executive concerning budget
and appropriation requests;
      (6)   to recommend the delineation of areas of productive agricultural
land in the County;
      (7)   to recommend procedures concerning the determination of values of
easements;
      (8)   to review and make recommendations to the County concerning
proposed regulations for State and County agricultural districts;
      (9)   to prepare and review recommendations to the County concerning
County policies and programs for agricultural and woodland preservation;
      (10)   to seek the advice of and cooperate with the Agricultural
Extension Service, the Soil Conservation District and the State foresters in
carrying out its responsibilities; and
      (11)   to perform other, duties as may be assigned by the County Council
or County Executive.
   (b)   Meetings. The Board shall meet at the direction of the Chair or on the
request of two members of the Board, but in no event less than once every three
months.
   (c)   Decisions. Decisions of the Board shall be made if a majority of the
members is present at a meeting and if a majority of the members present
concurs.
   (d)   Staff support. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall provide staff
support to the Board.
   (e)   Public ethics issues. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Article 7 of this Code, a person may be appointed to and may serve on the
Agricultural Preservation Advisory Board even if the person has a district
agreement with the State or County or has sold an easement on the person's
agricultural land or woodland to the State or County. Nothing in this
subsection excuses a member of the Agricultural Preservation Advisory Board
from compliance with §
7-3-101 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-202) (Bill No. 45-90; Bill No. 56-99; Bill No. 20-00;
Bill No. 45-00)
§ 17-10-203. Procedures, requirements for establishment of County agricultural
district.
   (a)   Establishment procedures. The following procedures shall be used to
establish a County agricultural district:
      (1)   Any landowner whose land either in whole or in part is devoted to
agriculture or woodlands or otherwise meets the criteria of this subtitle may
file a petition with the Office of Planning and Zoning requesting the
establishment of a County agricultural district on that land.
      (2)   The petition shall include maps and descriptions of the current use
of the land in the proposed district and the names and addresses of all
adjacent property owners.
      (3)   All land proposed to be placed in a County agricultural district
must:
         (i)   include at least 50 contiguous acres for agricultural land or at
least 10 contiguous acres for woodlands;
         (ii)   be located outside water and sewer categories 1, 2, and 3 shown
in the Anne Arundel County Master Plan for Water Supply and Sewerage Systems;
and
         (iii)   have an approved soil and water conservation plan prepared by
the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District.
      (4)   Within 60 days after receipt of a petition, the Planning and Zoning
Officer shall determine whether to approve the establishment of a County
agricultural district.
      (5)   In making a determination, the Planning and Zoning Officer:
         (i)   shall consider the provisions of the General Development Plan;
and
         (ii)   may not approve the establishment of a district on property on
which further development is precluded by law or by contract.
   (b)   County's offer to purchase easement. A landowner's acceptance of an
offer from the County for the purchase of an easement under §
17-10-208(d) may be the basis for establishment of a district, without the
necessity of the landowner making application to establish a district.
   (c)   Establishment of district. Following approval by the Planning and
Zoning Officer or on acceptance of an offer from the County for the purchase of
an easement, a County agricultural district shall be established on execution
by the landowner of a district agreement that incorporates the conditions that
are set forth in the regulations adopted under §
17-10-212.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-203) (Bill No. 45-90; Bill No. 56-99; Bill No. 20-00)
§ 17-10-204. Use of land in County agricultural district.
   (a)   Special exception and variance. The establishment of a district or the
sale of an easement does not alter special exception or variance requirements
applicable to a zoning classification in which the County agricultural district
is located.
   (b)   Restrictions. A person who owns land that has been included in a
County agricultural district:
      (1)   may not subdivide the land except to provide owner or children's
lots to the extent allowed by the easement; and
      (2)   shall be subject to the provisions of this article and
Article 18 of this Code.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-203.1) (Bill No. 45-90; Bill No. 56-99; Bill No. 3-05;
Bill No. 4-05)
§ 17-10-205. Procedure to terminate County agricultural or woodland district.
   (a)   Withdrawal by notification. Except when an easement has been
purchased, a landowner may withdraw from a County agricultural district by
giving notification in writing to the Office of Planning and Zoning:
      (1)   no earlier than five years after the date the landowner's land is
included in a district or, if a landowner is receiving a tax credit under §
4-2-301 of this Code, no earlier than ten years after the landowner's land is
included in a district;
      (2)   subject to the provisions of §
4-2-301 of this Code, after the County has rejected the purchase of an easement
on the landowner's property; or
      (3)   if the Planning and Zoning Officer finds that continuation in the
district will cause the landowner severe economic hardship, consisting of
financial peril to the landowner, whether caused by natural disaster, the
disability of the landowner, or some other occurrence.
   (b)   Adjustment of acreage. In a County agricultural district that contains
land from more than one landowner, if a landowner's withdrawal from the
district causes the district no longer to meet the requirements for a County
district, the Office of Planning and Zoning may adjust the district to the
remaining acreage.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-204) (Bill No. 45-90; Bill No. 56-99; Bill No. 20-00)
§ 17-10-206. Program to purchase easements.
   (a)   Establishment. There is a program to finance the purchase of
easements.
   (b)   Agreement.
      (1)   The County Executive shall determine the methods of paying
landowners for easements, and the appropriate terms and conditions for any
agreement to purchase an easement in accordance with the requirements set forth
in this subtitle or in other applicable provisions of law.
      (2)   The County may provide for the payment for easements by the
execution and delivery of long-term obligations of the County, including long-
term obligations in the form of installment purchase agreements for deferred
payment of the purchase price.
      (3)   The execution and delivery of any such long-term obligations shall
be authorized by ordinance, which shall prescribe the security for form, manner
of execution, delivery, and sale, if applicable, the maturity and the other
terms and conditions of such long-term obligations or, in each case, the manner
of determining the same. The final maturity of such long-term obligations may
not exceed 30 years.
   (c)   Payment. Payment for easements may be made from dedicated transfer tax
revenues that are appropriated as provided under §
4-11-111 of this Code; from any other legally available appropriated funds or
revenues; and as provided in subsection (b)(2).
   (d)   Termination and release.
      (1)   Subject to subsection (d)(2), an easement purchased by the County
shall be given by the landowner in perpetuity and may not be terminated by the
landowner, and may not be extinguished by the County without approval of the
County Council.
      (2)   Except for an easement purchased under an installment purchase
agreement and subject to the provisions of
Article 18 of this Code, a landowner may have one 40,000 square foot lot
released from an easement.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-205) (Bill No. 45-90; Bill No. 79-94; Bill No. 56-99;
Bill No. 4-05)
§ 17-10-207. Application for sale of easement.
   (a)   Generally. Any landowner whose land is devoted in whole or in part to
agriculture or woodlands may file an application with the Office of Planning
and Zoning requesting that the County purchase an easement if the land includes
at least 50 contiguous acres for agricultural land or at least 25 contiguous
acres for woodlands.
   (b)   Application. The application shall be filed in the manner and with the
supporting documentation required by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (c)   Review by Agricultural Land Coordinator. On receipt of an application,
the Agricultural Land Coordinator shall review the application, meet with the
landowner, and recommend to the Planning and Zoning Officer whether to purchase
an easement.
   (d)   Planning and Zoning Officer. Within 60 days after receipt of an
application, the Planning and Zoning Officer shall determine whether the
property is eligible for purchase by the County of an easement and, if an
eligibility determination is made, direct the Agricultural Land Coordinator to
order an appraisal.
   (e)   Ineligibility. Among other factors, a property may not be eligible for
the purchase of an easement if:
      (1)   the landowner fails to provide the information requested by the
County or to cooperate with the Agricultural Land Coordinator or any State or
County agency with regard to admission into a program; or
      (2)   the property does not meet the minimum qualifications for acreage,
soil classification, water and sewer service designation, and applicable zoning
as set forth in regulations adopted under §
17-10-212.
   (f)   Purchase price. The purchase price of the proposed easement shall be
established in accordance with §
17-10-208(a).
   (g)   State program. If a property is eligible for the State program, the
Agricultural Land Coordinator shall refer the landowner to the State program
instead of processing the application through the County program.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-206) (Bill No. 56-99; Bill No. 20-00)
§ 17-10-208. Valuation, priority of easement purchase.
   (a)   Purchase price. Except as provided in subsection (b) for easements
purchased by the execution and delivery of long-term obligations, including
installment purchase agreements, the purchase price of an easement shall be
based on:
      (1)   an appraisal obtained by the County; or
      (2)   if the landowner is dissatisfied with the appraisal obtained by the
County, the average of the amount set forth in the County's appraisal and an
appraisal obtained by the landowner at the landowner's sole expense from a list
of appraisers approved by the County, but in no event less than the amount set
forth in the County's appraisal.
   (b)   Long-term obligation. Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, for
easements purchased by installment purchase agreements, the Planning and Zoning
Officer, with the advice of the Controller, may negotiate the terms of a long-
term obligation, including the stated purchase price or amount, the interest
rate, and other appropriate provisions such that, in the reasonable
determination of the Planning and Zoning Officer, the face value of the long-
term obligation is less than or commensurate with the value of the easement
based on an appraisal.
   (c)   Priorities for easement purchases. For properties referred into the
County program, the Planning and Zoning Officer shall set priorities for the
purchase of easements, based on factors the Planning and Zoning Officer
determines are necessary to preserve agricultural land or woodlands, including
the purchase price, whether the land is in the General Development Plan as
agricultural or open space, and whether the land borders a municipality or
other developing area.
   (d)   Terms for payment. The purchase price shall be paid to the landowner
immediately on execution of an easement or on such terms as the County and the
landowner agree, provided that the purchase price under an installment purchase
agreement shall be available and encumbered in the fiscal year that the
easement is purchased, unless otherwise authorized by ordinance of the County
Council.
   (e)   County not obligated. Neither the determination by the Planning and
Zoning Officer that a property is eligible for the purchase of an easement nor
the obtaining of an appraisal obligates the County to purchase an easement.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-207) (Bill No. 45-90; Bill No. 79-94; Bill No. 56-99;
Bill No. 20-00)
§ 17-10-209. Easement donation.
   (a)   Acceptance of donation. In addition to its authority to purchase
easements under this subtitle, the County or the County's designee may accept
the donation of an easement or other interest in property for agricultural land
or woodland preservation purposes.
   (b)   When prohibited. The County may not accept the grant of a gift of
residual interest in a property on which the County has accepted an easement or
of a life estate or of any interest that would result in the merger of the
easement with the gift and thereby extinguish the easement held by the County.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-207.1) (Bill No. 56-99)
§ 17-10-210. Right to sell.
   This title does not restrict the right of an owner to sell land located in a
County agricultural district or land on which the County holds an easement,
provided that the sale is subject to the easement.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-208) (Bill No. 45-90)
§ 17-10-211. Public access.
   Purchase of an easement by the County does not create a right of public
access to the land unless the easement contract specifically provides for
public access.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-209) (Bill No. 45-90)
§ 17-10-212. Executive regulations.
   The regulations "Anne Arundel County Agricultural Land and Woodland
Preservation Program" prepared by the Department and dated August, 1999 are
approved and adopted as the regulations governing the County agricultural land
and woodland preservation program.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 2-210) (Bill No. 45-90; Bill No. 79-94; Bill No. 56-99)
SUBTITLE 3. NUISANCE ACTIONS
§ 17-10-301. Agricultural operations as a defense in private nuisance action.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, “agricultural operation” means the
production of food and other agricultural products, including structures,
vehicles, or other farm machinery, conditions, or associated activities. Types
of agricultural operations include: cultivation of land; raising or production
of poultry; production of eggs; production of milk and other dairy products;
production of fruits, vegetables, or other horticultural or floricultural
crops; raising, production, or the occasional slaughtering and rendering of
livestock, including the livestock listed in the Agriculture Article, § 1-101
(f), of the State Code; pasturage; apiaries; silvaculture; and wineries. The
term does not include regular rendering; manufacturing or processing of feed
products, tallow, or grease; or bone distillation.
   (b)   Defense. If it is alleged in a private action that an agricultural
operation interferes with the use and enjoyment of private property, because
that action constitutes a private nuisance, the person charged in the action
shall not be liable if the agricultural operation:
      (1)   is being conducted in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices and conforms to federal, State, and County law; or
      (2)   commenced prior to the use of the property by the person alleged to
have suffered injury as a result of the operation.
   (c)   Negligent or willfully injurious conduct. The defenses authorized by
subsection (b) do not apply to an agricultural operation conducted in a
negligent or willfully injurious manner.
(1985 Code, Art. 17, § 1-106) (Bill No. 58-04)
TITLE 11. FEES AND SECURITY
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
17-11-101.   Fees and security.
   
17-11-102.   Fee reduction.
   
17-11-103.   Exemption.
Subtitle 2. Development Impact Fees
   
17-11-201.   Definitions.
   
17-11-202.   Purpose.
   
17-11-203.   Who must pay fees.
   
17-11-204.   Computation of fees – Fee schedule.
   
17-11-205.   Computation of fees – Independent impact analysis.
   
17-11-206.   Payment of fee; lien against property; refund.
   
17-11-207.   Credits.
   
17-11-208.   Impact fee special funds.
   
17-11-209.   Use of funds.
   
17-11-210.   Determinations of expenditures and encumbrances of fees.
   
17-11-211.   Review of fee schedule, fee collection, and district boundaries;
reports.
   
17-11-212.   Review and automatic adjustment of fees.
   
17-11-213.   State impact fee enabling legislation.
Subtitle 3. Developer Street Light Fee
   
17-11-301.   Street lighting and fees.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 17-11-101. Fees and security.
   The following fees shall be paid and security given as provided in the
following chart, except that fees paid on an application governed by the law as
it existed prior to May 12, 2005 shall be credited against the fees in the
following chart if the application is withdrawn and a new application is filed
under this article:
Category Fee or Security
Category                                Fee or Security
Amended record plat                     $350
Bicycle, pedestrian, and transit        $330 per residential dwelling unit
infrastructure fee-in-lieu, residential
Bicycle, pedestrian, and transit
infrastructure fee-in-lieu, non-        $0.40 per square foot of enclosed space
residential, other than warehouses
Bicycle, pedestrian, and transit
infrastructure fee-in-lieu, non-        $0.11 per square foot of enclosed space
residential, warehouses
Clearing in violation of forest         $4.50 per square foot
conservation law
Clearing in violation of critical area  $1.50 per square foot of mitigation
law                                     required
Digital conversion of record plat       $250, first page
                                        $75, additional pages
Fees and charges relating to allocation See Article 13 of this Code
Fee for abandonment of forest
conservation easement in areas that are $1.25 per square foot of conservation
35 feet wide or less with a total area  easement abandoned
of 10,000 square feet or less
Fee for abandonment of forest
conservation easement in areas that are $1.50 per square foot of conservation
more than 35 feet wide with a total     easement abandoned
area of more than 10,000 square feet
Fee-in-lieu of planting for land        $1.25 per square foot or the amount
outside the critical area and inside a  provided in COMAR Title 08, Subtitle
priority funding area                   19, Chapter 4, whichever is greater
Fee-in-lieu of planting for land        $1.50 per square foot or 20% more than
outside the critical area and outside a the fee-in-lieu for land inside a
priority funding area                   priority funding area, whichever is
                                        greater
Fee-in-lieu of planting for land inside $2.00 per square foot of mitigation
the critical area                       required
Fee-in-lieu for new impervious surface  $1.50 per square foot of mitigation
or lot coverage inside a buffer         required
modification area
Fee-in-lieu for planting in the         $2.00 per square foot of mitigation
critical area buffer                    required
Fee-in-lieu for new impervious surface  $1.50 per square foot of mitigation
inside the critical area on a legal lot required
in existence before December 1, 1985
Fee-in-lieu of recreation area          $1,000 per unit
                                        $120 per residential unit
Final plan approval, application for    $420 per acre or part of an acre,
                                        commercial or industrial
Incentive Program                       $500
                                        Public works agreement: 10% of the cost
Inspection fees                         of the improvements
                                        Forestation agreement: 10% of the cost
                                        of the installed plant materials
Mobile home relocation plan, review     $1,500
Mobile home relocation plan, compliance $300 per occupied mobile home unit
monitoring
Modification, application for           $250
Preliminary plan review, application    $75 per residential unit
for                                     $360 per acre or part of an acre,
                                        commercial or industrial
                                        Public works agreement: amount equal to
                                        approved cost estimate
Security for completion of public       Forestation agreement: amount equal to
improvements or forestation             approved cost estimate outside the
                                        critical area or $1.50 per square foot
                                        inside the critical area
Security for payment of labor and       Public works agreement: amount equal to
materials                               50% of the approved cost estimate
                                        Amount equal to 10 months actual rent
Security for payment of mobile home     multiplied by the number of occupied
park relocation assistance              mobile homes, less any relocation
                                        assistance previously paid or not
                                        required to be paid under State law
Security for maintenance during         Public works agreement: amount equal to
warranty period                         10% of the approved cost estimate
Signs                                   $35 per sign
Site development plan approval,         $120 per residential unit
application for                         $420 per acre or part of an acre,
                                        commercial or industrial
Site development plan for development   $350 per acre or part of an acre
that does not require a permit
                                        $75 per residential unit
Sketch plan approval, application for   $360 per acre or part of an acre,
                                        commercial or industrial
 
(Bill No. 3-05; Bill No. 77-05; Bill No. 43-08; Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 93-12;
Bill No. 2-13; Bill No. 20-14; Bill No. 57-16; Bill No. 78-18; Bill No. 68-19;
Bill No. 44-24)
§ 17-11-102. Fee reduction.
   (a)   Environmental site design. The Planning and Zoning Officer, upon
receipt of a cost benefit analysis that justifies the reduction, may authorize
a reduction in application fees of up to 50% for development that exceeds the
environmental site design criteria of this Code.
   (b)   Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area. The following fees for
redevelopment in the Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area under
Subtitle 3 of Title 7 shall be reduced by 50% for:
      (1)   an application for sketch plan approval;
      (2)   an application for final plan approval;
      (3)   an application for preliminary plan approval;
      (4)   an application for site development plan approval;
      (5)   an application for a grading permit; and
      (6)   an application for a building permit.
   (c)   Redevelopment. Fees for redevelopment under Subtitle 12 of Title 7,
shall be reduced by 50% for an application for a sketch plan, preliminary plan,
site development plan, final plan, grading permit, and building permit.
(Bill No. 59-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 2-13; Bill No. 64-20; Bill No. 2-25)
§ 17-11-103 Exemption.
   Anne Arundel Community College shall be exempt from fees for preliminary
plans, site development plans, and modifications.
(Bill No. 91-18)
SUBTITLE 2. DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
§ 17-11-201. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Capital improvements" means land acquisition, site development,
equipment, or facilities for public schools, transportation, or public safety,
and the term includes:
         (i)   construction of school projects contained in the adopted County
capital budget and five-year capital program, transportation projects contained
in the adopted County capital budget and five- year capital program or State
consolidated transportation program, and public safety projects contained in
the adopted County capital budget and five-year capital program; and
         (ii)   public safety vehicles and equipment contained in the adopted
County current expense budget.
      (2)   "Encumbrance" means a legal commitment for the expenditure of
funds, chargeable against the applicable appropriation for the expenditure,
that is documented by a contract or purchase order.
      (3)   "Finished area" means an enclosed area in a dwelling unit that is
suitable for year-round use, embodying walls, floors, and ceilings that are
similar to the rest of the dwelling unit, and is further described in American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standard Z765-2003.
      (4)   "Floor area" has the meaning stated in Article 18 of this Code.
      (5)   "General ledger" means the official accounting records where
assets, liabilities, revenues, expenditures, budgets, and encumbrances are
recorded.
      (6)   "Person" does not include a State or federal governmental entity.
      (7)   "Pledge" means obligate taxes, fees, or other sources of revenue
for use in the repayment of a debt.
      (8)   "Public safety" means police and fire protection facilities.
      (9)   "Site-related transportation improvements" means capital
improvements and dedications and conveyances of rights-of-way for site
driveways and roads, right and left turn lanes leading to and from site
driveways, traffic-control measures for site driveways, frontage roads,
acceleration and deceleration lanes, roads necessary to provide direct access
to a development, local road improvements required by this article, and any
other direct access improvements.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 7-101) (Bill No. 50-87; Bill No. 96-01; Bill No. 27-07;
Bill No. 71-08)
§ 17-11-202. Purpose.
   This title is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents of the County by:
      (1)   requiring all new development to pay its proportionate fair share
of the costs for land, capital facilities, and other expenses necessary to
accommodate development impacts on public school, transportation, and public
safety facilities;
      (2)   complementing the provisions of
Title 5 by requiring that all new development pay its share of costs for
reasonably attributable impacts; and
      (3)   helping to implement the General Development Plan to help ensure
that adequate public facilities for schools, transportation, and public safety
are available in a timely and well planned manner.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 7-102) (Bill No. 50-87; Bill No. 96-01)
§ 17-11-203. Who must pay fees.
   (a)   Improvement of real property that causes impact. Any person who
improves real property and thereby causes an impact upon public schools,
transportation, or public safety facilities shall pay development impact fees
as provided in this subtitle.
   (b)   Change of use or improvement. Any person who subjects an existing use
to a change of use or improvement that causes any impact on public schools,
transportation, or public safety facilities shall pay a fee based on the net
increase in impacts attributable to the change of use or improvement. The net
increase shall be calculated by determining a gross fee based on the new use or
improvement and subtracting from the gross fee the amount of the fee
attributable to the previously existing use or improvement. A replacement of or
addition to an existing dwelling is not subject to a development impact fee.
   (c)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Subject to the conditions set forth in paragraphs (2) and (3) of
this subsection, the following shall be exempt from impact fees:
         (i)   facilities for assisted living programs, as defined in the
Health-General Article, § 19-1801, of the State Code;
         (ii)   hospice facilities, as defined in the Health-General Article, §
19-901(c), of the State Code;
         (iii)   hospitals, as defined in the Health-General Article, § 19-301
(f), of the State Code;
         (iv)   nursing homes, as defined in the Health-General Article, § 19-
1401(e), of the State Code;
         (v)   residential dwelling units, provided that the sale or rental of
the units is restricted to persons having a household income not exceeding 120
percent of the area median income, adjusted by household size, as defined by
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, or that the
units were constructed under a program that requires the homebuyers to
participate in the initial construction or rehabilitation of the units;
         (vi)   a fire station on property owned by a volunteer fire company
formed pursuant to §
12-1-201 of this Code;
         (vii)   facilities for Anne Arundel Community College on property
owned by or leased to Anne Arundel Community College; and
         (viii)   accessory dwelling units, provided that the accessory
dwelling unit is not constructed during the new construction of a principal
single-family detached dwelling.
      (2)   To be eligible for exemption under paragraph (1)(i) through (vi):
         (i)   a facility for an assisted living program, hospice facility,
hospital, nursing home, or a fire station on property owned by a volunteer fire
company formed pursuant to §
12-1-201 of this Code shall be owned and operated by an entity exempt from
taxation under § 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code that has been in existence
for at least three years preceding the date of application for the exemption
under paragraph (3); or
         (ii)   a residential dwelling unit was constructed by or under a
program sponsored by an entity exempt from taxation under § 501(c) of the
Internal Revenue Code that has been in existence for at least three years
preceding the date of application for the exemption under paragraph (3).
      (3)   A person seeking exemption under this subsection shall, upon
submission of an initial application for subdivision or submission of a site
development plan for review, complete an application for exemption supplied by
the Office of Planning and Zoning and provide any additional information the
Planning and Zoning Officer believes to be necessary to determine eligibility
for the exemption. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall notify the person of
a determination of eligibility in the letter approving a sketch plan for a
subdivision, a final plan for a minor subdivision, or recommending approval of
a building or grading permit for a site development plan.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 7-103) (Bill No. 50-87; Bill No. 96-01; Bill 71-08; Bill
No. 20-15; Bill No. 91-18; Bill No. 6-23)
§ 17-11-204. Computation of fees – Fee schedule.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided in §
17-11-206, the amount of the development impact fee shall be determined by the
fee schedules set forth in this section. As used in the fee schedules, "square
feet" refers to the finished area for residential development, and to floor
area for non-residential development.
   (b)   Impact fee schedule.
      (1)   On and after January 1, 2009, the development impact fee schedule,
subject to adjustment under §
17-11-212, shall be:
Development Type              Roads Schools Public Safety Total
Residential (by square foot):
Development Type                             Roads Schools Public Safety Total
Residential (by square foot):
Under 500 feet                               $252  $381    $17           $650
500 - 999 feet                               413   700     28            1,141
1,000 - 1,499 feet                           536   960     36            1,532
1,500 - 1,999 feet                           622   1,131   42            1,795
2,000 - 2,499 feet                           687   1,259   46            1,992
2,500 - 2,999 feet                           736   1,361   49            2,146
3,000 - 3,499 feet                           774   1,446   52            2,272
3,500 - 3,999 feet                           810   1,519   54            2,383
4,000 - 4,499 feet                           842   1,583   56            2,481
4,500 - 4,999 feet                           871   1,639   58            2,568
5,000 - 5,499 feet                           896   1,690   60            2,646
5,500 - 5,999 feet                           917   1,737   61            2,715
6,000 feet and over                          927   1,758   62            2,747
Non-residential:
Amusement, recreation, and place of assembly $177  $0      $7            $184
per required parking space
Hotel/motel room                             853   -0-     22            875
Industrial per 1,000 sq. ft.                 736   -0-     27            763
Mini-warehouse per 1,000 sq. ft.             121   -0-     6             127
For profit hospital per bed                  960   -0-     29            989
For profit nursing home per bed              214   -0-     23            237
Marinas per berth                            242   -0-     9             251
Office per 1,000 sq. ft.
   Under 100,000 sq. ft.                  1,190 -0-     65            1,255
   100,000 - 199,999 sq. ft.              1,031 -0-     58            1,089
   200,000 sq. ft. and over               918   -0-     53            971
Mercantile per 1,000 sq. ft.                 1,240 -0-     165           1,405
 
      (2)   On and after January 1, 2010, the development impact fee schedule,
subject to adjustment under §
17-11-212, shall be:
Development Type              Roads Schools Public Safety Total
Residential (by square foot):
Development Type                             Roads Schools Public Safety Total
Residential (by square foot):
Under 500 feet                               $504  $761    $34           $1,299
500 - 999 feet                               826   1,401   55            2,282
1,000 - 1,499 feet                           1,072 1,921   72            3,065
1,500 - 1,999 feet                           1,244 2,263   83            3,590
2,000 - 2,499 feet                           1,373 2,518   92            3,983
2,500 - 2,999 feet                           1,473 2,723   98            4,294
3,000 - 3,499 feet                           1,549 2,893   104           4,546
3,500 - 3,999 feet                           1,620 3,038   108           4,766
4,000 - 4,499 feet                           1,684 3,166   113           4,963
4,500 - 4,999 feet                           1,742 3,279   116           5,137
5,000 - 5,499 feet                           1,792 3,381   120           5,293
5,500 - 5,999 feet                           1,833 3,473   123           5,429
6,000 feet and over                          1,855 3,516   124           5,495
Non-residential:
Amusement, recreation, and place of assembly $354  $0      $14           $368
per required parking space
Hotel/motel room                             1,706 -0-     44            1,750
Industrial per 1,000 sq. ft.                 1,472 -0-     54            1,526
Mini-warehouse per 1,000 sq. ft.             242   -0-     12            254
For profit hospital per bed                  1,920 -0-     58            1,978
For profit nursing home per bed              427   -0-     47            474
Marinas per berth                            484   -0-     17            501
Office per 1,000 sq. ft.
   Under 100,000 sq. ft.                  2,380 -0-     130           2,510
   100,000 - 199,999 sq. ft.              2,062 -0-     116           2,178
   200,000 sq. ft. and over               1,836 -0-     106           1,942
Mercantile per 1,000 sq. ft.                 2,480 -0-     331           2,811
 
      (3)   On and after January 1, 2011, the development impact fee schedule,
subject to adjustment under §
17-11-212, shall be:
Development Type              Roads Schools Public Safety Total
Residential (by square foot):
Development Type                    Roads  Schools Public Safety Total
Residential (by square foot):
Under 500 feet                      $1,259 $1,903  $85           $3,247
500 - 999 feet                      2,065  3,502   138           5,705
1,000 - 1,499 feet                  2,681  4,802   180           7,663
1,500 - 1,999 feet                  3,111  5,657   208           8,976
2,000 - 2,499 feet                  3,433  6,296   229           9,958
2,500 - 2,999 feet                  3,682  6,807   246           10,735
3,000 - 3,499 feet                  3,872  7,232   259           11,363
3,500 - 3,999 feet                  4,050  7,596   271           11,917
4,000 - 4,499 feet                  4,211  7,915   282           12,408
4,500 - 4,999 feet                  4,355  8,197   291           12,843
5,000 - 5,499 feet                  4,479  8,452   299           13,230
5,500 - 5,999 feet                  4,583  8,683   307           13,573
6,000 feet and over                 4,637  8,791   310           13,738
Non-residential:
Amusement, recreation, and place of $886   $0      $35           $921
assembly per required parking space
Hotel/motel room                    4,266  -0-     109           4,375
Industrial per 1,000 sq. ft.        3,680  -0-     136           3,816
Mini-warehouse per 1,000 sq. ft.    606    -0-     30            636
For profit hospital per bed         4,801  -0-     144           4,945
For profit nursing home per bed     1,068  -0-     117           1,185
Marinas per berth                   1,210  -0-     43            1,253
Office per 1,000 sq. ft.
   Under 100,000 sq. ft.         5,951  -0-     290           6,276
   100,000 - 199,999 sq. ft.     5,154  -0-     325           5,444
   200,000 sq. ft. and over      4,589  -0-     266           4,855
Mercantile per 1,000 sq. ft.        6,200  -0-     827           7,027
 
   Editor's note – The impact fees on this schedule are adjusted in accordance
with the most recent 20- City Annual National Average Construction Cost Index
as required by §
17-11-212. The adjusted amounts are available at: https://www.aacounty.org/
impact-fees.
   (c)   Mixed use and fractional units. When an improvement to real property
consists of a development with mixed uses, the fee shall be computed by
calculating the space committed to the various land use types on the schedule.
If the development includes fractional units, the fee shall be computed to the
appropriate fraction.
   (d)   Fee schedule interpretation. If a feepayer is in doubt about which and
use types on the schedule apply to a development, the feepayer may request a
fee schedule interpretation from the Planning and Zoning Officer. The Planning
and Zoning Officer shall use the fee for the land use type most nearly
comparable to the development, and in determining the transportation fee shall
be guided by the report entitled "Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip
Generation, an Information Report" (Third Edition). If the Planning and Zoning
Officer determines that there is no comparable land use type for the proposed
development, the feepayer shall prepare an independent impact analysis pursuant
to §
17-11-205.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, §7-104) (Bill No. 50-87; Bill No. 96-01; Bill No. 71-088;
Bill No. 45-12)
§ 17-11-205. Computation of fees – Independent impact analysis.
   (a)   When allowed. An independent impact analysis shall be used to compute
the development impact fee if:
      (1)   the Planning and Zoning Officer determines that there is not a
comparable land use type for the development under §
17-11-204;
      (2)   the Planning and Zoning Officer requires it when the location,
intensity, or unusual nature of the use indicates that the impacts on public
school, transportation, or public safety facilities would be substantially
higher than the impacts assumed for purposes of the fee schedule in §
17-11-204; or
      (3)   the feepayer chooses to use an independent impact analysis.
   (b)   Feepayer responsibility for preparation of draft. The feepayer shall
be responsible for the preparation of the draft independent impact analysis and
the Planning and Zoning Officer shall accept, reject, or modify the draft
analysis.
   (c)   Document preparation. The person who prepares the draft independent
impact analysis shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning Officer on the
basis of professional training and experience in preparation of development
impact analyses. The independent impact analysis shall follow standard
methodologies and format and be approved by the Planning and Zoning Officer.
Prior to submission of the draft independent impact analysis, the feepayer
shall meet with the Planning and Zoning Officer to review the requirements for
the preparation of a draft independent impact analysis.
   (d)   Formulas and methodologies. In addition to the methodologies approved
by the Planning and Zoning Officer, the following formulas shall be used to
determine the development impact fee for schools, transportation, and public
safety unless the fee payer provides substantial competent evidence that an
alternative formula or methodology should be used:
      (1)   School Fee = SU x (C-SCG)
Where:
   SU   =   Student per unit
   C   =   Capital cost per student station
   SCG   =   State capital grant per student station
      (2)   Transportation Fee = (ATL x TR x NT x Cost) - MFC/LC x 2
Where:
   ATL   =   Average trip length
   TR   =   Daily trip generation rate
   NT   =   Percentage of new trips
   LC   =   Lane capacity at level of service D
   Cost   =   Per-lane mile construction and right-of-way cost
   MFC   =   Motor fuel credit
      (3)   Public Safety Fee = FP x TCI - (PTC + FTC)/PP
Where:
   FP   =   Functional population per land use type (the measure of demand for
services based on the allocation of Anne Arundel County population among
residential and nonresidential land uses)
   TCI   =   Total public safety capital improvement value
   PP   =   Peak population (which equals permanent residents, seasonal
population, and transient population)
   PTC   =   Credit amount for past tax payments
   FTC   =   Credit amount for future tax payments
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 7-105) (Bill No. 50-87; Bill No. 96-01)
§ 17-11-206. Payment of fee; lien against property; refund.
   (a)   When and to whom paid. Except as provided in §
17-11-207, the fee shall be paid to the Department of Inspections and Permits
before the issuance of a building permit for the improvement, a mobile home
park construction permit, or a zoning certificate of use for a change of use.
The amount of the fee shall be set as of the date of application for the permit
or zoning certificate of use. A permit or a zoning certificate of use may not
be issued until any applicable development impact fee has been paid.
   (b)   Commercial and industrial structures. For commercial and industrial
structures, the fee shall be paid for the initial building permit for the
primary structure. Subsequent building permits for tenant improvements shall
not be subject to the fee unless the land use type for which the tenant
improvement permit is sought is subject to a higher fee than the land use type
indicated when the initial permit was obtained. Any tenant improvement subject
to a higher fee shall pay only the difference between that higher fee and the
fee for the original land use.
   (c)   Collection. Development impact fees not paid when due shall be
collected as provided by §
1-8-101 of this Code.
   (d)   Refund upon building permit expiration. If a building permit expires
and construction under the permit has not commenced, the feepayer is entitled
to a refund of any development impact fee paid as a condition of the permit's
issuance and shall apply to the Department of Inspections and Permits for the
refund within 60 days of the expiration of the building permit. The County
shall retain 6% of the fee as an administrative fee to offset the costs of
collection and refund.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 7-106) (Bill No. 50-87; Bill No. 96-01; Bill No. 71-08)
§ 17-11-207. Credits.
   (a)   When allowed. Any conveyance of land or construction received and
accepted by the County or the County Board of Education from a developer,
including construction of a contract school by a developer or a developer’s
agent pursuant to an agreement with the Board of Education, may be credited
against the development impact fee due if the conveyance or construction meets
the same needs as the development impact fee in providing expanded capacity
over and above the requirements of this article. A developer of a regulated
development shall receive a credit against development impact fees as set forth
in this section. If the developer wishes to receive credit against the amount
of the development impact fee due, the developer shall enter into a written
Impact Fee Credit Agreement with the County. The Impact Fee Credit Agreement
shall provide for establishment of credits and the procedure and time allowed
for redemption of such credits. Development impact fee credits shall be claimed
and applied at the time development impact fees are required to be paid.
   (b)   Determination of value. The value of land conveyed by a developer and
accepted by the County for purposes of this section shall be determined by an
appraisal based on the fair market value of the land. The value of facilities
constructed by a developer and accepted by the County for purposes of this
section shall be established by the County. Construction shall be in accordance
with County and State design standards.
   (c)   Transportation impact fee credits. Transportation impact fee credits
shall be allowed for transportation improvements providing transportation
capacity over and above the adequate road facilities requirements for a
development project set forth in this article. The development providing the
capital improvements shall be allowed transportation impact fee credits in the
amount provided in the Transportation Impact Fee Credit Agreement. Credit may
not be given for site-related transportation improvements.
   (d)   Conveyance of land; credit for construction. Any land awarded credit
under this section shall be conveyed no later than the time at which
development impact fees are required to be paid. The portion of the development
impact fee represented by a credit for construction shall be deemed paid when
the construction is completed and accepted by the County for maintenance or
when adequate security for the completion of the construction has been
provided.
   (e)   School impact fee credits. In the event that a developer provides
capital improvements to create additional school capacity, including
construction of a contract school pursuant to a School Capacity Mitigation
Agreement provided for in §§
17-5-501 and
17-5-901(g), the developer shall be entitled to a school impact fee credit in
the amount provided in the School Impact Fee Credit Agreement. Credits may not
be given for capital improvements necessary to meet existing school capacity
deficiencies.
   (f)   Moderately priced dwelling units. A developer of a regulated
development shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees due that is equal
to the impact fees otherwise due for each moderately priced dwelling unit
provided, even if some or all of the moderately priced dwelling units are not
required under Title 12.
   (g)   Credits not assignable. Impact fee credits are not transferable or
assignable unless expressly permitted in an Impact Fee Credit Agreement. Unused
or unclaimed credits may not be refunded.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 7-107) (Bill No. 50-87; Bill No. 96-01; Bill No. 47-12;
Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-11-208. Impact fee special funds.
   There are three separate special funds, the Anne Arundel County
Transportation Impact Fee Special Fund, the Anne Arundel County School Impact
Fee Special Fund, and the Anne Arundel County Public Safety Impact Fee Special
Fund. Transportation impact fees, school impact fees, and public safety impact
fees collected under this subtitle shall be deposited in the appropriate
special fund to ensure that the fees and all interest accruing to the special
fund are designated for improvements reasonably attributable to new development
and are expended to reasonably benefit the new development.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 7-108) (Bill No. 50-87; Bill No. 96-01)
§ 17-11-209. Use of funds.
   (a)   Capital improvements. Except as set forth in subsection (g), all funds
collected from development impact fees shall be used solely for capital
improvements for expansion of the capacity of public schools, roads, and public
safety facilities and not for replacement, maintenance, or operations.
Expansion of the capacity of a road includes extensions, widening, intersection
improvements, upgrading signalization, improving pavement conditions, and all
other road and intersection capacity enhancement. Expansion of the capacity of
a public school includes all construction and remodeling to the extent that the
construction increases the capacity of the public schools. Expansion of the
capacity of public safety facilities includes the construction of new or
expanded police stations, fire stations, and headquarters buildings, expansion
and upgrading of communications equipment, and new additions to the inventories
of police patrol vehicles, fire fighting vehicles, and paramedic emergency
vehicles.
   (b)   Use.
      (1)   In this section, "used for" means used for payment in any manner,
including the repayment of:
         (i)   the principal on bonds sold to finance capital improvements;
         (ii)   the interest on bonds issued as part of a series of bonds
secured by a pledge of impact fees pursuant to a bond authorization ordinance;
and
         (iii)   the disbursal of impact fees collected after fiscal year 2002
from the Impact Fee Special Fund to the General Fund to compensate the General
Fund for the repayment of principal on bond indebtedness to the extent that the
proceeds of the bond indebtedness were used to finance an impact fee eligible
capital improvement or improvements in the district from which the impact fees
were collected, or another district pursuant to subsection (d), provided that:
            1.   for purposes of subparagraph(b)(1)(iii) of this subsection an
"impact fee eligible capital improvement" shall mean a capital improvement to
the extent that the Planning and Zoning Officer has determined that the capital
improvement expanded the capacity of public schools, transportation, or public
safety facilities to accommodate new development;
            2.   for purposes of subparagraph (b)(1)(iii) of this subsection,
"bond indebtedness" shall mean the obligation to repay bond proceeds used to
finance an impact fee eligible capital improvement; and
            3.   the useful life, as determined by the Office of Finance, of
the capital improvement or capital improvements that were financed through the
proceeds of bond indebtedness had not expired as of the time of payment of the
impact fees.
      (2)   The funds collected from the transportation impact fee shall be
used for the collector, arterial, principal arterial, and freeway road network
under the jurisdiction of the State, the County, or any incorporated
municipality within the County. The funds collected from the school impact fee
shall be used for the County public school system. The funds collected from the
public safety impact fee shall be used for capital improvements to the Anne
Arundel County Police and Fire Departments.
      (3)   Priority consideration for the use of funds collected from
development impact fees shall be given to the expansion of facilities in the
Odenton Town Center, the Parole Town Center, and the Glen Burnie Town Center
Enhancement Area designated by the Office.
   (c)   Districts. The school impact fee districts shall be as shown on the
school impact fee districts map, and the transportation impact fee districts
shall be as shown on the transportation impact fee districts maps as adopted by
the County Council. The school impact fee district map prepared by the Office
of Planning and Zoning and dated June 15, 1992, and the transportation impact
fee district maps prepared by the Office of Planning and Zoning and dated July
20, 1987, and May 8, 2009, are adopted as the development impact fee district
maps. The public safety impact fee district shall be the County as a whole.
   (d)   Use within district or outside district under certain circumstances.
Funds collected from development impact fees shall be used for capital
improvements within the development impact fee district from which they are
collected, so as to reasonably benefit the property against which the fees were
charged. Any road used as a boundary of a transportation impact fee district
may be considered to be within any district it bounds for purposes of using
transportation impact fees. Fees from one district may be used for capital
improvements in another district on a written finding by the Planning and
Zoning Officer that the capital improvements are a direct benefit to the
district from which the fees were collected. Development impact fees shall be
collected only within those districts as to which the fees are designated for
collection on the impact fee district maps.
   (e)   Reimbursement for excess payments. By written agreement, the County
and the feepayer may provide for reimbursement to the feepayer for any fees
advanced by the feepayer and paid in excess of that required by this title. The
County shall use the fees advanced to fund the costs of capital improvements
for public schools, roads, or public safety needed by new development.
Reimbursement of such fees may be made from development impact fees collected
subsequent to the agreement and from development that will reasonably benefit
from the capital improvements.
   (f)   Substitution for other funding source. The Budget Officer may
substitute development impact fees for one or more of the projected sources of
funding for a capital project that were identified for purposes of the capital
budget in accordance with §
4-11-102(c)(12) of this Code, unless such substitution specifically was
prohibited for the project by ordinance of the County Council. The Budge
Officer shall report the substitution to the County Controller and County
Auditor.
   (g)   Impact fee analysis. Funds collected from development impact fees and
deposited into any of the special funds described in §
17-11-208 may be used to fund studies and analyses required to determine the
appropriate amount of development impact fees.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 7-109) (Bill No. 50-87; Bill No. 58-92; Bill No. 96-01;
Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 27-07; Bill No. 85-09; Bill No. 9-12; Bill No. 45-12;
Bill No. 87-18; Bill No. 2-19; Bill No. 78-20; Bill No. 11-21; Bill No. 64-23;
Bill No. 84-23)
§ 17-11-210. Determination of expenditures and encumbrances of fees.
   (a)   Expenditures. An expenditure occurs when goods or services are
received and actual liabilities are incurred.
   (b)   Determination of expenditures. To determine whether impact fees
collected in an impact fee district have been expended by the end of the sixth
fiscal year following collection, the Controller shall:
      (1)   identify each capital project in the district that is eligible for
impact fee use; and
      (2)   determine the amount of impact fees disbursed from the impact fee
special fund to the capital projects fund to pay the costs of the capital
project, as recorded in the general ledger of the County or the Board of
Education.
   (c)   Amount of expenditures. The total amount of impact fees collected in
an impact fee district that has been expended by the end of the sixth fiscal
year following collection is the sum of the amounts calculated in accordance
with subsection (b)(2).
   (d)   Encumbrances. An encumbrance occurs when a contract is executed or a
purchase order issued, and the amount of the contract or purchase order is
recorded in the general ledger of the County or the Board of Education.
   (e)   Calculation of encumbrances eligible for impact fee use. To determine
whether impact fees collected in an impact fee district are encumbered by the
end of the sixth fiscal year following collection, the Controller shall:
      (1)   identify each capital project in the district that is eligible for
impact fee use;
      (2)   determine the encumbrances for the capital project as recorded in
the general ledger of the County or the Board of Education;
      (3)   calculate the maximum amount of appropriations eligible for impact
fee use by multiplying the total amount of appropriations for the capital
project by the percentage of the capital project that is eligible for impact
fee use as determined by the Planning and Zoning Officer; and
      (4)   subtract the expenditures for the capital project determined in
accordance with subsection (b)(2) from the maximum amount of appropriations
eligible for impact fee use calculated in accordance with paragraph (3).
   (f)   Amount of encumbrances.
      (1)   If the amount calculated in accordance with subsection (e)(4) is $0
or less, no impact fees are encumbered for the capital project.
      (2)   If the amount calculated in accordance with subsection (e)(4) is
greater than $0, the amount of impact fees encumbered for the capital project
is the lesser of the amount calculated in accordance with subsection (e)(4) or
the encumbrances determined in accordance with subsection (e)(2).
      (3)   The total amount of impact fees collected in an impact fee district
that is encumbered by the end of the sixth fiscal year following collection is
the sum of the amounts calculated in accordance with paragraph (2).
(Bill No. 27-07; Bill No. 71-08)
§ 17-11-211. Review of fee schedule, fee collection, and district boundaries;
reports.
   (a)   Annual review. Annually, the Planning and Zoning Officer shall review
the boundaries of the school impact fee districts and the transportation impact
fee districts. The Planning and Zoning Officer may propose amendments to the
boundaries for the purpose of redesignating the districts for the collection
and non-collection of development impact fees. All proposals shall be submitted
to the Planning Advisory Board for review. Following a public hearing, the
Board shall make advisory recommendations to the County Executive and County
Council.
   (b)   Review of impact fee schedule. On or before January 15, 2012, and
every three years thereafter, the Planning and Zoning Officer shall review the
development impact fee schedule, considering new data and technical information
such as changes in costs, revenues, student generation rates, trip generation
rates, trip lengths, and other relevant factors, and issue a report to the
County Executive. If the County Executive proposes amendments to the schedule,
the proposed amendments shall be submitted to the Planning Advisory Board for
review. Following a public hearing, the Board shall make advisory
recommendations to the County Executive and the County Council.
   (c)   Amendments. Following receipt of recommendations from the Planning
Advisory Board, the County Executive may submit to the County Council
amendments to the fee schedule, alterations of district boundaries, and
redesignations of districts. The County Council may amend the fee schedule,
alter district boundaries, and redesignate districts for collection or
noncollection, as the County Council considers appropriate.
   (d)   Budget Officer's quarterly report. On a quarterly basis, the Budget
Officer shall report to the County Council on the collection and disbursement
of development impact fees.
   (e)   Yearly reports to the Planning Advisory Board. Along with submission
of the capital budget to the Planning Advisory Board each year, the Planning
and Zoning Officer shall submit a report to the Planning Advisory Board that
includes the following:
      (1)   for existing projects that utilize development impact fees, any
recommended changes to the amount; and
      (2)   for new projects that may utilize development fees, a description
of the project, the total budget for the project, and the amount of the
development impact fees proposed to be utilized.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 7-111) (Bill No. 50-87; Bill No. 18-94; Bill No. 20-00;
Bill No. 96-01; Bill No. 71-08; Bill No. 45-12)
§ 17-11-212. Review and automatic adjustment of fees.
   (a)   Yearly adjustment. Prior to each fiscal year, the Controller shall
adjust all development impact fees set forth in this title based on the
methodology set forth in subsection (b).
   (b)   Methodology. The base for computing an adjustment is the most recent
20-City Annual National Average Construction Cost Index from the Engineering
News-Record (ENR). The initial index to be referenced is January, 2008. All
fees shall be adjusted by the percent change in the index rounded to the
nearest dollar, and the adjustments automatically shall be effective on the
first day of July for each fiscal year.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 7-112) (Bill No. 50-87; Bill No. 31-91; Bill No. 96-01;
Bill No. 71-08; Bill No. 45-12)
§ 17-11-213. State impact fee enabling legislation.
   (a)   By ordinance enacted by the County Council, and subject to any
applicable express prohibition in the Anne Arundel County Charter, the County
may fix, impose, and collect development impact fees for financing, in whole or
in part, the capital costs of additional or expanded public works,
improvements, and facilities required to accommodate new construction or
development.
   (b)   (1)   By ordinance enacted by the County Council, the County may grant
exemptions from or credits against development impact fees for development by
not-for-profit entities that have been in existence for at least 3 years.
      (2)   The ordinance shall:
         (i)   set the amount of the exemptions or credits;
         (ii)   establish the conditions of eligibility for the exemptions or
credits; and
         (iii)   adopt procedures for applying for the exemptions or credits.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, § 7-113) (Bill No. 96-01; Bill No. 71-08; Bill No. 45-12)
Editor's note – This section was added to the public local laws of Maryland
(Article 2 - Anne Arundel County) by 1986 Md. Laws, Ch. 350, § 1. This section
was added as § 13-900 in the 1967 Code and recodified as Article 24, § 7-113 in
the 1985 Code. Section 2 of the Act reads, in part: "The Anne Arundel County
Administration shall submit to the Anne Arundel County Delegation of the
General Assembly an annual written report concerning the implementation and
effect of this Act. The report shall be submitted on or before commencement of
the regular legislative session for 1989, and 1990."
Editor's note – Subsection (b) was enacted by the General Assembly of Maryland
by House Bill 515, effective October 1, 2008. House Bill 515 referred to § 17-
11-215, but because of the repeal of § 17-11-210 in 2008 by Bill No. 71-08, §
17-11-215 was renumbered as § 17-11-214. Section 17-11-211 was subsequently
repealed in 2012 by Bill No. 45-12, resulting in § 17-11-214 being renumbered
as §
17-11-213.
SUBTITLE 3. DEVELOPER STREET LIGHT FEE
§ 17-11-301. Street lighting and fees.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following terms have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   "Installer" means the person who installs street lighting in a
development at the direction of the Department of Public Works.
      (2)   "Street lighting" means the components necessary to provide
lighting to public or private roads or streets, and includes poles, cables,
wiring, transformers, and fixtures.
   (b)   Street lighting – Installation. Street lighting shall be provided in a
development and shall be of a design submitted by a developer and approved by
the Office. Street lighting shall be placed in a location approved by the
Department of Public Works at the expense of the developer. The Department of
Public Works shall be responsible for arranging for the purchase, construction,
and installation of street lighting in a development.
   (c)   Same – Purchase, construction, and installation fees. A developer
shall pay a fee in the amount of the estimated costs of the purchase,
construction, and installation of street lighting approved for a development,
based on the installer's rates and charges in effect at the time of payment in
accordance with the Public Utilities Article, §§ 4-201 et seq., of the State
Code, and the fee shall include the County's overhead and administrative costs.
The fee paid by a developer in accordance with this section shall be placed
into the Developer Street Light Special Fund and used in accordance with §
4-11-120 of this Code.
   (d)   Same – Energy and maintenance fees. A developer shall pay a fee in the
amount of the estimated costs for two years of energy and maintenance for
street lighting, based on rates and charges in effect at the time of payment in
accordance with the Public Utilities Article, §§ 4-201 et seq. of the State
Code.
   (e)   Same – Timing of payment. The Department of Public Works shall provide
a developer with the amount of the fees required to be paid in accordance with
subsections (c) and (d) and payment shall be made by the developer at the time
that a public works agreement is executed.
(Bill No. 104-13)
TITLE 12. MODERATELY PRICED DWELLING UNITS
Section
   
17-12-101.   Definitions.
   
17-12-102.   Applicability.
   
17-12-103.   Establishment of moderately priced dwelling units.
   
17-12-104.   Application and agreement.
   
17-12-105.   Contribution in lieu of developing moderately priced dwelling
units.
   
17-12-106.   Eligibility to purchase or rent a moderately priced dwelling unit.
   
17-12-107.   Establishment of initial sales price and initial sale of
moderately priced dwelling units.
   
17-12-108.   Resale of moderately priced dwelling units.
   
17-12-109.   Rental of moderately priced dwelling units.
   
17-12-110.   Foreclosure.
   
17-12-111.   Notice to purchasers of or lenders for a moderately priced
dwelling unit.
   
17-12-112.   Bulk transfers.
   
17-12-113.   Conversion to condominium or cooperative.
   
17-12-114.   Waiver.
   
17-12-115.   Appeal.
   
17-12-116.   Report.
§ 17-12-101. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   “Administrator” means the community service entity with which the
County has an agreement pursuant to §
3-10-102 of this Code to administer the moderately priced dwelling unit program
for the County as provided in this title.
      (2)   “Applicant” means a person or entity that submits an application to
develop:
         (i)   10 or more dwelling units at one location in one or more
developments or redevelopments, parts of developments or redevelopments, or
phases of developments or redevelopments; or
         (ii)   9 or less dwelling units at one location in one or more
developments or redevelopments, parts of developments or redevelopments, or
phases of developments or redevelopments if the person or entity voluntarily
subjects the development or redevelopment to the terms of this title.
      (3)   “BMSA” means the Baltimore Metropolitan Statistical Area.
      (4)   “Certificate of eligibility” means a certificate provided to an
eligible person that indicates the person meets the eligibility requirements of
§
17-12-106.
      (5)   “Closing costs” means statutory charges for transferring title,
fees for obtaining necessary financing, title examination fees, title insurance
premiums, house location survey charges, and fees for preparation of loan
documents and deed of conveyance.
      (6)   “Consumer Price Index” means the latest published version of the
Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) of the U.S. Department of
Labor for the Baltimore Metropolitan Statistical Area, or any similar index
selected by the Administrator.
      (7)   “Control period” means:
         (i)   for units intended for ownership, a 20-year period commencing on
the date of original sale in which a moderately priced dwelling unit is subject
to either resale price controls or owner occupancy requirements provided in
this title; and
         (ii)   for units intended for rental, a 40-year period commencing on
the date of original rental in which a moderately priced dwelling unit is
subject to either maximum rental limits or rental occupancy requirements
provided in this title.
      (8)   “Date of original sale” means the date of settlement for the
initial purchase of a moderately priced dwelling unit.
      (9)   “Date of original rental” means the effective date of the first
lease agreement for a moderately priced dwelling unit.
      (10)   “Dwelling unit” has the meaning stated in §
18-1-101 of this Code.
      (11)   “Eligible household” means a household whose income qualifies the
household to participate in the moderately priced dwelling unit program, and
who holds a valid certificate of eligibility from the Administrator that
entitles the household to buy or rent a moderately priced dwelling unit.
      (12)   “Gross household income” means the salaries, interest on savings
and checking accounts, social security benefits, unemployment insurance,
pension and retirement benefits, disability benefits, income from real estate
or other investments, and income from business entities or partnerships of all
adults over 18 years of age that reside in a household.
      (13)   “Household” means the individuals who intend to live together in a
moderately priced dwelling unit.
      (14)   “Housing Trust Special Revenue Fund” means the fund established
under §
4-11-124 of this Code.
      (15)   “Market rate unit” means a dwelling unit in a regulated
development other than a moderately priced dwelling unit.
      (16)   “Moderately priced dwelling unit” means a dwelling unit in a
regulated development that is offered for sale or rent to eligible households
through the Administrator in accordance with the requirements of this title.
      (17)   “Regulated development” means development subject to §
17-12-102.
      (18)   “Single-family detached dwelling” has the meaning stated in §
18-1-101 of this Code.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-102. Applicability.
   (a)   Applicability. Except as provided in subsection (b), this title
applies to:
      (1)   a development with a residential component, that permits the
construction of a total of 10 or more dwelling units;
      (2)   rehabilitation of an existing multifamily residential structure
that increases the number of dwelling units in the structure by a total of 10
or more dwelling units;
      (3)   conversion of a rental property to a condominium or cooperative
that increases the number of dwelling units by a total of 10 or more dwelling
units;
      (4)   a development that will change the use of an existing building from
a non-residential use to a residential use that will contain a total of 10 or
more dwelling units; and
      (5)   a development containing fewer than 10 dwelling units that an
applicant voluntarily subjects to the terms of this title.
   (b)   Exceptions. This title does not apply to:
      (1)   a development in the RA or RLD zoning district;
      (2)   a development that:
         (i)   is financed under local, State, or federal financing programs,
including the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
programs, Maryland Community Development Administration rental programs, and
low income housing tax credits; and
         (ii)   provides an equal or greater number of income-restricted
affordable units than would be required by this title;
      (3)   a development financed or developed by Arundel Community
Development Services, Inc. that provides an equal or greater number of income-
restricted affordable units than would be required by this title;
      (4)   workforce housing under Title 10 of Article 18 of this Code; and
      (5)   housing for elderly of moderate means under Title 10 of Article 18
of this Code.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-103. Establishment of moderately priced dwelling units.
   (a)   Ten to nineteen dwelling units. If a regulated development will
contain not less than 10 nor more than 19 dwelling units, an applicant shall
either:
      (1)   make a contribution to the Housing Trust Special Revenue Fund if
permitted by and in accordance with §
17-12-105; or
      (2)   designate not less than 10% of dwelling units offered for sale and
not less than 15% of dwelling units offered for rental in the development as
moderately priced dwelling units that meet the requirements of this title.
   (b)   Twenty or more dwelling units. If a regulated development will contain
20 or more dwelling units, an applicant shall designate not less than 10% of
dwelling units offered for sale and not less than 15% of dwelling units offered
for rental in the development as moderately priced dwelling units that meet the
requirements of this title.
   (c)   Fractional units. When the application of the percentages set forth in
subsections (a) and (b) result in a fractional unit of less than 0.50%, the
result shall be rounded down to the next whole number, and when the result is a
fractional unit of 0.50% or more, the result shall be rounded up to the next
whole number.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-104. Application and agreement.
   (a)   Requirements. A development plan required by this article may not be
approved and a building permit may not be issued unless the requirements of
this title are met.
   (b)   Agreement. Before a regulated development that will contain moderately
priced dwelling units or that is required to include moderately priced dwelling
units may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Officer, an applicant shall
enter into an agreement with the County or the Administrator, in a form
approved by the County, that:
      (1)   requires a specific number of moderately priced dwelling units to
be constructed on a time schedule approved by the Planning and Zoning Officer;
      (2)   requires each single-family moderately priced dwelling unit to have
two or more bedrooms;
      (3)   requires that the number of efficiency and one-bedroom moderately
priced dwelling units in a regulated development of multifamily dwelling units
may not exceed the ratio that market rate efficiency and one-bedroom units
respectively bear to the total number of market rate units in the development;
      (4)   details the number, type, location, and sequencing plan for all of
the moderately priced dwelling units;
      (5)   requires the moderately priced dwelling units meet design standards
established by the County or the Administrator;
      (6)   requires compliance with the requirements of this title and the
agreement for the control period;
      (7)   runs with the land until the control period ends;
      (8)   contains any other information or conditions the Planning and
Zoning Officer determines to be necessary to ensure the applicant’s compliance
with this title; and
      (9)   is noted on the final subdivision plat and recorded in the land
records of the County.
   (c)   Types of units.
      (1)   Moderately priced dwelling units offered for sale in a regulated
development may be the types as permitted in the underlying zoning district.
      (2)   The requirement for moderately priced dwelling units to be offered
for sale may not be satisfied by provision of moderately priced dwelling unit
to be offered for rent.
   (d)   Bulk regulations. The applicant shall comply with applicable bulk
regulations.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-105. Contribution in lieu of developing moderately priced dwelling
units.
   (a)   When allowed. In exceptional circumstances, the Planning and Zoning
Officer may permit an applicant that is developing or redeveloping a
subdivision, in whole, in part, or in phases, of not less than 10 nor more than
19 lots to make a contribution to the Housing Trust Special Revenue Fund in
lieu of developing moderately priced dwelling units.
   (b)   Requirements. An applicant shall:
      (1)   apply to the Planning and Zoning Officer for permission to make a
contribution authorized by subsection (a);
      (2)   provide any information or documents that the Planning and Zoning
Officer deems necessary to determine whether to grant permission; and
      (3)   prove to the satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning Officer, after
consultation with and recommendation by the Administrator, that exceptional
circumstances exist.
   (c)   Definition of “exceptional circumstances”. For the purposes of this
section, exceptional circumstances means:
      (1)   in a proposed development, the cost of an individual package of
resident services and facilities to be provided to all households would likely
make the moderately priced dwelling units effectively unaffordable to eligible
households; or
      (2)   compliance with the requirements of this title would result in the
applicant being unable to secure a reasonable return from or make any
reasonable use of the property, and the hardship is unique to the property, is
not due to the zoning classification of the property, and is not the result of
the applicant’s own actions.
   (d)   Amount of contribution. The contribution by an applicant pursuant to
subsection (a) or §
17-12-103(a)(1) shall be as follows:
      (1)   for moderately priced dwelling units that would be offered for
sale, 2.5% of the average sales price of all units in the development for each
required moderately priced dwelling unit; and
      (2)   for moderately priced dwelling units that would be offered for
rent, either:
         (i)   the difference between the actual annual rental income for a
comparable market rate unit in the development and the maximum annual rental
amount permitted by this title for each year of the 40-year control period,
paid by December 31 of each year; or
         (ii)   if approved by the Administrator, a single payment that is
equivalent to the total amount due under subparagraph (i) on a present value
basis.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-106. Eligibility to purchase or rent a moderately priced dwelling unit.
   (a)   Application. Households seeking to purchase or rent a moderately
priced dwelling unit shall:
      (1)   apply for a certificate of eligibility by submitting to the
Administrator a fully completed application on a form provided by the
Administrator;
      (2)   provide proof that:
         (i)   for moderately priced dwelling units offered for rent, the
household income does not exceed 75% of the median income adjusted for
household size for the BMSA; and
         (ii)   for moderately priced dwelling units offered for sale, the
household income does not exceed 100% of the median income adjusted for
household size for the BMSA;
      (3)   if seeking to purchase a moderately priced dwelling unit, provide
proof that the household is able to qualify for and obtain financing;
      (4)   provide proof that at least one adult member of the household is a
resident of the County or employed in the County for at least six months prior
to the date of the application;
      (5)   except when waived by the Administrator for good cause, provide
proof that no adult member of the household has owned any residential real
estate during the three-year period prior to application; and
      (6)   certify that the household intends to occupy the moderately priced
dwelling unit as a primary residence and will not lease or sublease the
moderately priced dwelling unit to any other person or entity.
   (b)   Certificate of eligibility. Households that meet the requirements of
subsection (a) shall be given a certificate of eligibility that will be valid
for three years. Eligibility shall be reviewed within 60 days before a sale or
rental of a moderately priced dwelling unit to ensure that income eligibility
guidelines continue to be met.
   (c)   Waiting list. In the event there are more eligible households that
wish to purchase or rent a moderately priced dwelling unit than there are
available units, the Administrator shall establish a waiting list from which
eligible households shall be selected and notified.
   (d)   Adjustment of income requirements. If there are no eligible households
on the waiting list, the Administrator may adjust the income requirements for
eligibility under subsection (a)(2).
   (e)   Renewal of certificate of eligibility. Prior to the expiration of a
certificate of eligibility, an eligible household may have the certificate of
eligibility renewed for an additional one year if the eligible household proves
to the satisfaction of the Administrator that the eligible household still
meets the requirements of subsection (a).
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-107. Establishment of initial sales price and initial sale of
moderately priced dwelling units.
   (a)   Sales price. The initial sales price of the moderately priced dwelling
units:
      (1)   shall be set annually by the Administrator within 30 days of the
publication of the updated information for the BMSA, and may be adjusted by the
Administrator one time during that year if the Administrator determines that
market conditions warrant an adjustment;
      (2)   shall take into consideration the items identified in subsection
(b); and
      (3)   may not exceed the price that a household earning 80% of the median
income for a household of four for the BMSA can afford.
   (b)   Factors. In setting the initial sales price of a moderately priced
dwelling unit, the Administrator shall consider:
      (1)   the type of dwelling unit;
      (2)   the number of square feet in the dwelling unit;
      (3)   the number of bedrooms and bathrooms; and
      (4)   affordability based on area median income and market conditions.
   (c)   Notice of availability of unit. The applicant developing moderately
priced dwelling units shall promptly notify the Administrator when a moderately
priced dwelling unit is initially available for sale.
   (d)   Contents of notice. The notice by the applicant shall:
      (1)   set forth the number, size, price, and location of units offered;
      (2)   provide the anticipated timing for the completion of construction;
      (3)   provide the information specified in subsection (b);
      (4)   include a copy of the approved final development plan and plat; and
      (5)   include any other information the Administrator deems necessary.
   (e)   Listing of unit. The applicant shall list the moderately priced
dwelling unit for sale in the same manner as a market rate unit.
   (f)   Sale of unit. The applicant shall sell the moderately priced dwelling
unit to an eligible household at the top of the waiting list described in §
17-12-106(c), and as may have been adjusted in accordance with §
17-12-106(d).
   (g)   No eligible household.
      (1)   If there are no eligible households willing or able to purchase a
moderately priced dwelling unit, Arundel Community Development Services, Inc.
and the Housing Commission of Anne Arundel County shall have the first option
to purchase the unit for use in their programs or in programs administered by
them.
      (2)   If Arundel Community Development Services, Inc. or the Housing
Commission of Anne Arundel County do not purchase the unit, the applicant may
sell the moderately priced dwelling unit to a household that is not eligible,
provided the purchaser complies with the requirements of this title that an
eligible household would have to comply with after purchase of a moderately
priced dwelling unit for the control period.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-108. Resale of moderately priced dwelling units.
   (a)   Applicability. This section does not apply to foreclosure proceedings.
   (b)   Resale. If a moderately priced dwelling unit is offered for resale
during the control period:
      (1)   Arundel Community Development Services, inc. and the Housing
Commission of Anne Arundel County shall have the first option to purchase the
unit for use in their programs or in programs administered by them;
      (2)   if Arundel Community Development Services, Inc. or the Housing
Commission of Anne Arundel County does not purchase the moderately priced
dwelling unit, then the owner shall sell the moderately priced dwelling unit to
an eligible household; and
      (3)   if there are no eligible households willing or able to purchase the
unit, the unit may be sold to a household that is not eligible provided that
the purchaser complies with the requirements of this title that an eligible
household would have to comply with after purchase of a moderately priced
dwelling unit for the remainder of the control period.
   (c)   Resale price. The resale price of a moderately priced dwelling unit
for sale during the control period shall be equal to the prior sale price plus:
      (1)   a percentage of the moderately priced dwelling unit’s sale price
equal to the increase in the cost of living, calculated using the Consumer
Price Index, between the dates of ownership;
      (2)   the fair market value of improvements made to the unit during the
dates of ownership; and
      (3)   a reasonable sales commission, if paid by the seller.
   (d)   Adjustment of resale price. The resale price of a moderately priced
dwelling unit may be reduced by the Administrator to reflect abnormal wear and
tear because of neglect, abuse, or insufficient maintenance.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-109. Rental of moderately priced dwelling units.
   (a)   Rental rate. The rental rate for a moderately priced dwelling unit:
      (1)   shall be set annually by the Administrator within 30 days of the
publication of the updated information for the BMSA and may be adjusted by the
Administrator one time during that year if the Administrator determines that
market conditions warrant an adjustment;
      (2)   shall take into consideration the items identified in subsection
(b); and
      (3)   may not exceed the rate that a household earning 75% of the median
income for a household of four in the BMSA can afford.
   (b)   Factors. In setting the rental rate, the Administrator shall consider:
      (1)   the type of dwelling unit;
      (2)   the number of square feet in the dwelling unit; and
      (3)   the number of bedrooms and bathrooms.
   (c)   Review of rental rates.
      (1)   The Administrator shall annually review income eligibility and
rental rates for compliance.
      (2)   A household whose income increases over 75% of the median income
adjusted for household size in the BMSA while renting a moderately priced
dwelling unit may continue to reside in the unit and renew its lease until the
end of a lease term during which the household income exceeds 120% of the
median income adjusted for household size in the BMSA. When the dwelling unit
is vacated, it will be offered for rent to an eligible household.
   (d)   Advertising and marketing of moderately priced dwelling units. A
landlord shall advertise and market a moderately priced dwelling unit in the
same manner as the landlord advertises and markets market rate units that are
within the same development.
   (e)   Lease term. The term for each lease of a moderately priced dwelling
unit may not exceed one year, but may be subject to renewals.
   (f)   Information to be provided. Landlords shall provide to the
Administrator copies of all approved lease applications, leases, lease
renewals, income certifications, and rent increase notices for all moderately
priced dwelling units.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-110. Foreclosure.
   (a)   Notice. A party intending to initiate a foreclosure proceeding related
to a moderately priced dwelling unit shall notify the Administrator of the
pending action at least 30 days prior to filing the action, and the
Administrator shall have the right to cure the default and stay acceleration of
the note or other instrument.
   (b)   Proceeds of foreclosure sale – dwelling unit. If a moderately priced
dwelling unit is sold at foreclosure during the control period the covenants
required under this title shall be released, and the amount of the foreclosure
sales price that exceeds the price established under §
17-12-107 or §
17-12-108, after satisfaction of any liens recorded against the property, and
reasonable expenses of foreclosure, as approved by the Administrator, shall be
paid to the County and deposited into the Housing Trust Special Revenue Fund.
   (c)   Proceeds of foreclosure sale – rental complex. If a rental complex
consisting of moderately priced dwelling units that are rental units is sold at
foreclosure during the control period, the covenants required under this title
shall be released and the amount of the sales price that exceeds the fair
market value of the rental complex on the date of original rental for the first
unit rented in the complex, after satisfaction of any liens recorded against
the property, and reasonable expenses of foreclosure, as approved by the
Administrator, shall be paid to the County and deposited into the Housing Trust
Special Revenue Fund.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-111. Notice to purchasers of or lenders for a moderately priced
dwelling unit.
   (a)   Covenant required – for sale dwelling unit. During the control period,
any deed, mortgage, or deed of trust conveying a moderately priced dwelling
unit or an interest in a moderately priced dwelling unit shall contain a
covenant running with the land declaring that use, resale, and foreclosure of
the unit is subject to the requirements of this title and that the
Administrator shall have the right to enforce the covenant.
   (b)   Covenant required – rental complex. Prior to the initial rental of a
moderately priced dwelling unit in a rental complex, each lender whose lien is
secured by one or more moderately priced dwelling units that will be utilized
as rental units shall provide the Administrator with satisfactory proof that
runs with the land for the control period and that has been recorded in the
land records of the County, that any use of each moderately priced dwelling
unit and any foreclosure of any lien will be subject to the requirements of
this title and that the Administrator shall have the right to enforce this
obligation.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-112. Bulk transfers.
   This title does not prohibit the bulk transfer or sale of all or some of the
moderately priced dwelling units during the control period so long as the buyer
is bound by the requirements of this title.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-113. Conversion to condominium or cooperative.
   (a)   Effect of conversion. If all or part of a rental complex that contains
moderately priced dwelling units is converted to a condominium or cooperative,
the requirements of this title that pertain to the sale of individual
moderately priced dwelling units shall apply.
   (b)   Date of original sale. For the purposes of a sale under subsection
(a), the date of original rental shall be considered the date of original sale.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-114. Waiver.
   The Administrator may waive the requirements of this title pertaining to the
resale of moderately priced dwelling units or the establishment of rental rates
if the requirements conflict with the regulations of federal or State housing
programs and will prevent eligible households from buying or renting moderately
priced dwelling units.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-115. Appeal.
   A person aggrieved by a final decision of the Administrator or the Planning
and Zoning Officer may appeal the decision to the County Board of Appeals.
(Bill No. 72-24)
§ 17-12-116. Report.
   On or before July 1, 2028, and every 3 years thereafter, the Administrator
shall report to the County Executive and County Council on the moderately
priced dwelling unit program, including:
      (1)   the total number of moderately priced dwelling units created during
the reporting period itemized by:
         (i)   the number of units offered for rent;
         (ii)   the number of units offered for sale;
         (iii)   the dwelling unit type; and
         (iv)   the size of the unit measured by the number of bedrooms;
      (2)   the amount of contributions to the Housing Trust Special Revenue
Fund in accordance with this title made during the reporting period;
      (3)   the initial sale price, including any adjustments, for moderately
priced dwelling units established during the reporting period;
      (4)   the rental rate, including any adjustments, for moderately priced
dwelling units established during the reporting period;
      (5)   the income eligibility requirements, including any adjustments, to
purchase or rent a moderately priced dwelling unit established during the
reporting period; and
      (6)   the number of households on the waiting list described under §
17-12-106(c) during the reporting period.
(Bill No. 72-24)
ARTICLE 18. ZONING
   Title
      
1.   DEFINITIONS
      
2.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
3.   PARKING, OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND SIGNAGE
      
4.   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
      
5.   COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
      
6.   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
      
7.   MARITIME DISTRICTS
      
8.   MIXED USE DISTRICTS
      
9.   OTHER ZONING DISTRICTS
      
10.   REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDITIONAL USES
      
11.   REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
      
12.   SPECIAL USES
      
13.   CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY
      
14.   OTHER OVERLAYS
      
15.   NONCONFORMING USES
      
16.   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
      
17.   ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
      
18.   FEES
      
APPENDIX A – MAPS
TITLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Section
   
18-1-101.   Definitions.
§ 18-1-101. Definitions.
   Unless defined in this article, the Natural Resources Article of the State
Code, or COMAR, words defined elsewhere in this Code apply in this article. The
following words have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   "Accessory" means a use or structure that customarily is incidental
and subordinate to another use or structure.
      (2)   "Adult bookstore" means a commercial establishment that has a
significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade in, derives a
significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or
substantial portion of its interior business or advertising from, or maintains
a significant or substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale
or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:
         (i)   books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, movies, videotapes, cassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations that are characterized by their emphasis upon
display of sexual activities; or
         (ii)   instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use or
marketed primarily for sexual activities.
For purposes of this definition, "sexual activities" means sadomasochistic
abuse, sexual conduct, or sexual excitement, as those terms are defined in the
Criminal Law Article, § 11-101, of the State Code.
      (3)   "Adult day care center" has the meaning stated in the Health-
General Article, § 24-701, of the State Code.
      (4)   "Adult movie theater" means a commercial establishment, including
an adult film arcade with display devices, that regularly and routinely offers
for viewing on the premises films, videos, or similar material characterized by
an emphasis upon display of sexual activities, but the term does not include a
hotel, motel, or similar place of accommodation that offers such films, videos,
or similar material for viewing by guests in their rooms. For purposes of this
definition:
         (i)   "Adult film arcade" means a commercial establishment that
contains display devices for viewing films, videos, or similar material in
viewing booths on the premises if a significant or substantial portion of the
films, videos, or similar material available for viewing is characterized by an
emphasis upon display of sexual activities;
         (ii)   "Display device" means an electronically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machine, film projector, videotape player,
DVD player, or other image-producing device that is activated by or at the
request of a customer in return for money or any other form of consideration;
         (iii)   "Sexual activities" means sadomasochistic abuse, sexual
conduct, or sexual excitement, as those terms are defined in the Criminal Law
Article, § 11-101, of the State Code; and
         (iv)   "Viewing booth" means an enclosed or partially enclosed area
for use by customers to view films, videos, or similar material by means of a
display device.
      (5)   "Aggregate net energy facility" means an industrial scale,
renewable energy generating facility that uses energy from the sun to produce
electricity and that operates as a principal use to supply electricity
generated at that location to one or more pre-specified locations, and is
regulated by Maryland net metering rules and utility tariffs.
      (6)   “Aggregation” or “aggregated”, with respect to agritourism and
farming, means gathering and selling agricultural products from multiple farm
sources to create a larger and more consistent supply to meet consumer demand.
      (7)   “Agricultural heritage site” means a property listed on the County
Inventory of Historic Resources that is determined by the Planning and Zoning
Officer to be historically significant for its contribution to the agricultural
history of the County.
      (8)   “Agritourism” means a business enterprise on a farm related to
agriculture or natural resources that is offered to the public or invited
groups. Agritourism shall be accessory to a principal use of farming and shall
be located on land that qualifies for an agricultural use assessment pursuant
to the Tax-Property Article, § 8-209 of the State Code or that is covered by a
current and active soil conservation and water quality plan approved by the
Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District. Agritourism includes fishing; wildlife
study; corn mazes; pumpkin patches; harvest festivals; field trips; hayrides;
pick-your-own operations; farm tours; food services, including commercial
kitchens for preparation of value-added products and service of farm to table
meals; aggregation; farm museums; educational classes; and other activities or
events related to agriculture, historical, cultural, or natural resources,
agricultural products, or agricultural skills.
      (9)   “Airfield” or “airport” means a facility for the takeoff, landing,
fueling, and housing of aircraft, the discharging and receiving of passengers
and cargo from or to the aircraft, and the provision of shelter and
conveniences for passengers.
      (10)   “Animal hospital” or “veterinary clinic” means a structure used by
a licensed veterinarian for the practice of veterinary medicine and may include
the sale of pet supplies and the boarding and grooming of animals to the extent
necessary to the practice of veterinary medicine.
      (11)   “Animal hospital with non-medical overnight stays” or “veterinary
clinic with non-medical overnight stays” means a structure used by a licensed
veterinarian for the practice of veterinary medicine and may include the sale
of pet supplies and grooming, in addition to boarding for non-medical purposes.
      (12)   “Antenna structure” means the rigid part of an assembly that
receives or transmits radio energy and the mast or tower on which the assembly
is mounted, but does not include non-rigid items such as wire, cable,
transmission lines, lightning rods, guy wires, or guy wire anchors.
      (13)   “Arcade” means a facility with nine or more coin-operated
amusement devices.
      (14)   “Assisted care unit” means a discrete living space within an
assisted living facility intended to be occupied by individuals desiring or
requiring to participate in an assisted living program as defined in the
Health-General Article, § 19-1801, of the State Code, but does not include a
comprehensive care unit.
      (15)   “Assisted living facility” means a facility with an assisted
living program as defined in § 19-1801 of the Health-General Article of the
State Code that is not a group home or a community- based assisted living
facility.
      (16)   “Assisted living facility I, community based” means a facility
with an assisted living program as defined in § 19-1801 of the Health-General
Article of the State Code that is not a group home and that houses no more than
eight residents other than staff.
      (17)   “Assisted living facility II, community based” means a facility
with an assisted living program as defined in § 19-1801 of the Health-General
Article of the State Code that is not a group home and that houses between 9
and 16 residents other than staff.
      (18)   “Automobile and truck dismantling and recycling facility” means a
facility that dismantles, tests, and cleans parts from inoperable motor
vehicles and may include the sale of parts from dismantled motor vehicles.
      (19)   “Automobile gasoline station” means a facility that offers retail
sales to the public of gasoline, motor oil, lubricants, motor fuels, travel
aids, or minor automobile accessories.
      (20)   “Banquet hall” means an establishment, not open to the public,
that prepares or serves food and beverages only for ceremonial gatherings
honoring guests or special occasions.
      (21)   “Beer” has the meaning stated in § 1-101 of the Alcoholic
Beverages and Cannabis Article of State Code.
      (22)   “Bird sanctuary” means a facility where birds are kept and given
care.
      (23)   “Bog” means an ecosystem consisting of peatland characterized by
sphagnous mat, organic soils, or accumulated peat and soils saturated to the
surface throughout the year with minimal fluctuation in water level and
contiguous nontidal wetlands.
      (24)   “Bog protection area” means an area shown on the Bog Protection
Area Guidance Map, consisting of a bog, contributing streams, a one-hundred
foot upland area buffer, the limited activity area, and contributing drainage
area.
      (25)   “Borrow pits” means areas from which soil and other natural
materials are removed for use, without further processing, as fill for
activities such as landscaping, building construction, or highway construction
and maintenance.
      (26)   “BRAC Mixed Use Development” means development that meets the
requirements of §
18-10-113.
      (27)   “Brewery” means a facility that has been issued a Class 5
manufacturer’s license under Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of State
Code that produces more than 22,500 barrels of beer per year.
      (28)   “Brewery, craft” means a facility that has been issued a Class 5
manufacturer’s license or a Class 7 micro-brewery license under Alcoholic
Beverages and Cannabis Article of State Code that produces not more than 22,500
barrels of beer per year.
      (29)   “Buffer” has the meaning stated in the Natural Resources Article,
§ 8-1802, of the State Code and COMAR, Title 27.
      (30)   “Building restriction line” for a lot other than a flag lot means
a line drawn parallel to the lot line at a distance equal to the required
setback or to any applicable minimum width requirement, whichever is greater.
“Building restriction line” for a flag lot means the line created when the
following two hypothetical lines are connected: a line equal to the minimum lot
width drawn from the opening of the pipestem and continuing along the pipestem
lot line and a line equal to the minimum lot width drawn from the opening of
the pipestem and continuing along the lot line of the flag.
      (31)   “Business complex” means a development on a lot or lots under
single ownership or control that combines two or more of the permitted,
conditional, or special exception uses allowed in the district in which the
development is located.
      (32)   “Child care center” has the meaning stated in the Education
Article, § 9.5-401, of the State Code.
      (33)   “Coffee roaster” means a facility that roasts green coffee beans
for use in brewing and that may sell roasted coffee beans, either whole or
ground, to retailers or directly to individuals.
      (34)   “Commercial telecommunication facility” means a structure, such as
a tower, antenna, monopole, panel, microwave dish, or in-building wireless
communication enhancement system, including accessory structures, used for the
wireless electromagnetic transmission of information, but the term does not
include a satellite earth station, a structure used for amateur or recreational
purposes such as a ham radio or citizens band radio, a small cell system, or a
facility owned by a public utility that is used to control the utility’s
distribution systems.
      (35)   “Composting facility” means a facility where composting takes
place under a Tier 1 or Tier 2 composting facility permit issued by the
Maryland Department of the Environment pursuant to COMAR 26.04.11.05 or
26.04.11.06.
      (36)   “Comprehensive care unit” means a room within an assisted living
facility intended to be occupied by individuals requiring continuous health
care services.
      (37)   “Conference retreat facility” means a facility with lodging,
dining, and other supporting services that are used for educational or
religious conclaves, seminars, or similar activities by educational, religious,
fraternal, social, service, or other similar groups, but not as accommodations
for the general public.
      (38)   “Confront” or “confronting” when used in reference to real
property means a lot or parcel that would adjoin another lot or parcel but for
an intervening public or private road or right-of-way.
      (39)   “Contiguous lots” means two or more lots that share a boundary
line.
      (40)   “Contributing drainage area” means an area shown on the Bog
Protection Area Guidance Map that drains to the bog and contributing streams.
      (41)   “Contributing streams” means areas shown on the Bog Protection
Area Guidance Map as watercourses or streams that drain into the bog.
      (42)   “Cosmetic facial hair salon” means a business that uses cosmetic
equipment, including microblades, to remove or temporarily enhance facial hair
but does not include use of tattoo equipment or permanent cosmetic procedures.
      (43)   “Cottage food business” means a business that produces and
packages cottage food products onsite in a residential kitchen, sells the
cottage food products in accordance with § 21-330.1 of the Health-General
Article of the State Code and COMAR, and has annual revenues from the sale of
cottage food products of $25,000 or less. For purposes of this definition,
“cottage food product” has the meaning stated in § 21-301 of the Health-General
Article of the State Code.
      (44)   “Critical area” means all lands and waters defined in Natural
Resources Article, § 8-1807, of the State Code.
      (45)   “Dance hall” means a facility that is open to the public or to a
limited membership that does not have an alcoholic beverage license and that
provides entertainment, such as music, a floor show, a stage show, or dancing.
      (46)   “Data storage center” means a facility use primarily for the
storage, management, processing, and transmission of digital data, which houses
computer or network equipment, systems, servers, appliances and other
associated components related to digital data storage and operations.
      (47)   “Density” means the number of dwelling units for each acre of
gross area, except that accessory dwelling units and farm tenant houses may not
be included when calculating density, unless they are located within the
resource conservation area of the critical area.
      (48)   “Distillery” means a facility that has been issued a Class 1
distillery license under Title 2, Subtitle 2 of the Alcoholic Beverages and
Cannabis Article of State Code or a facility that has been issued a Class 2
rectifying license under Title 2, Subtitle 2 of the Alcoholic Beverages and
Cannabis Article of State Code that rectifies, blends, or bottles more than
100,000 gallons of product per calendar year.
      (49)   “Distillery, limited” means a facility that has been issued a
Class 9 limited distillery license under Title 2, Subtitle 2 of the Alcoholic
Beverages and Cannabis Article of State Code or a facility that has been issued
a Class 2 rectifying license under Title 2, Subtitle 2 of the Alcoholic
Beverages and Cannabis Article of State Code that rectifies, blends, or bottles
100,000 gallons or less of product per calendar year.
      (50)   “Dwelling unit” means a single unit, including attached garages
and decks, providing complete, independent living facilities for at least one
person, including permanent provisions for sanitation, cooking, eating,
sleeping, and other activities routinely associated with daily life. The
following variations of “dwelling” have the meanings indicated:
         (i)   “Dwelling, duplex” means a structure that contains two dwelling
units arranged side-by-side or one above the other.
         (ii)   “Dwelling, fourplex” means a structure that contains four
dwelling units with each unit separated horizontally or vertically from another
dwelling unit by a common wall or partition.
         (iii)   “Dwelling, marina caretaker’s residence” means a dwelling for
the sole purpose of housing a person directly involved in the custodial,
managerial, or operational aspects of a marina.
         (iv)   “Dwelling, multifamily” means a structure that contains twelve
or more dwelling units with each unit separated horizontally or vertically from
another dwelling unit by a common wall or partition and with each unit having
access from an interior corridor system.
         (v)   “Dwelling, multiplex” means a structure that contains between
five and eleven dwelling units with each unit separated horizontally or
vertically from another dwelling unit by a common wall or partition and having
access from an interior corridor system.
         (vi)   “Dwelling, single-family detached” means a structure that
contains one dwelling unit used as a principal dwelling and entirely separated
from any other structure on all sides.
         (vii)   “Dwelling, stacked townhouse” means a structure that contains
four or more dwelling units arranged over and under or back-to-back with each
unit separated horizontally or vertically from another dwelling unit by a
common wall or partition and with each unit having separate access directly to
the exterior of the structure or to a garage or small egress landing.
         (viii)   “Dwelling, townhouse” means a structure that contains at
least three and no more than eight dwelling units side by side with each unit
separated by a common wall or partition, and with each unit having separate
access directly to the exterior of the structure.
         (ix)   “Dwelling, triplex” means a structure that contains three
dwelling units with each unit separated horizontally or vertically from another
dwelling unit by a common wall or partition.
         (x)   “Dwelling unit, accessory” means a smaller dwelling unit located
on the same lot as a principal single-family detached dwelling.
         (xi)   “Dwelling unit, adult independent” means a dwelling unit of any
type that is occupied by at least one person who is 55 years of age or older
and resident minor children are prohibited.
         (xii)   “Dwelling unit, apartment” means a single dwelling unit in
conjunction with another allowed use in the zoning district.
         (xiii)   “Dwelling unit, abutting heavy industrial zone” means a
dwelling unit approved pursuant to §
17-3-505 of this Code.
      (51)   “Eating disorder treatment facility” means a private, inpatient
facility treating persons for and with a primary mental health diagnosis of
eating disorder at the time of admission that is licensed and accredited as
required by §§ 10-501 et seq., of the Health General Article of the State Code
and as otherwise required by federal and State law and regulations.
      (52)   “Eating disorder treatment unit” means a discrete living space
within an eating disorder treatment facility occupied by individuals receiving
treatment in an eating disorder treatment facility that is licensed and
accredited as required by §§ 10-501 et seq., of the Health General Article of
the State Code and as otherwise required by federal and State law and
regulations.
      (53)   “Electric vehicle repair facility” means a facility that provides
mechanical and electrical services for vehicles powered solely by electrically
charged batteries.
      (54)   “Electric vehicle towing and storage facility” means a facility
that provides towing and storage services for vehicles powered solely by
electrically charged batteries.
      (55)   “Entertainment complex” means a facility for the presentation of
the performing arts, including indoor movie theaters, theaters for live
performances, and indoor and outdoor concert halls, but excluding adult movie
theaters.
      (56)   “Excavation area” means that part of a clay and borrow pit or a
sand and gravel operation in which the extraction and removal of natural
materials or deposits takes place.
      (57)   “Fabrication” means the assemblage or packaging of products or
parts, predominantly using previously prepared material.
      (58)   “Farm” means land use for farming.
      (59)   “Farm alcohol production facility” means a facility used for
“agricultural alcohol production” as defined in § 4-214 of the Land Use Article
of the State Code that is located on a farm that qualifies for an agricultural
use assessment pursuant to § 8-209 of the Tax-Property Article of the State
Code or that is covered by a current and active soil conservation and water
quality plan approved by the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District.
      (60)   “Farm dual use” means a lot or parcel on which the principal use
is farming and that includes one of the following commercial uses: contractor
and construction yards; well and septic service; excavation service; farm
vehicle and equipment repair; trades, such as plumbers, mechanical/HVAC,
electricians, or other trades required to be licensed by
Article 15 of this Code; and outside storage of equipment associated with these
commercial uses.
      (61)   “Farm or agricultural heritage site special event” means a
gathering of the public or invited groups limited to attendance by invitation
or reservation for compensation for events including parties, celebrations,
weddings, or receptions on a farm that qualifies for an agricultural use
assessment pursuant to § 8-209 of the Tax-Property Article of the State Code or
that is covered by a current and active soil conservation and water quality
plan approved by the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District, or an
agricultural heritage site.
      (62)   “Farm or agricultural heritage site stay” means a hosted
accommodation for overnight guests who pay to stay on a farm that qualifies for
an agricultural use assessment pursuant to § 8-209 of the Tax-Property Article
of the State Code or that is covered by a current and active soil conservation
and water quality plan approved by the Anne Arundel Soil Conservation District,
or on an agricultural heritage site. “Farm or agricultural heritage site stay”
does not include a bed and breakfast inn, bed or breakfast home, or short-term
residential rental.
      (63)   “Farming” means the use of land or structures for agricultural
purposes, including agriculture, urban agriculture, apiaries, horticulture and
floriculture, greenhouses, orchards, agricultural nurseries, viticulture,
aquaculture, hydroponics, agroforestry, animal and poultry husbandry subject to
the requirements of §
18-4-104, dairying, on-farm composting as regulated by COMAR 26.04.11.06, and
primary and value added agricultural processing. For purposes of this
definition:
         (i)   “agriculture” means the business, science and art of cultivating
and managing soil for the production, growing, or harvesting of crops,
agricultural or horticultural products, and may also include selling crops,
agricultural, or horticultural products grown or produced onsite or aggregated
from multiple sites;
         (ii)   “agroforestry” means the integration of trees and shrubs into
farming systems and includes forestry (including silviculture), tree farming,
and forest farming;
         (iii)   “animal and poultry husbandry” means the breeding, feeding,
raising, and general care or use of animals, including equine animals, swine,
cattle, goats, chickens, and similar farm or livestock animals;
         (iv)   “aquaculture” means the farming or culturing of finfish,
shellfish, other aquatic plants or animals, or both, in lakes, streams, inlets,
estuaries, and other natural or artificial water bodies or impoundments,
including hatching, cultivating, planting, feeding, raising, and harvesting of
aquatic plants and animals;
         (v)   “primary agricultural and value added processing” means the
processing of one or more agricultural ingredients or products in the course of
preparing it for market or on-site consumption, so long as at least one of the
ingredients or products are grown or produced on the farm, including cutting,
drying, packaging, canning, milling, grinding, freezing, heating, and
fermenting;
         (vi)   “farmers’ market” means a facility located on a farm that
offers for public sale locally produced agricultural, horticultural, dairy,
meat products, or similar products produced on that farm or aggregated from
other farms;
         (vii)   “farm stand” means a wagon, trailer, vehicle, or temporary
structure located on a farm that offers for public sale agricultural,
horticultural, dairy, meat products, or similar products produced on that farm
or aggregated from other farms;
         (viii)   “farm store” means a permanent structure located on a farm
that offers for public sale agricultural, horticultural, dairy, meat products,
or similar products produced on that farm or aggregated from other farms; and
         (ix)   “farming” does not include the cultivation, processing or
dispensing of cannabis, as defined in § 1-101 of the Alcoholic Beverages and
Cannabis Article of the State Code.
      (64)   “Floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal area of all
floors of a structure other than those areas used for or related to the parking
of vehicles, and it is measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the center line of party walls.
      (65)   “Floor area ratio” means the floor area of a structure divided by
the gross area of the lot on which the structure is located.
      (66)   “Gaming position” means a seat at a video lottery terminal.
      (67)   “Garden center” means a facility that sells plants, bushes or
trees, grown onsite or offsite, as well as other items customarily used for
plants and gardens including seeds, mulch, fertilizer, soil, gardening tools,
and pots, but does not include a hardware store, a home center, or a building
supply store.
      (68)   “Gross area” means the total area of a lot.
      (69)   “Group home I” means a residential facility authorized by federal,
State or local law or regulation, or licensed or supervised by a federal,
State, or local agency that houses no more than eight persons, other than
staff, with intellectual, development, or physical disabilities, or mental
health issues.
      (70)   “Group home II” means a residential facility authorized by
federal, State or local law or regulations, or licensed or supervised by a
federal, State, or local agency that houses between 9 and 16 persons, other
than staff, with intellectual, development, or physical disabilities or mental
health issues.
      (71)   “Health club or spa” means a facility in which memberships in a
program of physical exercise are offered, including the right to use saunas,
whirlpools, weightlifting rooms, massages, steam rooms, or exercising machines.
      (72)   “Height” when used in reference to a structure means the vertical
distance from the average height of the highest roof surface for a structure
with a roof or from the highest point of a structure without a roof to the
grade plane. For purposes of this definition, “grade plane” means the average
of the finished ground levels between the structure and a point six feet from
the structure or, if the lot line is closer than six feet from the structure,
the lot line.
      (73)   “Heliport” means a facility for the takeoff, landing, fueling, and
housing of helicopters, the discharging and receiving of passengers and cargo
from or to a helicopter, and the provision of shelter and conveniences for
helicopter passengers.
      (74)   “Homeowner’s association” means a nonprofit community association,
condominium association, improvement association, or similar association that
owns, leases, or has easement rights on property within a recorded subdivision.
      (75)   “Hospice facility” has the meaning stated in the Health-General
Article, § 19-901, of the State Code and includes a facility that provides full
inpatient care.
      (76)   “Institutional uses” means those uses that serve a recreational,
social, medical, educational, or religious purpose, such as schools, nursing
homes, assisted living facilities, hospitals, libraries, museums, and nonprofit
charitable or philanthropic organizations.
      (77)   “Junk” means any kind of salvage or waste material that is not
handled as recyclables or solid waste by an automobile and truck dismantling
and recycling facility, recyclables recovery facility, rubble landfill, rubble
processing facility, or solid waste transfer station, including old, scrap,
dismantled, inoperable, or dilapidated motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts,
machinery, household furniture and appliances, construction equipment and
materials, tanks and drums, tires, pipes, wood, paper, metals, rags, and glass.
      (78)   “Junkyard” means any land or structure used for the storage,
keeping, collection, salvage, sale, disassembling, wrecking, baling,
maintenance, or abandonment of junk, but the term does not include an
automobile and truck dismantling and recycling processing facility, recyclables
recovery facility, rubble landfill, rubble processing facility, or solid waste
transfer station.
      (79)   “Kennel, commercial” means a facility for the housing of dogs,
cats, or other domesticated animals for the purpose of commercial breeding,
sale, boarding, training, or grooming.
      (80)   “Land-clearing debris” means solid waste that is acceptable for
disposal in a land- clearing debris landfill under State law and regulation.
      (81)   “Land-clearing debris landfill” means a sanitary landfill
permitted under State law and regulation as a land-clearing debris landfill.
      (82)   “Landscaping and tree contracting” means a business engaged in
providing the services of planting, seeding, sodding, removing, cutting,
trimming, pruning, mulching, aerating, applying chemicals, watering,
fertilizing, or similar services to establish, promote, or control growth of
trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, ground cover, and other flora, or otherwise
maintaining a lawn or landscape for ornamentation or other nonagricultural
purpose.
      (83)   “Limited activity area” means the 200-foot area shown on the Bog
Protection Area Guidance Map that is measured as the 300-foot area surrounding
the outer edge of the bog but excluding the 100-foot upland buffer.
      (84)   “Lot, corner” means a lot that has frontage on more than one
intersecting road. For purposes of this definition, a road with angles that are
135 degrees or less, measured from the centerline of the road, is considered
two intersecting roads.
      (85)   “Lot, corner through” means a lot that has frontage on three
roads.
      (86)   “Lot, through” means a lot other than a corner lot or corner
through lot with frontage on more than one road.
      (87)   “Lot line, front” means the boundary of a lot that abuts the road
right-of-way or, for a waterfront lot, the mean high-water line.
      (88)   “Marina” means a facility located along the shoreline that has
docks, moorings, supplies, and other services for watercraft and watercraft
passengers. The following types of marinas have the meanings indicated:
         (i)   “Marina, commercial” means a marina for servicing, fueling, and
storage of watercraft that may include covered or uncovered wet storage slips,
dry storage of watercraft, and boat sales.
         (ii)   “Marina, community” means a marina that provides limited
watercraft services in a recorded residential riparian subdivision for
residents and their guests and that is located on property leased or owned by a
homeowner’s association.
         (iii)   “Marina, neighborhood” means a marina that provides limited
watercraft services.
      (89)   “Mean high-water line” means the average level of high tides at a
given location.
      (90)   “Meteorological tower” means a meteorological tower or structure
designed to support the gathering of wind or solar energy resource data, and
includes the tower, base plate, anchors, guy cables and hardware, anemometers,
wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment, data loggers, wiring, and
telemetry devices used to monitor and transmit data for over a period of time
for instant or historic data.
      (91)   “Mobile home” has the meaning stated for “manufactured home” in §§
11-9-101 of this Code.
      (92)   “Natural wood waste” means tree and other natural vegetative
matter, including tree stumps, brush and limbs, root mats, logs, leaves, grass
clippings, and unadulterated wood wastes.
      (93)   “Natural wood waste recycling facility” means a facility for the
recycling of natural wood waste or for the production of compost or mulch, but
the term does not include a collection or processing facility that provides
recycling services solely for its own employees or for its own recyclable
materials generated onsite.
      (94)   “Net area” means gross area minus the 100-year nontidal
floodplain, steep slopes, and tidal and nontidal wetlands.
      (95)   “Net density” means the number of dwelling units allowed for each
acre of net area.
      (96)   “Night club” or “comedy club” means a facility that is open to the
public, has an alcoholic beverage license, and provides entertainment, such as
music, a floor show, a stage show, or dancing.
      (97)   “Nonconforming use” means a use that was allowed when it came into
existence but that is no longer allowed under the law in effect in the zoning
district in which the use is located.
      (98)   “Nurseries with landscaping and plant sales” means a facility for
the cultivating, harvesting, and sale of plants, bushes, trees, and other
nursery items grown onsite, either in the ground or
in containers, prior to sale, and includes the sales of products related to
landscaping and the cultivation of plants, bushes, trees, and other nursery
items.
      (99)   “Nursing home” has the meaning stated in the Health-General
Article, § 19-1401(e), of the State Code.
      (100)   “Open area” has the meaning stated in §
17-1-101 of this Code.
      (101)   “Package goods store” means a retail store that keeps for sale
and sells beer, wine, and liquor in sealed packages or containers that may not
be opened or consumed on the premises where sold.
      (102)   “Pedestrian circulation system” means the sidewalks and other
pedestrian ways that serve as access to and between the uses, structures,
parking areas, and other elements of a development.
      (103)   “Personal fitness studio” means a facility with classrooms or
offices offering personal health and wellness counseling or classes,
supplemented by use of exercising machines and physical training in an exercise
area occupying less than 2,000 square feet of the total square footage of the
space.
      (104)   “Personal fitness studio, water-based” means a personal fitness
studio in which all or part of the physical training offered shall involve
activities that take place on a body of navigable water. A personal fitness
studio under this definition shall be considered an accessory use to the
principal maritime use in MA2, MB and MC Maritime Districts.
      (105)   “Petroleum products” means liquid petroleum gas, fuel oil, and
light fractions of crude oil, including kerosene, naphtha, gasoline, and diesel
fuel.
      (106)   “Pier” means a floating or fixed platform, including associated
pilings and similar features, that extends over water from the shoreline. The
following types of piers have the meanings indicated:
         (i)   “Pier, commercial” means a pier used for commercial purposes
that is not located in a residential zoning district.
         (ii)   “Pier, community” means a pier for watercraft that is
established and operated for the benefit of a recorded residential riparian
subdivision.
         (iii)   “Pier, private” means a pier for watercraft that extends from
a privately owned residential lot or community owned property for which a pier
construction agreement (PCA) has been executed.
         (iv)   “Pier, recreational” means a pier used by residents of a
recorded residential riparian subdivision and their guests for crabbing,
fishing, sunning, swimming, and similar activities, but not for watercraft or
boating activities of any kind.
      (107)   “Plasma center” means a for-profit business licensed under the
Health-General Article of State Code that collects human blood plasma and
compensates individuals for their blood plasma or other blood product.
      (108)   “Principal use” means a primary structure or activity for which a
lot is employed.
      (109)   “Private club” means an establishment that provides facilities
for members for social or recreational purposes, is not open to the public, is
not operated for profit or commercial purposes, and is exempt from taxation
under § 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (110)   “Processing site” means that part of a clay and borrow pit or a
sand and gravel operation in which washing, screening, blending, and
stockpiling take place.
      (111)   “Produce market” means a facility, not located on a farm, where
local produce, meat products, fruits, vegetables, value-added agricultural or
horticultural products, and prepared foods and beverages are sold directly to
the public primarily for off-site consumption.
      (112)   “Public activity area” means a plaza, square, village green,
pocket park, courtyard, or similar area of a noncommercial nature that serves
as a place for the public to gather and that includes amenities such as
benches, fountains, gazebos, pavilions, art, and shade trees.
      (113)   “Public utility essential services” means 69 kv or lesser
transmission lines, distribution lines, and accessory equipment and structures
that distribute or transmit such services as electricity, communications,
power, or fuel.
      (114)   “Public utility uses” means an electric substation, a fuel
transmission pumping station, and a telephone switching station.
      (115)   “Reclamation” means the rehabilitation of disturbed land for
useful purposes and the protection of the natural resources of adjacent areas,
including bodies of water.
      (116)   “Recovery residence” means a facility that provides recovery
residence services as defined under § 8-101 of the Health-General Article of
the State Code.
      (117)   “Recreational uses, active” means recreational activities, other
than golf courses, that require special facilities, fields, or equipment, such
as playgrounds, ice skating rinks, running tracks, and athletic facilities,
including playing fields for athletic events, tennis courts, basketball courts,
and swimming pools.
      (118)   “Recreational uses, passive” means recreational activities that
require minimal changes to the site and preserve natural features, such as
nature areas, picnic areas, walking or hiking areas, fishing areas, hunting
areas and bird or wildlife watching areas.
      (119)   “Recyclables” has the meaning stated for “recyclable materials”
in the Environment Article, § 9-1701, of the State Code.
      (120)   “Recyclables recovery facility” means a facility used for
recycling, but the term does not include an automobile and truck dismantling
and recycling facility or a natural wood waste recycling facility.
      (121)   “Recycling” means any process in which materials that would
otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and
returned to the marketplace in the form of raw materials or products.
      (122)   “Refuse” means ashes, garbage, rubbish, junk, industrial waste,
dead animals, and salvable waste and other solid waste materials.
      (123)   “Regional commercial complex” means a large commercial
development with retail, entertainment, and service uses, and which may include
residential uses, of a scale and function to serve a regional market that
contains at least 750,000 square feet of non-residential floor area.
      (124)   “Restaurant” means an establishment, open to the public, that
prepares or serves food and beverages for consumption onsite and may include
take-out and delivery services. Restaurants may also provide banquet hall or
catering services for ceremonial gatherings honoring guests or special
occasions, as long as such services are not provided exclusively.
      (125)   “Road” means an open way that is dedicated as a public or private
right-of-way or easement for the passage of vehicles and persons. The following
types of roads are defined from the lowest to the highest classification:
         (i)   “Local road” means a road designed to provide vehicular access
to abutting properties and to discourage through traffic, but the term does not
include a parking lot, a drive aisle, or an alley.
         (ii)   “Collector road” means a road that provides primary access to
an arterial road from one or more neighborhoods; allows for traffic circulation
within residential, commercial, and industrial areas and for the internal
distribution of trips within a neighborhood; and may provide access to local
roads, other collector roads, and abutting properties.
         (iii)   “Minor arterial road” means a road that serves trips of
moderate length; interconnects and augments the principal arterial system;
provides primary access to or through communities of high density residential,
commercial, retail, or industrial land uses and distributes traffic to smaller
geographic areas; and partially controls access to abutting commercial,
industrial, and residential properties at predetermined locations to discourage
direct access to individual properties at other locations.
         (iv)   “Principal arterial road” means a road that serves the needs of
through traffic for moderately long trips and serves major activity centers and
major portions of the trips entering or leaving urban areas; is a primary
travel route for commercial, commuter, and recreational travel in rural areas;
provides secondary linkages between large urban centers, suburban population,
and employment centers; and permits direct access to individual properties only
under unusual circumstances.
         (v)   “Freeway” means a road that provides for efficient and
uninterrupted travel over long distances; serves interstate and commuter needs;
does not allow direct access to abutting properties; and has access only by
interchange facilities.
      (126)   “Rooming house” means all or part of a single-family detached
dwelling that is occupied by a resident owner or resident manager and that has
rooms without cooking facilities for rent.
      (127)   “Rubble” means solid waste that is acceptable for disposal in a
rubble landfill under State law and regulation.
      (128)   “Rubble landfill” means a sanitary landfill permitted under State
law and regulation as a rubble landfill.
      (129)   “Rubble processing facility” means a facility used to reduce or
alter the volume or characteristics of rubble that is permitted under State law
and regulation as a processing facility.
      (130)   “Sanitary landfill” means a land-clearing debris landfill,
municipal landfill, or rubble landfill.
      (131)   “Scenic or historic rural road” means a road shown on the
official map entitled “Scenic and Historic Rural Roads, 2006” adopted by the
County Council.
      (132)   “School bus facility” meas a facility that:
         (i)   is used in whole or in part for the inside or outside storage,
maintenance, service, and associated operations of school buses; and
         (ii)   provides school bus transportation for the Board of Education
of Anne Arundel County.
      (133)   “School, private academic” means a private institution that
offers an academic course of instruction and that is operated by a religious
facility or under a certificate of approval by the State Department of
Education.
      (134)   “Self-service storage facility” means an arrangement of enclosed
or unenclosed individual secured storage areas for sale, lease, or rent, but
the term does not include storage for wholesale or retail activity, a freight
or distribution center, or warehousing as part of a commercial or industrial
operation.
      (135)   “Service organization” means an association of persons for the
promotion of a common object or goal other than the operation of a profit-
making business.
      (136)   “Setback” means a minimum distance between a lot line and a
structure.
      (137)   “Shoreline” means the mean high-water line.
      (138)   “Sign” means any writing, letter, or numeric work, pictorial
presentation, illustration or decoration, emblem, device, symbol, trademark,
flag, banner, pennant, or any other device, figure, or character utilized to
advertise, announce, identify, or make known or attract attention. The
following types of signs have the meanings indicated:
         (i)   “Directional sign” means a sign that directs traffic to a use or
area.
         (ii)   “Freestanding sign” means a sign that is permanently affixed to
the ground and supported by one or more columns, uprights, or braces.
         (iii)   “Identification sign” means a sign attached to the facade of a
structure that relates to a use located at the same location as the sign.
         (iv)   “Temporary sign” means a sign that is portable and easily
removable, displays messages of a transitory or temporary nature, such as stake
signs and wind signs, and is not a freestanding sign or a sign permanently
affixed to a structure.
      (139)   “Slip” means a water area used for the wet storage or temporary
docking of a watercraft.
      (140)   “Small cell system” means any short range equipment installed for
the purpose of supplementing or extending wireless communications coverage in a
localized area. “Small cell system” includes:
         (i)   any pole, strand, or other structure used to support a system or
to which a system is attached;
         (ii)   any radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular or back- up power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration; and
         (iii)   any ancillary or accessory structure or equipment to house any
part of the system.
      (141)   “Small wind energy system” means a wind energy conversion system
which may consist of a wind turbine, a tower and base, and associated control
or conversion electronics for the purpose of generating energy for use on site
and not for sale.
      (142)   “Solar energy generating facility – accessory” means a renewable
energy generating facility that uses energy from the sun to produce electricity
for on-site use as accessory to a principal use; for which excess electricity
generated and not immediately utilized for on-site use or temporarily stored
for future on-site use may be provided to a utility company in exchange for a
credit or other compensation methodology as prescribed by the utility company,
provided the property has existing electrical service supplied by the utility.
If the facility is ground-based, the development of the facility shall be
subject to Article 17 of this Code and the square footage of the solar panels
for the system may not exceed the total square footage of the roofs of all
existing structures on the site.
      (143)   “Solar energy generating facility – community” means a renewable
energy generating facility that uses energy from the sun to produce electricity
and that satisfies the requirements of a “community solar energy generating
system” set forth in § 7-306.2 of the Public Utilities Article of the State
Code.
      (144)   “Solar energy generating facility – utility scale” means an
industrial scale, renewable energy generating facility as a principal use that
uses energy from the sun to produce electricity for sale to a regional
wholesale electricity market through transmission lines and not to end-users.
      (145)   “Solar panel” means that part of a solar energy system containing
one or more receptive cells or modules, the purpose of which is to capture
solar energy.
      (146)   “Solid waste” means solid waste regulated by COMAR, Title 26.
      (147)   “Solid waste transfer station” means a facility where
nonhazardous solid waste is taken from a collection vehicle, temporarily stored
or stockpiled, and ultimately placed in a transportation unit for movement to
another facility that is permitted under State law and regulation as a transfer
station.
      (148)   “Stables or riding club” means a commercial or community facility
used for the purpose of boarding, selling, riding, or training equines;
teaching equestrian skills; or day camps related to those activities.
      (149)   “State-licensed medical clinic” means an outpatient medical
clinic licensed by the State of Maryland as a detoxification facility or a
substance abuse treatment program under Title 8, Subtitle 4 of the Health-
General Article including programs exempt from licensing requirements under §
7.5-401(b)(1) of the Health-General Article of the State Code. The term does
not include a medical clinic located on property owned or leased by the County
or the State, or an Early Intervention Level 0.5 program as described in COMAR
10.47.02.03.
      (150)   “Storage, dry” means the keeping of watercraft on land on a
trailer, cradle, rack, or other device.
      (151)   “Storage, dry covered” means the keeping of watercraft in a
covered enclosed structure on land.
      (152)   “Storage, multilevel watercraft rack structure” means a structure
or rack system that is in excess of 10 feet in height and is constructed or
used for storing watercraft and appurtenances.
      (153)   “Storage, wet” means the storage of watercraft by docking,
mooring, or berthing a watercraft to a pier, wharf, dock, piling, buoy, or
similar facility.
      (154)   “Structure” means anything constructed the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attachment to something permanently located
on the ground.
      (155)   “Structure, principal” means a structure that serves a principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
      (156)   “Tavern” means an establishment that has been issued a Class D
beer, wine, and liquor license by the Board of License Commissioners.
      (157)   “Telecommunication” means the process that permits the passage of
information from a sender to one or more receivers in a useable form by means
of any electromagnetic system.
      (158)   “Transitional housing facility” means any use that regularly
provides temporary shelter, with or without food, to individuals without
permanent housing but does not include temporary shelter in periods of extreme
heat or cold or during a state of disaster or emergency.
      (159)   “Transportation shelter” means a structure that protects users
from the weather while awaiting transportation and that is an inherent part of
the overall transportation system of the County, including bus, light rail, and
rapid transit service.
      (160)   “Twenty-year registered use” means a use not allowed as a
permitted, conditional or special exception use under the law in effect for the
zone in which the use is located when the use commenced, and for which no
enforcement action has been initiated within 20 years of the date the use
commenced.
      (161)   “Unmerge” means to restore merged lots to their status as
individual lots for the purpose of complying with the requirements of this
article applicable to individual lots.
      (162)   “Use” means a purpose for which a lot is employed.
      (163)   “Vehicular circulation system” means the streets and roads,
driveways, and other vehicular ways that serve as access to and between the
uses, buildings, parking areas, and other elements of the development.
      (164)   “Veterinarian clinic, large animal” means a facility operated by
at least one licensed diplomate of the American College of Veterinary Surgeons
specializing in the health and treatment of large farm animals such as equine,
swine, cattle, goats, fowl, and similar farm or livestock animals.
      (165)   “Video lottery facility” has the meaning set forth in the State
Government Article, § 9-1A-01, of the State Code.
      (166)   “Video lottery terminal” has the meaning set forth in the State
Government Article, § 9-1A-01, of the State Code.
      (167)   “Warehouse” means all or part of a commercial structure for the
storage of goods, wares, or merchandise and where trucks or similar commercial
vehicles may load or unload cargo.
      (168)   “Water-dependent uses” has the meaning stated in COMAR, Title 27.
      (169)   “Waterfront lot” means a lot that (i) abuts the mean high-water
line or (ii) abuts platted land owned by a homeowner’s association or the
County that abuts the mean high-water line and, through agreements or
conveyances, has the right to function as a waterfront lot.
      (170)   “Waterway” means a navigable body of water shown on waterway maps
adopted as part of this article, consisting of the main bodies of the
Chesapeake Bay and the Patapsco River, and the main bodies and tributaries of
the following tributaries of the Chesapeake Bay or the Patapsco River:
Broadwater Creek, Bodkin Creek, Curtis Creek, Magothy River, Parrish Creek,
Rhode River, Rock Creek, Rockhold Creek, Severn River, South River, Stoney
Creek, West River, and Whitehall Bay.
      (171)   “Wind turbine” means the parts of the small wind energy system
including the blades, generator and tail mounted on a monopole, lattice or
guyed structure or mounted on a building.
      (172)   “Winery” means a facility that has been issued a Class 3 or Class
4 Manufacturer’s License under Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of
State Code.
      (173)   “Yacht club” means a private, nonprofit club with land and
facilities owned or leased, maintained, controlled, and managed by the members
that provides limited marina facilities for the use of members and their
guests.
      (174)   “Yard” means the land area between the lot line and the principal
structure, with a front and rear yard extending to the side lot line and a side
yard extending to the front and rear lot lines.
      (175)   “Zoning certificate of use” means a certification issued by the
Office of Planning and Zoning that authorizes a use in a specific zoning
district.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 21-06; Bill No. 64-07; Bill No. 69-07;
Bill 82-09; Bill No. 13-10; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 13-11;
Bill No. 14-11; Bill No. 63-11; Bill No. 71-11; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 15-12;
Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 58-14; Bill No. 7-15; Bill No. 8-15;
Bill No. 14-15; Bill No. 23-15; Bill No. 43-15; Bill No. 72-15; Bill No. 96-15;
Bill No. 106-15; Bill No. 21-16; Bill No. 24-16; Bill No. 28-16; Bill No. 30-
16; Bill No. 58-16; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No.
65-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 3-18; Bill No. 19-18; Bill No. 34-18; Bill No.
74-18; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 14-19; Bill No. 62-19; Bill No. 75-19; Bill No.
76-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 81-20; Bill No.
87-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 30-21; Bill No. 66-21; Bill No.
104-21; Bill No. 31-22; Bill No. 57-22; Bill No. 73-22; Bill No. 6-23; Bill No.
53-23; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 61-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 88-23; Bill No.
3-24; Bill No. 17-24; Bill No. 29-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 72-24; Bill No.
13-25; Bill No. 24-25; Bill No. 29-25)
TITLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
18-2-101.   Scope; applicability.
   
18-2-102.   Policy.
   
18-2-103.   Planning for future development.
   
18-2-104.   Contents and review of the General Development Plan.
   
18-2-105.   Zoning districts created.
   
18-2-106.   Zoning map.
   
18-2-107.   Zoning district line corrections.
   
18-2-108.   Amendments to comprehensive zoning ordinance.
   
18-2-109.   Review of applications for alcoholic beverage licenses.
   
18-2-110.   Preservation of historic and archaeological resources.
   
18-2-111.   Compliance with other law.
Subtitle 2. Uses and Structures
   
18-2-201.   Use requirements.
   
18-2-202.   Zoning certificate of use.
   
18-2-203.   Temporary uses.
   
18-2-204.   Accessory structures.
   
18-2-205.   Barbed-wire or electrified fences.
   
18-2-206.   Outside storage.
   
18-2-207.   Outdoor seating related to food and beverage service.
Subtitle 3. Bulk Regulations
   
18-2-301.   Setbacks.
   
18-2-302.   Exceptions to height limitations.
   
18-2-303.   Exemptions to bulk regulations.
   
18-2-304.   Front road designation for corner lots.
Subtitle 4. Waterfront Provisions
   
18-2-401.   Front yard of waterfront lots.
   
18-2-402.   Principal structures.
   
18-2-403.   Accessory structures and uses.
   
18-2-404.   Piers and mooring pilings.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 18-2-101. Scope; applicability.
   (a)   Scope. This article applies to all land located in the County, except
that it does not apply to land owned or leased and developed by the County or
the Board of Education unless federal or state law requires compliance with
this article. The provisions of this article are minimum requirements and are
in addition to other requirements of law.
   (b)   Applicability to pending and future proceedings. Subject to the
grandfathering provisions of COMAR Title 27, this article applies to all
pending and future proceedings and actions of any board, department, or agency
empowered to decide applications under this Code, except that:
      (1)   an application for a special exception or variance filed on or
before April 4, 2005 shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to May
12, 2005 for the special exception or variance as approved;
      (2)   an application for a special exception or variance filed before
July 6, 2010 shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to November 22,
2010 for the special exception or variance as approved if the County approves
an administrative waiver as stipulated in COMAR, Title 26 or the project is
exempt from the administrative waiver process;
      (3)   an application for a special exception filed before June 4, 2018
shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to June 4, 2018;
      (4)   development that falls within one of the exceptions set forth in §
17-2-101(b)(1) through (b)(5) of this Code shall be governed by the law
relating to parking, lot size, width at the front building restriction line,
coverage, setbacks, height limitations, and density that existed prior to May
12, 2005;
      (5)   development that falls within one of the exceptions set forth in §
17-2-101(b)(6) or (b)(7) of this Code shall be governed by the law as it
existed prior to July 6, 2010 if the County approves an administrative waiver
as stipulated in COMAR, Title 26 or the project is exempt from the
administrative waiver process;
      (6)   subject to the election provisions of subsection (8), an
application for a special exception or variance filed before November 19, 2012
shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to April 16, 2013 for the
special exception or variance as approved;
      (7)   subject to the election provisions of subsection (8), development
that falls within one of the exceptions set forth in §
17-2-101(b)(8) or (b)(9) of this Code shall be governed by the law as it
existed prior to April 16, 2013;
      (8)   for any application described in subsection (6) or (7), the
applicant may make an election, in writing and filed with the Planning and
Zoning Officer no later than July 1, 2013, to be governed by the law as it
exists after April 16, 2013;
      (9)   an application for a solar energy generating facility – community
filed before January 1, 2018, shall be governed by the law as it existed prior
to January 1, 2018 for a solar energy system – principal; and
      (10)   the following shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to
August 1, 2020:
         (i)   an application for a grading permit, building permit, or zoning
certificate of use filed on or before February 18, 2020 for a group home that
would be deemed an “assisted living facility I, community based”, an “assisted
living facility II, community based,” a “group home I,” or a “group home II”
under Bill No. 16-20;
         (ii)   an application for a grading permit, building permit, or zoning
certificate of use filed on or before February 18, 2020 for an existing use
with a group home license issued by the State; and
         (iii)   an application for a grading permit, building permit, or
zoning certificate of use filed on or before February 18, 2020 for a group home
or a rooming house;
      (11)   the following shall be governed by the location of critical area
boundaries in existence prior to October 8, 2021:
         (i)   an application for development, provided any permits associated
with the development are issued on or before December 1, 2021; and
         (ii)   an application for a variance or a special exception, provided
the application is filed on or before October 8, 2021 and any permits
associated with the application are issued on or before December 1, 2021. A
variance or special exception grandfathered under this subsection may not be
extended by variance;
      (12)   for a property located in the Odenton Town Center, any application
listed in §
17-2-101(b)(18) of this Code or any application under this article filed on or
before March 29, 2024 shall be governed by Subtitle 1 of Title 9 as it existed
prior to March 29, 2024; and
      (13)   for a property located in a mixed use district, any application
listed in§
17-2-101(b)(20) of this Code filed on or before February 2, 2025 and any
application under this article associated with those applications shall be
governed by the law as it existed prior to February 2, 2025.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 52-06; Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 93-12;
Bill No. 76-13; Bill No. 18-18; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 63-21;
Bill No. 84-23; Bill No. 75-24)
§ 18-2-102. Policy.
   The policy of the County is to:
      (1)   guide and direct the development of land and the location of public
facilities and services in accordance with the General Development Plan for the
County;
      (2)   organize the concentration of population;
      (3)   relate density of uses to the proper locations;
      (4)   facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks, and other public facilities and services;
      (5)   protect and preserve the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries;
      (6)   protect and preserve the historic and archaeological heritage of
the County;
      (7)   promote an adequate supply of housing throughout the County with a
broad range of housing types and prices that meet the needs of citizens at
different ages and stages of their lives;
      (8)   strengthen and revitalize existing communities and encourage the
revitalization of older residential and commercial areas;
      (9)   promote the value of buildings and other structures;
      (10)   provide for the safety and promote the general welfare of the
County through the protection of life and property to enhance and maintain the
quality of life for all citizens;
      (11)   preserve agricultural land, forested and rural areas, bogs,
wetlands, and floodplains; and
      (12)   divide the County into zoning districts of such character, number,
shape, and area as are best suited to effect these policies.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 64-09)
§ 18-2-103. Planning for future development.
   (a)   Guides. The following documents shall be used as a guide in the future
development of land in and the location of public services and facilities by
the County:
      (1)   the current General Development Plan for Anne Arundel County;
      (2)   all current master plans, concept plans, preservation plans, and
management plans adopted by the County Council; and
      (3)   all region plans authorized by the current General Development Plan
and adopted by the County Council.
   (b)   Rule of construction. Except as provided in §
3-1-205(i) or §
18-16-303(g) of this Code, the adoption, amendment, or repeal of any of the
documents listed in subsection (a) may not be construed to evidence or
constitute a mistake in the zoning map then existing or a change in the
character of any neighborhood.
   (c)   Current General Development Plan supersedes other land use plans.
Unless specifically provided in subsection (d)(5) or otherwise in this Code or
the State Code, the land use plan contained in the current General Development
Plan supersedes the land use plan in any other adopted plan.
   (d)   Green Infrastructure Master Plan.
      (1)   The 2022 Green Infrastructure Master Plan is not regulatory, does
not have the force of law, and does not impose restrictions on development or
land use in the County.
      (2)   On or before July 1, 2023, and on or before July 1 of every year
following, the Office of Planning and Zoning, in conjunction with the
Department of Recreation and Parks, shall submit to the County Executive and
County Council a report on the progress of the implementation of the Green
Infrastructure Master Plan. In coordination with the annual report the Office
of Planning and Zoning shall update the Green Infrastructure Network Map to:
         (i)   remove any areas identified as technical errors;
         (ii)   designate areas in the Network where development has been
approved;
         (iii)   designate areas in the Network where land has been conserved
through acquisition, easement, or similar mechanisms; and
         (iv)   add any adjacent, contiguous areas that have been conserved
through acquisition, easement, or similar mechanisms.
   (e)   Region plans.
      (1)   Any General Development Plan adopted by the County Council shall
designate no less than seven region planning areas encompassing all
unincorporated areas of the County.
      (2)   The General Development Plan shall provide for creation of region
plans for each region planning area, and shall specify:
         (i)   the content of the region plans;
         (ii)   the implementation process and schedule for completion of the
region plans; and
         (iii)   the composition of stakeholder advisory committees, which
shall include no less than nine and up to fifteen members, all of whom shall be
residents of, own property in, or have an interest in land use planning in the
region planning area, nominated by the County Executive, and approved by
resolution of the County Council. Of the members, two-thirds shall be residents
of the region, and including one resident from each Councilmanic District
included in the region planning area, who is recommended to the County
Executive by the County Councilmember from the Councilmanic District.
      (3)   The Office of Planning and Zoning shall work with the stakeholder
advisory committees to create the region plans and to ensure that the region
plans are consistent with the policies in the General Development Plan.
      (4)   Each region plan shall include maps depicting any changes to the
land use map included in the current General Development Plan, and a
description of how the changes are consistent with the goals and policies of
the General Development Plan.
      (5)   Region plans adopted by the County Council after adoption of the
General Development Plan shall be considered amendments to the General
Development Plan, until adoption of the next General Development Plan.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, §§ 1-101, 1-102) (Bill No. 47-85; Bill No. 77-85; Bill No.
82-85; Bill No. 29-86; Bill No. 61-86; Bill No. 66-87; Bill No. 32-88; Bill No.
49-88; Bill No. 20-90; Bill No. 81-90; Bill No. 32-92; Bill No. 74-92; Bill No.
67-93; Bill No. 14-94; Bill No. 73-94; Bill No. 84-95; Bill No. 92-95; Bill No.
112-96; Bill No. 108-96; Bill No. 19-97; Bill No. 51-97; Bill No. 78-97; Bill
No. 87-97; Bill No. 52-98; Bill No. 117-98; Bill No. 51-99; Bill No. 56-99;
Bill No. 69-99; Bill No. 72-99; Bill No. 5-00; Bill No. 22-00; Bill No. 69-00;
Bill No. 33-01; Bill No. 25-01; Bill No. 68-01; Bill No. 75-01; Bill No. 77-01;
Bill No. 92-01; Bill No. 5-02; Bill No. 31-02; Bill No. 42-02; Bill No. 67-02;
Bill No. 83-02; Bill No. 2-03; Bill No. 35-03; Bill No. 39-03; Bill No. 41-03;
Bill No. 48-03; Bill No. 69-03; Bill No. 75-03; Bill No. 16-04; Bill No. 46-04;
Bill No. 51-04; Bill No. 52-04; Bill No. 60-04; Bill No. 98-05; Bill No. 84-07;
Bill No. 33-08; Bill No. 93-08; Bill No. 64-09; Bill No. 89-09; Bill No. 90-09;
Bill No. 49-10; Bill No. 60-11; Bill No. 2-12; Bill No. 17-13; Bill No. 11-13;
Bill No. 91-13; Bill No. 56-14; Bill No. 60-14; Bill No. 74-14; Bill No. 12-15;
Bill No. 75-15; Bill No. 89-15; Bill No. 20-16; Bill No. 85-16; Bill No. 76-17;
Bill No. 13-18; Bill No. 21-18; Bill No. 11-21; Bill No. 8-22; Bill No. 75-24)
§ 18-2-104.  Contents and review of the General Development Plan.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "specified public facilities" means
County and State roads, public elementary and secondary schools, and the
capital improvements necessary to provide emergency medical services, fire
suppression, and storm water management.
   (b)   Contents. The General Development Plan, referred to as a "master plan"
in § 531 of the Charter, shall include the contents required by Land Use
Article, §§ 1-405 et seq., of the State Code, for the comprehensive plan of a
chartered county; a concurrency management plan for protecting the quality of
life in the County from the adverse impacts of new development by ensuring that
public facilities adequate to support future development are in place at the
time the future development occurs; and other information deemed necessary by
the Planning and Zoning Officer to plan for the orderly growth and development
of the County.
   (c)   Concurrency management plan. The concurrency management plan contained
in the General Development Plan shall include:
      (1)   a level of service standards for each of the specified public
facilities;
      (2)   a description of the existing specified public facilities and an
evaluation of the existing demand on those specified public facilities, with
detailed findings on the improvements to the specified public facilities
necessary to accommodate existing demand at the applicable level of service
standards and the costs of making those improvements;
      (3)   an evaluation of the impact of anticipated future development on
the specified public facilities, with detailed findings on the existing
capacities of the specified public facilities to accommodate future development
at the applicable level of service standards and improvements to the specified
public facilities necessary to accommodate future development; and
      (4)   a method for measuring and tracking the impacts on the specified
public facilities of development approvals, including the approval of
subdivisions and the issuance of building permits, and land use decisions such
as comprehensive rezonings, administrative rezonings, special exceptions, and
amendments to the master plan for water and sewer.
   (d)   Relationship of concurrency management plan to capital improvement
program. The concurrency management plan contained in the General Development
Plan shall guide the allocation of funds to the County capital improvement
program.
   (e)   Relationship of concurrency management plan to laws relating to
adequacy of public facilities and development impact fees. The concurrency
management plan shall be prepared so as to contain the required information and
constitute a sufficient basis for adequacy of public facilities and development
impact fee ordinances that:
      (1)   regulate the timing and sequencing of future development by
conditioning approval of the development on the program of capital improvements
described in subsection (d);
      (2)   do not require future development to bear the costs of the capital
improvements necessary to accommodate existing demand at the applicable level
of service standards; and
      (3)   require future development to bear the costs of the capital
improvements attributable to the impact of the future development.
   (f)   Review. The Office of Planning and Zoning continually shall monitor
the effectiveness of the General Development Plan in accomplishing its function
and shall prepare and provide to the Council an annual report that conforms
with State requirements for annual comprehensive plan reports. At intervals not
to exceed eight years, the Office of Planning and Zoning shall undertake a
comprehensive review of the General Development Plan and its implementing
mechanisms and shall recommend those revisions to the Plan and implementing
mechanisms as are necessary due to changes in demographic characteristics and
social, economic, and environmental factors.
(1985 Code, Art. 24, §§ 1-103, 1-104) (Bill No. 62-04; Bill No. 64-09; Bill No.
82-17)
§ 18-2-105. Zoning districts created.
   (a)   Creation. The following zoning districts are created:
 
Category               District
                       RA-Rural Agricultural
                       RLD- Residential Low Density
                       R1-Residential
Residential Districts  R2-Residential
                       R5-Residential
                       R10-Residential
                       R15- Residential
                       R22- Residential
                       C1-Local Commercial
Commercial Districts   C2-Commercial Office
                       C3-General Commercial
                       C4-Highway Commercial
                       W1-Industrial Park
Industrial Districts   W2-Light Industrial
                       W3-Heavy Industrial
                       MA1-Community Marina
                       MA1-B-Neighborhood Marina
Maritime Districts     MA2-Light Commercial Marina
                       MA3-Yacht Club
                       MB-General Commercial Marina
                       MC-Heavy Commercial Marina
                       MXD-N Neighborhood Mixed Use
                       MXD-G General Mixed Use
Mixed Use Development  MXD-S Suburban Center Mixed Use
                       MXD-U Urban Mixed Use
                       MXD-V Village Mixed Use
                       Odenton Town Center Districts:
                          OTC-C Odenton Town Center Core
                          OTC-T Odenton Town Center Transition
                          OTC-I Odenton Town Center Industrial
                          OTC-E Odenton Town Center East
Other Zoning Districts     Odenton Village Mix
                          OTC-FM Odenton Town Center Fort
                           Meade Business Mix
                          OTC-H Odenton Town Center Historic
                       OS-Open Space
                       TC-Town Center
                       SB-Small Business
 
   (b)   Mixed use districts after February 2, 2025. As of February 2, 2025,
the mixed use districts that existed prior to that date shall be renamed, and
the Anne Arundel County Digital Zoning Layer shall reflect the new name of the
mixed use district accordingly, as follows:
      (1)   The MXD-R Residential District shall be renamed the MXD-
N Neighborhood Mixed Use District;
      (2)   The MXD-C Commercial District shall be renamed the MXD-G General
Mixed Use District;
      (3)   The MXD-E Employment District shall be renamed the MXD-S Suburban
Center Mixed Use District; and
      (4)   The MXD-T Transit District shall be renamed the MXD-U Urban Mixed
Use District.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 20-16; Bill No. 84-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 75-24)
§ 18-2-106. Zoning map.
   (a)   Adoption of zoning map. The zoning districts are as shown on the
digital map entitled "Anne Arundel County Digital Zoning Layer" adopted by the
County Council. The Anne Arundel County Digital Zoning Layer shall be certified
by the Administrative Officer to the County Council and the certification shall
be part of the Digital Zoning Layer which shall be permanently kept and
maintained by the Office of Planning and Zoning. The Anne Arundel County
Digital Zoning Layer is incorporated in this article by reference as if fully
set forth.
   (b)   Authorized changes to zoning map. The Anne Arundel County Digital
Zoning Layer may not be changed except as follows:
      (1)   By a comprehensive zoning ordinance enacted by the County Council
and certified by the Administrative Officer to the County Council;
      (2)   By rezoning as authorized by §
18-16-303 and, upon final decision, certified by the Planning and Zoning
Officer;
      (3)   By zoning district line corrections as authorized by §
18-2-107 and certified by the Administrative Officer to the County Council or
the Planning and Zoning Officer.
   (c)   Changes to be recorded on Digital Zoning Layer. The Digital Zoning
Layer may not be changed after comprehensive zoning changes are certified by
the Administrative Officer to the County Council unless the change, the date of
the change, and the documentation supporting the change are recorded on the
Digital Zoning Layer and the change is certified by either the Administrative
Officer to the County Council or the Planning and Zoning Officer.
   (d)   Copies of Digital Zoning Layer. Uncertified copies of the Digital
Zoning Layer are provided for informational purposes only. To verify the zoning
status of a particular property, an individual may obtain a certified copy of
the Anne Arundel County Digital Zoning Layer from the Office of Planning and
Zoning. Certified copies shall be officially stamped by the Office of Planning
and Zoning and include the date on which the property's zoning was affirmed.
   (e)   Zoning district lines. To determine the precise location of a zoning
district line shown on the digital zoning layer, zoning district lines shall be
construed to follow:
      (1)   the limits of any municipal corporation;
      (2)   the center lines of roads and streets;
      (3)   the boundary lines of a railroad right-of-way;
      (4)   except for platted floodplains, the center line of nontidal waters,
or the landward edge of tidal waters, established from mean high-water; or
      (5)   platted lot lines or other property lines.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 75-10; Bill No. 22-23; Bill No. 69-23)
§ 18-2-107. Zoning district line corrections.
   (a)   In general. The Planning and Zoning Officer may either submit proposed
changes to the County Council for adoption by ordinance or certify changes to
the digital zoning layer to correct minor or technical errors to a zoning
district line:
      (1)   to follow the boundaries established in §
18-2-106(e)(1) through (4);
      (2)   to follow the boundaries established in §
18-2-106(e)(5), if there is a clear indication that the zoning district line
was intended to match the property boundary, when:
         (i)   more accurate or updated parcel information becomes available
due to approved development activity, a recorded plat, an updated sealed
property survey, or other improved information; or
         (ii)   minor drafting or other technical errors or omissions
identified within the GIS mapping system are corrected for a parcel and the
correction results in a zoning district line falling inside or outside of the
parcel boundary; or
      (3)   when written text or a map exhibit adopted by a comprehensive
zoning ordinance or other property rezoning clearly indicates a discrepancy
between a zoning district line as shown on the digital zoning layer and the
adopted text or map exhibit.
   (b)   Effect of correction. Any correction made in accordance with
subsection (a) may not be construed as a rezoning.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 75-10; Bill No. 22-23; Bill No. 69-23)
§ 18-2-108. Amendments to comprehensive zoning ordinance.
   (a)   Notice.
      (1)   A change of zoning proposed by amendment to a comprehensive zoning
ordinance may not be considered at a legislative session of the County Council
until:
         (i)   at least ten days before the legislative session:
            1.   one or more signs that comply with subsection (b) are posted
on the subject property; and
            2.   notice of the proposed change of zoning is posted to the
County Council website; and
         (ii)   a property owner, or their authorized agent, provides proof by
clear evidence to the Administrative Officer to the County Council that the
sign requirements of this subsection were met.
      (2)   This subsection does not apply to:
         (i)   a change of zoning by amendment to a comprehensive zoning
ordinance that was requested by application to or proposed by the Office of
Planning and Zoning prior to the introduction of the comprehensive zoning
ordinance;
         (ii)   an amendment to a comprehensive zoning ordinance that deletes a
proposed change of zoning and retains the current digital zoning layer; or
         (iii)   an emergency ordinance.
   (b)   Signs and location.
      (1)   Signs shall contain information about the proposed change of zoning
for the subject property and the date, time, and location of the hearing on the
comprehensive zoning ordinance.
      (2)   (i)   The Office of Planning and Zoning shall furnish signs to the
property owner or their authorized agent.
         (ii)   The property owner or their authorized agent is responsible for
posting and maintaining signs.
      (3)   Signs shall be located not more than 10 feet from each boundary of
the subject property that abuts a public road or navigable water, except that,
if required by flora covering the property or topographic conditions of the
land, a sign may be posted farther than 10 feet from the boundary to enhance
its visibility. If the property does not abut a public road, one or more signs
shall be posted in locations that can be readily seen by the public. The bottom
of each sign shall be erected at least three feet above the ground.
(Bill No. 69-23; Bill No. 26-24)
§ 18-2-109. Review of applications for alcoholic beverage licenses.
   The Office of Planning and Zoning shall review all applications for
alcoholic beverage licenses other than one-day alcoholic beverage licenses and
submit findings and recommendations to the Board of License Commissioners. The
findings shall take into account conformance to this article; the type of
vehicular access; the capacity of and possible disruption to the means of
access; existing traffic patterns for surrounding uses; the impact on
residential areas; the existing and allowed land uses on the lot or adjacent
lots; and the magnitude of the activity as a principal or accessory use.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 75-10)
§ 18-2-110. Preservation of historic and archaeological resources.
   To encourage preservation of historic and archaeological resources on a lot
containing historic or archaeological resources, the Office of Planning and
Zoning may allow density of development for that lot in accordance with the
gross area. In return, the developer shall enter into an easement and agreement
in a form acceptable to the County that provides for the preservation of the
historic or archaeological resources on the site.
(Bill No. 60-10)
§ 18-2-111. Compliance with other law.
   Except as otherwise provided by this article, all subdivision and
development shall comply with all applicable federal, State, and County law and
regulations and applicable environmental site design techniques.
(Bill No. 93-12)
SUBTITLE 2. USES AND STRUCTURES
§ 18-2-201. Use requirements.
   (a)   Consistency with law. A structure or lot may not be used, designed,
constructed, or altered in any manner inconsistent with this Code.
   (b)   Prohibited use. A use not specifically allowed in this article is
prohibited.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-2-202. Zoning certificate of use.
   (a)   Application. A person may file an application for a zoning certificate
of use on the form provided by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (b)   Acquisition of certificate required. A zoning certificate of use is
required for all uses except single-family dwellings and accessory dwelling
units. A person may not initiate or change a use that will exist for a period
exceeding 60 days without obtaining a zoning certificate of use. For a
commercial telecommunication facility or a small cell system, "person" includes
the owner and each user of the facility or system and "alter" includes any
change in configuration, transmit frequency range, or maximum power level from
that shown on the application for the zoning certificate of use.
   (c)   Adult bookstores and theaters. An application for a zoning certificate
of use for an adult bookstore or adult movie theater that is not granted or
denied within 30 days shall be considered as having been denied.
   (d)   Farm dual uses. An application for a zoning certificate of use for a
farm dual use that is located outside of the critical area may be accompanied
by an approved soil conservation and water quality plan in lieu of a site plan,
provided the plan depicts sufficient information for the Office of Planning and
Zoning to determine that the conditional use requirements will be met.
   (e)   When effective. A zoning certificate of use remains effective so long
as the use remains in conformity with the application granted. A change in
ownership does not itself cause the need for a new zoning certificate of use.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 65-17; Bill No. 76-19;
Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 74-24)
§ 18-2-203. Temporary uses.
   (a)   Except where specific temporary uses are provided for in this Code,
and except as provided in subsection (b), upon a determination that a temporary
use of land will not adversely affect nearby properties and will not require
significant or permanent changes to existing topography, vegetation, or other
natural features, the Planning and Zoning Officer may authorize the use in any
zoning district for a period not exceeding 60 days. The Planning and Zoning
Officer may grant up to two extensions of the temporary use for periods not
exceeding 60 days each. The land shall be entirely cleared of the temporary use
within five days after the expiration of the period.
   (b)   Farm or agricultural heritage site special events, one to eight annual
events. The Planning and Zoning Officer may authorize up to eight farm or
agricultural heritage site special events on a property in the RA, RLD, or R1
zoning districts as a temporary use if:
      (1)   the Planning and Zoning Officer determines that the event will not
adversely affect nearby properties and will not require significant or
permanent changes to existing topography, vegetation, or other natural
features;
      (2)   no more than eight events on the same property within a 12-month
period are authorized;
      (3)   authorization is given for each individual event to be held on a
property;
      (4)   an event will not exceed one day;
      (5)   any outdoor assembly areas are located and designed to shield
surrounding residential properties from the effects of noise, hazards, or other
offensive conditions;
      (6)   the maximum capacity for an event will not exceed 25 attendees per
acre;
      (7)   the owner has owned the property for the immediately preceding two
years and has been engaged in active farming for the immediately preceding two
years;
      (8)   for property in the critical area, provisions of this Code relating
to lot coverage and limits on clearing are applicable, and include access,
parking regardless of surface, temporary structures, temporary tents, and
temporary pavement surfaces; and
      (9)   for property in the critical area, no new lot coverage, including
for access or parking, is added in the buffer to accommodate the event.
   (c)   Clearing land of use. The land shall be entirely cleared of the
temporary use within five days after the expiration of the period.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 57-24)
Editor's note – Section 3 of Bill No. 69-20 requires the Office of Planning and
Zoning to provide a report to the County Council, on or before January 1 of
each year through 2027, on farm or agricultural heritage site special events
and farm or agricultural site stays.
§ 18-2-204. Accessory structures.
   (a)   When not accessory. A structure located within three feet of a
principal structure and a structure connected to a principal structure by an
enclosed breezeway less than 15 feet long is part of the principal structure
and is not an accessory structure.
   (b)   In front yard.
      (1)   Access ramps to accommodate a person under disability, driveways,
paved or gravel at-grade surfaces, fences, noise barriers or noise walls,
signs, walkways eight inches or less above grade, and walls may be located in
the front yard.
      (2)   When a new principal structure is constructed in an RA or RLD
district, an existing barn may be retained in the front yard.
      (3)   (i)   An accessory structure may be located in the front yard of a
through lot or corner through lot provided that the accessory structure is
located in the front yard that does not provide access to the lot.
         (ii)   If both front lot lines provide access to the lot, the
prevailing front yard pattern on adjoining lots shall be used to determine the
front yard in which the accessory structures may be located.
      (4)   An accessory structure may not be located in the front yard of a
nonwaterfront lot.
   (c)   On a different lot. An accessory structure or use may not be located
on a lot other than the lot on which a principal structure is located, except
that:
      (1)   a fence may be located on a lot without a principal structure;
      (2)   a private residential pier to serve a lot with a principal
structure may be located on land owned by a homeowner's association that abuts
the mean high-water line if an agreement is recorded among the land records
that allows location and use of the pier on the land owned by the homeowner's
association; and
      (3)   an accessory structure may be located on an unimproved lot abutting
a lot improved by a principal structure, provided the lots are under common
identical ownership and the accessory structure serves the lot with the
principal structure for the exclusive use of the owner or the principal
structure on the abutting lot. The Office of Planning and Zoning may require
that a structure built pursuant to this subsection be removed as a condition of
issuance of a building permit in the event a principal structure is to be
constructed on the same lot as the accessory structure.
   (d)   Floor area. The floor area of an accessory structure, including an
accessory structure constructed pursuant to subsection (c)(3), may not be
greater than the floor area of the principal structure.
   (e)   Right-of-way setback. An accessory structure may not be located in a
setback from a right- of-way line.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 64-17; Bill No. 4-18;
Bill No. 88-23)
§ 18-2-205. Barbed-wire or electrified fences.
   (a)   When allowed. 
      (1)   Barbed-wire or electrified fences are allowed in RA, RLD, R1, and
R2 districts if used in connection with farming.
      (2)   Barbed-wire, razor wire, or other such security wire is allowed
between two chain link fences or along the top of a chain link or other non-
barbed-wire fence, provided all fences are at least six feet in height, to
prevent access to a recreational vehicle or watercraft storage facility owned
by a community association, provided the storage facility, including the fence,
is:
         (i)   located on property that is owned by the community association
and is shown as community recreation area or open space on the subdivision
plat;
         (ii)   operated by the community association for use by, and limited
to, the subdivision residents; and
         (iii)   set back at least 50 feet from all property lines that abut a
residential lot.
      (3)   Electrified fences are allowed in W1, W2, and W3 districts provided
the electrified fence is at least fix feet in height and is completely
surrounded by a non-electrified fence or wall that is at least six feet in
height.
   (b)   Above a chain link or other fence. Up to six strands of barbed wire
are allowed along the top of a chain link or other non-barbed-wire fence that
is at least six feet in height:
      (1)   in a nonresidential zone to secure a warehouse or other storage
area; or
      (2)   to prevent access to a potentially dangerous use, such as a public
utility use, a construction site, a community or commercial swimming pool, or a
storm water management, sediment, or erosion control pond.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 80-08; Bill No. 6-19)
§ 18-2-206. Outside storage.
   Outside storage shall be screened in accordance with the Landscape Manual.
(Bill No. 78-05)
§ 18-2-207. Outdoor seating related to food and beverage service.
   (a)   Definition. For purposes of this section, “food service facility” has
the meaning stated in § 21-301 of the Health-General Article of the State Code.
   (b)   Requirements. Subject to subsection (d), a food service facility may
continue to utilize outdoor seating for food and beverage service if:
      (1)   the food service facility has utilized outdoor seating pursuant to
Executive Order No. 22, dated May 29, 2020, issued by County Executive Pittman,
as renewed by Executive Order No. 46, dated April 27, 2021, issued by County
Executive Pittman, continuously since a date between March 13, 2020, and May
21, 2021;
      (2)   the food service facility has continuously complied with all
requirements of Executive Order No. 22, dated May 29, 2020, issued by County
Executive Pittman, as renewed by Executive Order No. 46, dated April 27, 2021,
issued by County Executive Pittman, and Bill No. 55-21, as amended by Bill No.
83-21, Bill No. 1-23, and Bill No. 85-23; and
      (3)   (i)   within 90 days of June 23, 2024, the food service facility
shall file an application on a form provided by the Planning and Zoning Officer
to continue to utilize outdoor seating for food and beverage service; and
         (ii)   the Planning and Zoning Officer issues a written determination,
within their sole discretion, that the applicant has established that it has
met the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) and may continue to
utilize outdoor seating for food and beverage service so long as it continues
to comply with all requirements of Executive Order No. 22, dated May 29, 2020,
issued by County Executive Pittman, as renewed by Executive Order No. 46, dated
April 27, 2021, issued by County Executive Pittman, and Bill No. 55-21, as
amended by Bill No. 83-21, Bill No. 1-23, and Bill No. 85-23.
   (c)   Compliance – other. If a food service facility does not meet the
requirements of subsection (b), then outdoor seating for food and beverage
service shall comply with all other applicable provisions of this Code.
   (d)   Nonconforming use. Any nonconforming use that meets the requirements
of subsection (b) may utilize outdoor seating for food and beverage service
only so long as it complies with §
18-15-102(b) or §
18-15-103.
(Bill No. 16-24)
SUBTITLE 3. BULK REGULATIONS
§ 18-2-301. Setbacks.
   (a)   Lot in more than one district. A lot located in more than one zoning
district shall comply with the setback requirements applicable to the district
in which the majority of the property is located.
   (b)   Certain architectural features. An architectural feature that does not
contain floor area, such as an areaway, bay window, greenhouse window, chimney,
cornice, eave, sill, steps required for access, or stoop that does not exceed
five feet by five feet, may extend no more than three feet into a required
setback and be located no closer than five feet from any lot line. For purposes
of this subsection, "areaway" means an uncovered subsurface space adjacent to a
structure, such as an entrance to a basement.
   (c)   Open fire escapes. An open fire escape may extend no more than five
feet into a required setback and be no closer than five feet from any lot line.
   (d)   Decks. An open deck attached to a dwelling unit may project no more
than 10 feet into a rear setback so long as the deck is located at least three
feet from the lot line.
   (e)   Certain uses or structures. The following uses or structures need not
comply with setback requirements contained in this article and are not included
in determining requirements relating to maximum coverage by structures: access
ramps to accommodate a person under disability, driveways, paved or gravel at-
grade surfaces, fences, noise barriers or noise walls, signs, walkways eight
inches or less above grade, and walls.
   (f)   Dwellings on nonconforming lots. A single-family detached dwelling on
a lot that does not meet the area or width requirements of this article may be
expanded if the expansion is set back at least 25 feet from the front and rear
lot lines and seven feet from side lot lines and does not exceed 35 feet in
height.
   (g)   Residential subdivisions abutting heavy industrial zones. A dwelling
on a lot in a residential subdivision that abuts a W3 Industrial District shall
comply with the setback requirements for the district in which the property is
located or the setback requirements permitted pursuant to §
17-3-505 of this Code.
   (h)   Setbacks from alleys and easements. An alley or easement for the
passage of vehicles and persons may not be considered a road for the purposes
of assessing a front lot line.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 72-15; Bill No. 88-23)
§ 18-2-302. Exceptions to height limitations.
   (a)   Generally. Height limitations specified in this article do not apply
to steeples on a religious facility, flagpoles, or public utility essential
services.
   (b)   Roof features. Height limitations specified in this article do not
apply to the following when they are created only to the height necessary to
accomplish the intended purpose, are no more than 15 feet above the lowest
point of contact with the roof, and the total area is not more than 15% of the
cross sectional area of the section of the roof on which located:
      (1)   belfries;
      (2)   chimneys, ventilators, sky lights, water tanks, cooling towers, air
conditioning units, bulkheads, or similar roof features, including the
necessary associated mechanical equipment carried above roof level; or
      (3)   cupolas or domes consisting only of non-habitable space.
   (c)   Parapet walls. A parapet wall may extend no more than five feet above
the height limitations specified in this article.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05)
§ 18-2-303. Exemptions to bulk regulations.
   In-kind replacement is exempt from applicable bulk regulations if:
      (1)   the original structure has been in the same location for at least
twenty years; and
      (2)   a building permit is obtained within eighteen months after the
removal or destruction of the original structure.
(Bill No. 3-17)
§ 18-2-304. Front road designation for corner lots.
   On a corner lot other than one that is corner waterfront, the owner may
designate which of the two roads is the front road so long as the designation
is consistent with setback requirements for an existing structure that is to
remain.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05)
SUBTITLE 4. WATERFRONT PROVISIONS
§ 18-2-401. Front yard of waterfront lots.
   The front yard of a waterfront lot is the yard that faces the shoreline. If
more than one yard faces the shoreline, the rear yard is the one that provides
access to a road and the front yard is determined accordingly.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07)
§ 18-2-402. Principal structures.
   The Office of Planning and Zoning designates the location of a principal
structure on a waterfront lot based on:
      (1)   an approximate average of the location of principal structures on
abutting lots intended to keep structures relatively in line with one another;
      (2)   the height, location, necessity, and purpose of the proposed
structure;
      (3)   existing and allowed land uses on the lot and adjacent waterfront
properties;
      (4)   topographic and other physical features of the lot and adjacent
waterfront properties, including shoreline irregularities and restrictions
based on the required placement of utilities;
      (5)   the impact of the structure on the use and enjoyment of adjacent
waterfront properties and their light, air, and view; and
      (6)   protection of environmental features and maximization of ESD design
criteria.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 18-2-403. Accessory structures and uses.
   An accessory structure on a waterfront lot may be located in the front yard.
The Office of Planning and Zoning designates the location of an accessory
structure or use in the front yard on a waterfront lot based on:
      (1)   the height, location, necessity, and purpose of the proposed
structure;
      (2)   existing and allowed land uses on the lot and adjacent waterfront
properties;
      (3)   topographic and other physical and environmental features of the
lot and adjacent waterfront properties including shoreline irregularities and
restrictions based on the required placement of utilities;
      (4)   the impact of the structure or use on the use and enjoyment of
adjacent waterfront properties and their light, air, and view;
      (5)   if the accessory structure is to provide access to the waterfront,
the minimum disturbance necessary to provide access in accordance with ESD
design criteria; and
      (6)   compliance with the requirements of COMAR, Title 27 for access to
residential piers.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 18-2-404. Piers and mooring pilings.
   (a)   Location. The Office of Planning and Zoning designates the location of
a pier or mooring piling based on its impact on the use and enjoyment of
adjacent waterfront lots.
   (b)   Setbacks. A pier or mooring piling shall be located at least 15 feet
from a lot line extended for a private pier or at least 25 feet from a lot line
extended for all other piers. The Office of Planning and Zoning determines the
method of the lot line extension in accordance with one or more of the
following methods:
      (1)   from the side lot line at a 90-degree angle to the shoreline;
      (2)   from the extension of the last course of the lot line into the
water;
      (3)   from the side lot lines to the center of cove; or
      (4)   from the side lot lines generally parallel with existing piers
located on adjacent lots.
   (c)   Length. A pier or mooring piling may not extend into the water any
further than the lesser of the following:
      (1)   one-half the distance from the mean high-water line to the center
line of the body of water on which it is situated;
      (2)   one-half the distance from the mean high-water line to the center
point of a cove; or
      (3)   300 feet from the waterfront at mean high tide.
   (d)   Joint use of private pier. By agreement recorded among the land
records, two contiguous waterfront property owners may agree to share the use
of a private pier located on one of their waterfront lots or located as
extending from the common lot line or from a line extending from the common lot
line over land owned by a homeowner's association.
   (e)   Restrictions on mooring or docking. No person may use a private pier
or mooring piling for the mooring or docking of watercraft other than the owner
or occupant of the lot from which the pier extends, the owners or occupants
with a right to use the pier by virtue of an agreement allowed by this article
and recorded among the land records, or guests who are visiting those owners or
occupants for no more than 30 days in a six-month period. No more than four
watercraft exceeding 16 feet in length may be moored or docked at a private
pier or mooring piling. Watercraft exceeding 150 feet in length or 35 feet in
width may not be moored or docked at a private pier or mooring piling for more
than seven days in any 30-day period unless the pier or mooring piling is on
the Patapsco River or the Chesapeake Bay.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05)
TITLE 3. PARKING, OUTDOOR LIGHTING, AND SIGNAGE
Section
Subtitle 1. Parking
   
18-3-101.   Scope.
   
18-3-102.   Temporary parking areas.
   
18-3-103.   Calculation.
   
18-3-104.   Parking space requirements.
   
18-3-105.   Reduced parking requirements and joint use arrangements.
   
18-3-106.   Parking programs.
Subtitle 2. Outdoor Lighting
   
18-3-201.   Outdoor lighting.
Subtitle 3. Signage
   
18-3-301.   General provisions.
   
18-3-302.   Permit requirements.
   
18-3-303.   Prohibited signs; location; removal from County rights-of-way.
   
18-3-304.   Measurement of area and height.
   
18-3-305.   Permanent offsite directional signs in County rights-of-way.
   
18-3-306.   Temporary signs.
   
18-3-307.   Signs in residential districts and for certain dwellings in
commercial districts.
   
18-3-308.   Signs for business complexes.
   
18-3-309.   Signs in commercial and industrial districts for uses other than
dwellings and business complexes.
   
18-3-310.   Signs for marinas; signs in maritime districts.
   
18-3-311.   Signs in open space districts.
   
18-3-312.   Signs in Small Business Districts.
   
18-3-313.   Signage programs.
SUBTITLE 1. PARKING
§ 18-3-101. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to the parking required for particular uses. Other
requirements relating to parking are located in §§
17-6-101 et seq. of this Code.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-3-102. Temporary parking areas.
   The Planning and Zoning Officer may authorize the temporary use of property
as a parking area for a period not to exceed 30 days and may renew the
authorization for up to two additional 30-day periods. If use of the property
as a parking area has not ceased by the end of the authorized time period, the
parking area shall revert to its non-parking use and shall comply with all
requirements of this Code.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-3-103. Calculation.
   (a)   Floor area. Parking requirements based on the square footage of a
structure to be served shall be calculated based on 75% of the floor area.
   (b)   Per seat. Parking requirements per seat shall be determined by the
number of individual seats. For bench-type seating, 20 inches is the equivalent
of one seat.
   (c)   Rated capacity. Parking requirements for rated capacity shall be
determined by the maximum capacity of a structure as governed by the County
Fire Prevention Code and regulations of the Health Department.
   (d)   Fraction of base measures. Parking spaces shall be provided for each
fraction in excess of 50% of the base measures contained in §
18-3-104.
   (e)   More than one use. The parking requirements for two or more uses on
the same property are the sum of the individual requirements for each use.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-3-104. Parking space requirements.
   The minimum onsite required parking spaces are listed in the chart below.
They may be increased based on site development plan review or special
exception approval, reduced as provided in §
18-3-105, or superseded by a parking program allowed by this Code. The Planning
and Zoning Officer may determine reasonable and appropriate onsite parking
requirements for structures and land uses that are not listed on the chart
based on requirements for similar uses, comments from reviewing agencies, and
the parking needs of the proposed use.
 
Use Parking
Use                                                                             Parking
                                                                                2 spaces for
Adult day care                                                                  every 10
                                                                                adults or
                                                                                less
                                                                                0.5 spaces
                                                                                for each acre
                                                                                of land, with
Airports and airfields                                                          a minimum of
                                                                                20 spaces and
                                                                                2 spaces for
                                                                                each planned
                                                                                tie-down
                                                                                10 spaces for
Amusement parks                                                                 each ride or
                                                                                activity
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 3 seats
                                                                                and 1 space
Arenas, exposition halls, stadiums, racetracks, fairgrounds, concert facilities for every 10
                                                                                persons in
                                                                                designated
                                                                                standing
                                                                                areas
                                                                                1 space for
Art galleries, libraries, and museums                                           every 150
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                each adult
                                                                                independent
                                                                                dwelling
                                                                                unit, 1 space
                                                                                for each
                                                                                employee per
                                                                                major shift,
                                                                                and visitor
                                                                                parking at
Assisted living facilities                                                      the rate of 2
                                                                                spaces for
                                                                                every 10
                                                                                adult
                                                                                independent
                                                                                dwelling
                                                                                units,
                                                                                comprehensive
                                                                                care units,
                                                                                and assisted
                                                                                care units
                                                                                The number of
                                                                                spaces
                                                                                required for
Assisted living facilities I and II, community-based                            the
                                                                                applicable
                                                                                type of
                                                                                dwelling unit
                                                                                1 space shall
                                                                                be provided
                                                                                for every two
                                                                                employees and
                                                                                one space
                                                                                shall be
                                                                                provided for
Automobile and truck dismantling and recycling facilities                       every 1,000
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of covered
                                                                                floor area
                                                                                devoted to
                                                                                the storage
                                                                                or sale of
                                                                                parts
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                each 400
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor
                                                                                area, service
Automobile gasoline stations                                                    racks count 1
                                                                                for 1; aisles
                                                                                and pumps not
                                                                                to be used
                                                                                for required
                                                                                spaces
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 100
                                                                                square feet
Automobile gasoline stations, convenience stores, food service/restaurants      plus 1 space
                                                                                for every 5
                                                                                restaurant
                                                                                seats
                                                                                1 space for
Automobile repair and service facilities                                        every 500
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                1 space for
Automobile sales show rooms and rental facilities                               every 500
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                1 space for
Banks                                                                           every 200
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                1 space for
Bed and breakfast homes                                                         each guest
                                                                                room
                                                                                1 space for
Bed and breakfast inns                                                          each guest
                                                                                room
Bingo facilities, commercial                                                    1 space for
                                                                                every 2 seats
Bowling alleys                                                                  4 spaces for
                                                                                each lane
                                                                                2 spaces for
Child care centers                                                              each group of
                                                                                10 children
                                                                                or less
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                each employee
Clay and borrow pits and sand and gravel operations                             and at least
                                                                                5 spaces for
                                                                                visitors
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 2
                                                                                people at
Clubs, lodges, and related facilities                                           rated
                                                                                capacity per
                                                                                Fire
                                                                                Prevention
                                                                                Code
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 2
                                                                                people at
                                                                                rated
                                                                                capacity per
                                                                                Fire
Conference retreat facility                                                     Prevention
                                                                                Code, plus 1
                                                                                space for
                                                                                each employee
                                                                                and at least
                                                                                5 spaces for
                                                                                visitors
                                                                                1 space per
                                                                                1,000 square
                                                                                feet of floor
                                                                                area for the
                                                                                first 5,000
Data storage center                                                             square feet
                                                                                and 1 space
                                                                                for each
                                                                                additional
                                                                                5,000 square
                                                                                feet of floor
                                                                                area
                                                                                2.5 spaces
Dwellings: townhouses and stacked townhouses                                    for each
                                                                                dwelling unit
                                                                                2 spaces for
Dwellings: single-family detached, duplex, triplex, and fourplex                each dwelling
                                                                                unit
                                                                                1.5 spaces
Dwellings: adult independent units                                              for each
                                                                                dwelling unit
Dwellings, multifamily and multiplex
                                                                                1 space for
   Efficiency and 1 bedroom                                                  each dwelling
                                                                                unit
                                                                                1.5 spaces
   2 bedrooms                                                                for each
                                                                                dwelling unit
                                                                                2 spaces for
   3 or more bedrooms                                                        each dwelling
                                                                                unit
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 3
                                                                                eating
                                                                                disorder
Eating disorder treatment facility                                              treatment
                                                                                units plus 1
                                                                                space for
                                                                                each employee
                                                                                per major
                                                                                shift
                                                                                1 space per 5
                                                                                attendees for
                                                                                outdoor
                                                                                event; 1
                                                                                space for
                                                                                every 1,000
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of building
                                                                                area; and 1
                                                                                space for
Farm alcohol production facility                                                every 2
                                                                                employees.
                                                                                This does not
                                                                                include areas
                                                                                dedicated to
                                                                                agricultural
                                                                                production
                                                                                unrelated to
                                                                                the farm
                                                                                alcohol
                                                                                production
                                                                                facility
Garden center                                                                   4 spaces for
                                                                                each acre
Golf courses                                                                    8 spaces for
                                                                                each hole
                                                                                2 spaces for
                                                                                each hole;
Golf course facilities, private                                                 plus 1 space
                                                                                for each
                                                                                guest room
                                                                                The number of
                                                                                spaces
Group homes I                                                                   required for
                                                                                a single-
                                                                                family
                                                                                dwelling
                                                                                The number of
                                                                                spaces
Group homes II                                                                  required for
                                                                                a multifamily
                                                                                dwelling
                                                                                4 spaces for
Health clubs, spas, gymnasiums                                                  every 1,000
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                15 spaces
Heliports                                                                       plus 1 space
                                                                                for each
                                                                                tiedown
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                each bed,
                                                                                plus 1 space
                                                                                per employee
                                                                                per major
Hospitals                                                                       shift, plus 1
                                                                                space for
                                                                                each hospital
                                                                                vehicle, 10
                                                                                spaces for
                                                                                out-patient
                                                                                services
                                                                                1 space for
Hotels and motels                                                               each room or
                                                                                unit
                                                                                3 spaces for
Housing for the elderly of moderate means                                       every four
                                                                                units
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 200
                                                                                square feet
Kennels, commercial                                                             of floor
                                                                                area,
                                                                                excluding
                                                                                indoor and
                                                                                outdoor runs
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                each employee
Landfills, rubble and land-clearing debris                                      and at least
                                                                                5 spaces for
                                                                                visitors
                                                                                1 space for
Manufacturing, general                                                          every 1,000
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                1space for
                                                                                every 2 boat
                                                                                slips or
                                                                                moorings; 1
                                                                                space for
                                                                                every 3 boat
                                                                                slips in dry
                                                                                covered
                                                                                storage or in
                                                                                multilevel
Marinas, commercial and community                                               storage rack
                                                                                building; 2
                                                                                trailer
                                                                                spaces per
                                                                                ramp for
                                                                                community
                                                                                marinas; 5
                                                                                trailer
                                                                                spaces per
                                                                                ramp for
                                                                                commercial
                                                                                marinas
                                                                                2 spaces for
Miniature golf courses/driving ranges/batting cages                             each tee or
                                                                                cage
                                                                                2 spaces for
Mobile homes                                                                    each dwelling
                                                                                unit
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                each employee
Natural wood waste recycling facilities                                         and at least
                                                                                5 spaces for
                                                                                visitors
Nurseries, landscaping and plant sales                                          4 spaces for
                                                                                each acre
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 3 beds
Nursing homes                                                                   plus 1 space
                                                                                for each
                                                                                employee per
                                                                                major shift
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 200
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                except that
                                                                                medical and
Offices, professional and general                                               dental
                                                                                offices shall
                                                                                provide 1
                                                                                space for
                                                                                every 150
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
Produce markets                                                                 4 spaces for
                                                                                each acre
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 3 seats
                                                                                or 1 space
                                                                                for every 100
Public assembly and meeting establishments                                      square feet
                                                                                of floor
                                                                                area,
                                                                                whichever is
                                                                                greater
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every two
                                                                                boat slips or
Public launching facilities                                                     moorings plus
                                                                                10 trailer
                                                                                spaces per
                                                                                boat ramp
                                                                                The number of
                                                                                spaces
                                                                                required for
Recovery residences                                                             the
                                                                                applicable
                                                                                type of
                                                                                dwelling unit
                                                                                4 spaces for
Recreation centers                                                              every 1,000
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                each employee
Recyclables recovery facilities                                                 and at least
                                                                                5 spaces for
                                                                                visitors
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 3 seats
                                                                                (fixed seats)
                                                                                or 1 space
                                                                                for every 100
Religious facilities                                                            square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                (unfixed
                                                                                seating),
                                                                                whichever is
                                                                                greater
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 3 seats
                                                                                plus 1 space
                                                                                for every 15
                                                                                classroom
                                                                                seats plus 1
                                                                                space for
Religious facilities in combination with a school                               every 5 seats
                                                                                in a multi-
                                                                                purpose room
                                                                                or 1 space
                                                                                for every 3
                                                                                permanent
                                                                                auditorium
                                                                                seats
                                                                                1 space for
Research offices and laboratories                                               every 200
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
Retail or Service Business:
                                                                                1 space for
   For establishments and multiple-use centers with under 50,000 square feet every 160
floor area                                                                      square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                1 space for
   For establishments and multiple-use centers with 50,000 square feet of floevery 180
area and over, but less than 600,000 square feet of floor area                  square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                1 space for
   For establishments and multiple-use centers with 600,000 square feet of   every 200
floor area and over                                                             square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 3 seats
                                                                                or 1 space
                                                                                for every 200
Restaurants, banquet halls, and taverns                                         square feet
                                                                                of floor
                                                                                area,
                                                                                whichever is
                                                                                greater
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 2 beds
                                                                                and 1 space
Rooming houses                                                                  for each
                                                                                resident
                                                                                owner or
                                                                                resident
                                                                                manager
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                each employee
Rubble processing facilities                                                    and at least
                                                                                5 spaces for
                                                                                visitors
                                                                                1 space for
Schools, arts, business, technical, or trade                                    every 160
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
Schools, public charter and private academic:
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 20
                                                                                classroom
                                                                                seats; 1
                                                                                space for
   Elementary                                                                every 5 seats
                                                                                in multi-
                                                                                purpose
                                                                                rooms; 5
                                                                                spaces for
                                                                                visitors
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 10
                                                                                classroom
                                                                                seats; 10
                                                                                spaces for
                                                                                visitors; 1
                                                                                space for
                                                                                every 3
   Secondary schools                                                         permanent
                                                                                auditorium
                                                                                seats or 1
                                                                                space for
                                                                                each 40
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of seating
                                                                                area where
                                                                                fixed seating
                                                                                is not used
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 6
                                                                                classroom
                                                                                seats; 20
                                                                                spaces for
                                                                                visitors; 1
                                                                                space for
                                                                                every 3
   Colleges, junior colleges, and universities                               permanent
                                                                                auditorium
                                                                                seats or 1
                                                                                space for
                                                                                each 40
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of seating
                                                                                area where
                                                                                fixed seating
                                                                                is not used
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 60
                                                                                storage bays;
                                                                                4 spaces
                                                                                located
                                                                                adjacent to
                                                                                each
                                                                                unenclosed
Self-storage facilities                                                         storage area
                                                                                of 8,000
                                                                                square feet;
                                                                                2 spaces for
                                                                                employee
                                                                                parking; 5
                                                                                spaces
                                                                                located at
                                                                                the business
                                                                                office
                                                                                5 spaces for
Skating rinks                                                                   every 1,000
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                each employee
Solid waste transfer stations                                                   and at least
                                                                                5 spaces for
                                                                                visitors
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                each employee
                                                                                and 1 space
State-licensed medical clinics                                                  for every 20
                                                                                clients
                                                                                served by the
                                                                                clinic
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 4
Swimming pools, commercial                                                      persons based
                                                                                on facility's
                                                                                design
                                                                                capacity
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 10
Swimming pools, community                                                       persons based
                                                                                on facility's
                                                                                design
                                                                                capacity
                                                                                3.5 spaces
Tennis courts                                                                   for each
                                                                                court
Theaters                                                                        1 space for
                                                                                every 3 seats
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                each rental
                                                                                vehicle or
                                                                                trailer and
                                                                                one space
Truck and trailer rental facilities in conjunction with automobile service      every 100
stations                                                                        square feet
                                                                                of floor
                                                                                area, with a
                                                                                minimum of at
                                                                                least 5
                                                                                additional
                                                                                spaces.
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 200
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor
Veterinary offices, clinics, and hospitals                                      area,
                                                                                excluding
                                                                                overnight
                                                                                rooms for
                                                                                animals
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 2
                                                                                gaming
Video lottery facilities                                                        positions at
                                                                                a video
                                                                                lottery
                                                                                terminal
                                                                                1 space for
Video rental establishments                                                     every 100
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                1 space for
Warehouse and goods storage areas                                               every 1,000
                                                                                square feet
                                                                                of floor area
                                                                                1 space for
Watercraft charter operations at maritime facilities                            every 4
                                                                                passengers
Workforce housing
                                                                                1 space for
   Efficiency and 1 bedroom                                                  each dwelling
                                                                                unit
                                                                                1.5 spaces
   2 bedrooms                                                                for each
                                                                                dwelling unit
                                                                                2 spaces for
   3 bedrooms                                                                each dwelling
                                                                                unit
                                                                                1 space for
                                                                                every 2 boat
                                                                                slips or
                                                                                moorings; 1
                                                                                space for
Yacht clubs                                                                     every 3 boat
                                                                                slips in dry
                                                                                covered
                                                                                storage or in
                                                                                multilevel
                                                                                storage rack
                                                                                building
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 77-07; Bill No. 79-07;
Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 82-09; Bill No. 14-11; Bill No. 14-15; Bill No. 23-15;
Bill No. 21-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20;
Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 6-23; Bill No. 61-23; Bill No. 83-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-3-105. Reduced parking requirements and joint use arrangements.
   (a)   Reduced parking requirements. Upon written application, the Planning
and Zoning Officer may reduce the parking requirements of this subtitle if the
applicant demonstrates that the facility to be served would not require in its
day-to-day operation a full complement of parking. The application shall be
accompanied by a parking needs study that includes an estimate of the parking
needs for the use, a thorough explanation of the basis for the estimate, any
data used in calculating the estimate, including parking generation studies and
previous experience with similar uses, and an explanation of any other relevant
considerations, such as availability of commercial or public parking areas.
   (b)   Joint use parking. The Planning and Zoning Officer may allow joint use
parking arrangements if the applicants enter into a written agreement
acceptable to the County. Joint use arrangements may be authorized for a
multiple-use facility when parking is provided at a common onsite facility that
has the number of spaces required for each individual use. Joint use of the
same parking spaces may be used to meet the parking and loading requirements
if:
      (1)   the uses operate at different times with no overlap and the parking
spaces provided are the number required for the greater generator; or
      (2)   the uses operate during overlapping time periods and the parking
spaces provided are 100% of the number required for the greater generator plus
50% of the number required for the secondary generator; and
      (3)   vehicular and pedestrian access is provided within the development,
separately from roads and freeways.
   (c)   Reduced parking requirements – Workforce housing.
      (1)   For workforce housing, the parking requirements of this subtitle
shall be reduced by 10% if the workforce housing is located within one-quarter
mile of a high-frequency transit stop.
      (2)   If workforce housing contains secured covered bicycle storage, the
parking requirements of this subtitle shall be reduced by an amount not to
exceed:
         (i)   1 space for every eight bicycle locking positions; or
         (ii)   10% of the total parking required.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 83-23)
§ 18-3-106. Parking programs.
   (a)   Parking program. The developer of a mixed use project or a PUD shall
submit a parking program to the Office of Planning and Zoning. If approved, the
program shall supersede the standards of this subtitle to the extent of any
conflict.
   (b)   Onsite parking. Onsite parking for a mixed use project or a PUD shall
be separated from walkways by landscaped screening, low-profile walls, berms,
or decorative fencing; be well-illuminated; be free of pedestrian barriers; be
designed to minimize the number of curb cuts to streets and highways and allow
the direct movement of pedestrians between adjacent areas of onsite parking;
have well illuminated access ways for pedestrians; and be located to the rear
of buildings, below grade, or in a parking structure, except for short-term
convenience parking.
   (c)   Rideshare spaces. The Office of Planning and Zoning may require that
parking spaces in a mixed use project or PUD be designated for those who
rideshare.
   (d)   On-street parking. The Office of Planning and Zoning may require or
allow parking on both public and private streets in a mixed use project or PUD
to promote street-level access to buildings and amenities.
   (e)   Vehicular circulation system. The vehicular circulation system in a
mixed use project or PUD shall provide for the safe and convenient movement of
vehicles and pedestrians and adequate space for the loading and unloading of
persons, goods, and materials.
   (f)   Special uses. The parking program for a government reuse facility is
governed by §
18-12-106.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-07)
SUBTITLE 2. OUTDOOR LIGHTING
§ 18-3-201. Outdoor lighting.
   (a)   Applicability. This section does not apply to light fixtures on public
streets or rights-of-way.
   (b)   Outdoor lighting in nonresidential zoning districts. Outdoor light
fixtures in nonresidential zoning districts shall be located at least 25 feet
from the boundary of any residential district, except that the Office of
Planning and Zoning may approve a lesser setback upon the filing of an
application that describes the type, location, lumen rating, and height of an
outdoor lighting fixture and the reasons why a lesser setback should be
allowed. Potential reasons for a lesser setback may include the following:
      (1)   fixtures will not be visible at any point along the boundaries of
the lot on which they are located due to the location of buildings or walls,
topography, or similar visual barriers;
      (2)   lighting will have minimal offsite impact due to the distance of
the fixtures from roads and neighboring properties;
      (3)   fixtures will incorporate additional shielding or other features to
prevent offsite impact; or
      (4)   lighting plans demonstrate other factors that will prevent glare
and light spillover.
   (c)   Outdoor lighting in residential zoning districts. Outdoor light
fixtures installed on a residentially zoned lot shall be:
      (1)   arranged to direct the light down towards the property on which the
light fixture is located and away from adjoining residential lots or aimed to
confine the light to an object, such as a flag or landscaping; and
      (2)   installed using motion sensing if used for security purposes.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 61-21)
SUBTITLE 3. SIGNAGE
§ 18-3-301. General provisions.
   (a)   Materials; maintenance. A sign shall be made of durable material and
be properly maintained.
   (b)   Obstruction prohibited. A sign and its supporting structures may not
impair the clear sight triangle; obstruct a road, sidewalk, or driveway;
obstruct the view of traffic signs, traffic signals, oncoming traffic, or
pedestrians; or in any way interfere with the placement or function of a
traffic control device.
   (c)   Projection from facade. An identification sign may not project more
than two feet from the facade, except that a canopy or awning attached to a
principal structure may be used as an identification sign.
   (d)   Lighting limitations. The light from any illuminated sign shall be
shaded, shielded, or directed so that the light intensity or brightness does
not adversely affect surrounding or facing premises nor adversely affect the
safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on public or private roads or
parking areas. Light may not shine or reflect on or into residential
structures. A sign in a residentially zoned district may be lighted only during
the sign user's hours of operation.
   (e)   Electronic message boards. Except for properties listed on the County
Inventory of Historic Resources, electronic message boards may be used in
conjunction with allowed signs if the message is on a cycle of not less than
five seconds. Electronic message boards shall comply with the provisions of §§
17-6-501 and 17-6-504 of this Code and may not adversely affect properties
listed on the County Inventory of Historic Resources or on a scenic and
historic road. The placement of an electronic message board within sight of a
property listed on the County Inventory of Historic Resources or on a scenic
and historic road shall mitigate any adverse visual impact of the electronic
message board in a manner determined by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (f)   Color of freestanding signs. The parts of a freestanding sign that do
not contain sign area, such as the back, braces, and supports, shall be of a
single color.
   (g)   Display windows. For a commercial operation, an advertising sign
commonly used in a retail business may be in a display window if the sign does
not occupy more than 30% of the window area.
   (h)   Responsible party. The person or organization that is the subject of a
sign shall be presumed to be the party that erected the sign.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 92-13)
§ 18-3-302. Permit requirements.
   (a)   Permit generally required. Except as provided in subsection (b), a
permit shall be obtained from the Department of Inspections and Permits before
posting a sign.
   (b)   When permit not required. The following signs do not require a permit:
      (1)   a temporary sign;
      (2)   a directional sign that is less than four square feet in area;
      (3)   a permanent directional sign in a County right-of-way, but pre-
approval is required as provided in §
18-3-305;
      (4)   a sign forming an integral part of a transportation shelter, fuel-
dispensing pump, vending machine, or service appliance; or
      (5)   a sign posted at a parking lot as required by §
12-3-107 of this Code.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 18-09)
§ 18-3-303. Prohibited signs; location; removal from County rights-of-way.
   (a)   Definition. For purposes of this section, a "changeable copy sign"
means a sign designed so that characters, letters, or illustrations on the sign
can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign.
   (b)   Prohibition. The following types of signs are prohibited:
      (1)   a portable sign, including a portable changeable copy sign, with or
without wheels;
      (2)   a sandwich sign;
      (3)   revolving signs and whirling signs; and
      (4)   a sign that projects above the roof of a structure, a sign painted
on the roof of a structure, and a sign supported by poles, uprights, or braces
extending from or attached to the roof of a structure.
   (c)   Location. A sign shall be located within the lot lines of the use to
which it refers, except that a directional sign may be located within a County
right-of-way to the extent permitted by §
18-3-305 and §
18-3-306.
   (d)   Removal from County rights-of-way. The County may remove and dispose
of a sign posted in a County right-of-way that does not comply with §
18-3-305 or §
18-3-306 and may impose the costs of removal and disposition on the person or
entity responsible for the sign.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 66-21)
§ 18-3-304. Measurement of area and height.
   (a)   How area is measured. Sign area is measured as the smallest
rectangular area enclosing all elements of the sign, including the extreme
limits of the writing, representation, emblem, logo, or other display, and all
ornamental attachments and inner connecting links. Only one face of a
freestanding sign is measured if the faces are placed back to back no more than
three feet apart, are of the same dimensions, and have identical copy except
for minor differences necessary for directional purposes. Supporting framework,
bracing, or decorative fences or walls are not included.
   (b)   How height is measured. The height of a sign is measured as the
distance from the base of the sign at grade level to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 15-25)
§ 18-3-305. Permanent offsite directional signs in County rights-of-way.
   (a)   Generally. A permanent offsite directional sign stating the name of a
cultural or historical site; a club, lodge, or fraternal or service
organization; community business areas; a hotel or motel; a marina; a religious
facility; a restaurant; or a waterfront event is allowed in a County right-of-
way if the use to which the sign relates is located on a local or collector
road and at least 1,000 feet, measured by road distance, from an arterial or
higher classification road.
   (b)   Airport parking. A permanent offsite directional sign stating the name
of a private parking facility is allowed in a County right-of-way if the use to
which the sign relates is located in the area shown on the official map adopted
by the County Council entitled “Airport Permanent Offsite Directional Signs,
2005”.
   (c)   Restrictions. No more than four signs are allowed on a single sign
pole, and no more than one sign is allowed for a single business or business
area in one direction on an arterial road. No more than two sign poles are
allowed in any one direction at an arterial road intersection.
   (d)   Pre-approval required. An application for approval of a permanent
directional offsite sign shall be filed with the Office of Planning and Zoning
and shall contain the location of the business or business area, the
intersections requested for the location of the sign, and the name of the
business or business area that will appear on the sign.
   (e)   Installation. The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for
the installation of an offsite directional sign in a location determined by the
Department.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05)
   Editor’s note – A small-scale representation of the official map adopted by
Bill No. 78-05 is included as an appendix to this article.
§ 18-3-306. Temporary signs.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   A temporary sign is allowed in all zoning districts.
      (2)   A temporary sign on property that 500 feet or more of road frontage
or a temporary sign that applies to more than 10 adjacent lots may have a
maximum area of 64 square feet. Otherwise, a temporary sign shall have a
maximum area of nine square feet in residential districts and 24 square feet in
all other districts.
      (3)   The height of a temporary sign may not exceed 12 feet above grade
level.
      (4)   The total number of temporary wind signs on private property may
not exceed four.
      (5)   A temporary sign that is unrelated to an event may not be displayed
for more than two periods of 60-consecutive days in any 12-month period.
      (6)   A temporary sign that is related to an event may not be displayed
for more than 60 days before the start of the event and shall be removed within
7 days after the conclusion of the event.
   (b)   Temporary directional signs.
      (1)   A maximum of six temporary directional signs of no more than three
square feet in area or three feet in height are allowed per event or
destination, with a double-faced sign counting as one sign.
      (2)   A temporary directional sign shall be self-supporting and may be
posted only on weekends between 8:00 a.m. on Friday and 9:00 a.m. on the
following Monday or between 9:00 a.m. on County, State, or federal holidays and
9:00 a.m. on the following day.
      (3)   Temporary directional signs may be placed within a County right-of-
way if the signs are located at least three feet from any curbed or paved area.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 9-09; Bill No. 66-21)
§ 18-3-307. Signs in residential districts and for certain dwellings in
commercial districts.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to signs in residential districts and to
signs for adult independent dwelling units, multifamily dwellings, and
townhouse dwellings located in commercial districts.
   (b)   Freestanding signs.
      (1)   A residential development without a community facility or
multifamily dwelling may have two freestanding signs at the main roadway entry
point. If one sign is used, it may not exceed 40 square feet in area. If two
signs are used, each sign may not exceed 20 square feet in area. The signs may
not exceed a height of six feet.
      (2)   A residential development with a community facility or multifamily
dwelling may have the freestanding signs allowed by subsection (b)(1). The
development also may have one freestanding sign for each community facility or
multifamily dwelling within the development, and each sign may not exceed two
square feet in area or a height of four feet.
   (c)   Identification signs. A residential development may have one
identification sign on each main entrance facade of a community facility or
multifamily dwelling. Each sign may not exceed two square feet in area.
   (d)   Directional signs. A residential development may have directional
signs as necessary. Each sign may not exceed six square feet in area or a
height of five feet.
   (e)   Nonresidential and institutional use signs. Except as otherwise
provided in this section, each nonresidential or institutional use located in a
residential district may have one freestanding sign, one identification sign on
not more than two facades, and directional signs as necessary. A freestanding
sign may not exceed an area of 64 square feet or a height of 10 feet. The total
square footage of all identification signs may not exceed 400 square feet. Each
directional sign may not exceed 20 square feet in area or a height of seven
feet.
   (f)   Home occupation signs. One freestanding sign that does not exceed two
square feet in area or a height of five feet is allowed to identify a home
occupation.
   (g)   Bed and breakfast homes and inns signs. One freestanding sign that
does not exceed four square feet in area or a height of five feet is allowed to
identify a bed and breakfast home or bed and breakfast inn.
   (h)   Waterman's home commercial use sign. One freestanding sign that does
not exceed two square feet in area or a height of five feet is allowed to
identify a waterman's home commercial use.
   (i)   Roadside stand signs. Two freestanding signs are allowed for the sale
of agricultural produce at a roadside stand. Each sign may not exceed 20 square
feet in area or a height of eight feet.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05)
§ 18-3-308. Signs for business complexes.
   (a)   Freestanding signs. A business complex may have one freestanding sign
at each road frontage. The area of the sign may not exceed the lesser of 400
square feet or one square foot for each one foot of road frontage, except that
the area of the sign for a movie theater may not exceed 450 square feet. The
height of the sign may not exceed 40 feet. An automobile gasoline station may
have one additional freestanding sign at each road frontage, and the area of
the sign may not exceed 60 square feet or a height of 10 feet.
   (b)   Identification signs. A business complex may have:
      (1)   identification signs for the name of the business complex on not
more than three facades, so long as the area of the signs does not exceed 12%
of the area of each facade and the area of all signs does not exceed 400 square
feet;
      (2)   identification signs for the name of a tenant on not more than two
facades in a one or two story structure, so long as the area of the signs does
not exceed, for each tenant facade, the lesser of 10% of the area of the facade
or 200 square feet;
      (3)   one identification sign at each service entry, so long as the area
of each sign does not exceed four square feet;
      (4)   one identification sign on each entry facade if the business
complex is a mall or otherwise enclosed, so long as the area of each sign does
not exceed 10% of the area of the facade and the area of all signs does not
exceed 200 square feet;
      (5)   one identification sign for each secondary business in a structure
that contains one principal use, so long as the area of all identification
signs on the structure does not exceed 400 square feet; and
      (6)   no more than three identification signs on a canopy over a group of
gas pumps at an automobile gasoline station, so long as the area of the sign
does not exceed 25 square feet.
   (c)   Directional signs. A business complex may have directional signs as
necessary. Each sign may not exceed six square feet in area or a height of five
feet.
   (d)   Service windows. An establishment in a business complex with a ticket,
drive-through, or ordering window may have no more than two signs, freestanding
or identification, that relate to the business operation or services provided
at the window. The area of each sign may not exceed 32 square feet. The height
of a freestanding sign may not exceed six feet.
(Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 88-20)
§ 18-3-309.   Signs in commercial and industrial districts for uses other than
dwellings and business complexes.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to signs in commercial and industrial
districts for uses other than dwelling and business complexes.
   (b)   Freestanding signs. An establishment may have one freestanding sign at
each road frontage. The area of the sign may not exceed the lesser of 250
square feet or one square foot for each one foot of road frontage, except that
the area of the sign for a movie theater may not exceed 450 square feet. The
height of the sign may not exceed 30 feet. An automobile gasoline station may
have one additional freestanding sign at each road frontage, and the area of
the sign may not exceed 60 square feet or a height of 10 feet.
   (c)   Identification signs. An establishment may have:
      (1)   identification signs on not more than three facades, so long as the
combined area of the signs does not exceed 12% of the area of each facade and
the area of all signs does not exceed 400 square feet;
      (2)   one identification sign at each service entry, so long as the area
of each sign does not exceed four square feet;
      (3)   one identification sign for each secondary business in a structure
that contains one principal use, so long as the area of all identification
signs on the structure does not exceed 400 square feet; and
      (4)   no more than three identification signs on a canopy over a group of
gas pumps at an automobile gasoline station, so long as the area of the sign
does not exceed 25 square feet.
   (d)   Directional signs. An establishment may have directional signs as
necessary. Each sign may not exceed six square feet in area or a height of five
feet.
   (e)   Service windows. An establishment with a ticket, drive-through, or
ordering window may have no more than two signs, freestanding or
identification, that relate to the business operation or services provided at
the window. The area of each sign may not exceed 32 square feet. The height of
a freestanding sign may not exceed six feet.
(Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 88-20; Bill No. 92-23; Bill No. 14-24)
§ 18-3-310. Signs for marinas; signs in maritime districts.
   (a)   Community marinas. A community marina may have one freestanding sign
that does not exceed 36 square feet in area or a height of eight feet.
   (b)   Commercial marinas. A commercial marina may have one freestanding sign
at the entrance that does not exceed 200 square feet in area or a height of 25
feet and a freestanding sign on the shoreline or a pier that does not exceed 48
square feet in area or a height of 10 feet.
   (c)   Independent uses in a marina. Each independent use in a marina may
have two identification signs on a structure to which the use relates. The
total square footage of the signs may not exceed 200 square feet.
   (d)   Directional signs. Directional signs are allowed in a maritime
district as necessary. Each sign may not exceed six square feet in area or a
height of five feet.
   (e)   Bed and breakfast homes and inns signs. One freestanding sign that
does not exceed four square feet in area or a height of five feet is allowed to
identify a bed and breakfast home or bed and breakfast inn.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05)
§ 18-3-311. Signs in open space districts.
   (a)   Freestanding or identification signs. An establishment or use in an
open space district that relates to conservation, farming or nurseries, nature
study, or recreation may have one sign, freestanding or identification, that
does not exceed 20 square feet in area. The height of a freestanding sign may
not exceed six feet.
   (b)   Directional signs. An establishment or use in an open space district
may have directional signs as necessary. Each sign may not exceed four square
feet in area or a height of four feet.
   (c)   Home occupations. One freestanding sign that does not exceed two
square feet in area or a height of five feet is allowed to identify a home
occupation in a dwelling located in an open space district.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05)
§ 18-3-312. Signs in Small Business Districts.
   (a)   Freestanding signs. An establishment or use in a Small Business
District may have one freestanding sign that does not exceed 10 square feet on
a minor arterial road or road of lower classification, or an area of 30 square
feet on a principal arterial road or a road of higher classification. The
height of a freestanding sign may not exceed six feet on a minor arterial road
or a road of lower classification, or a height of 10 feet on a principal
arterial road or a road of higher classification.
   (b)   Identification signs. An establishment or use in a Small Business
District may have an identification sign on one facade, so long as the area of
the sign does not exceed 10% of the area of the facade.
   (c)   Directional signs. An establishment or use in a Small Business
District may have directional signs as necessary. Each sign may not exceed six
square feet in area and five feet in height.
   (d)   Illumination of signs. A sign in a Small Business District on a minor
arterial road or a road of lower classification may be illuminated only by
lighting exterior to the sign.
   (e)   Signs prohibited on accessory structures. An accessory structure in a
Small Business District may not have a sign.
(Bill No. 14-24)
§ 18-3-313. Signage programs.
   (a)   Signage program. The developer of a project located in a mixed use or
town center district or of a PUD shall submit a signage program to the Office
of Planning and Zoning. If approved, the program shall supersede the standards
described in this subtitle to the extent of any conflict.
   (b)   Purpose. A signage program shall contribute to the efficient
utilization of the development, minimize visual clutter, make use of
directional signs in the parking areas and pedestrian circulation system, be in
harmony with the architecture, landscaping, and other design elements of the
development, be compatible with existing or potential development in the
neighboring communities if the signage is along the periphery of the site or
visible from public streets or roads, and address the location, size, height,
number, color, and material of all proposed signs and state whether the
proposed signs will be illuminated.
   (c)   Special uses. The signage program for a government reuse facility is
governed by §
18-12-105.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 92-23; Bill No. 14-24)
TITLE 4. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
18-4-101.   Scope.
   
18-4-102.   Limitation on the number of dwellings on a lot.
   
18-4-103.   Limitations on mobile homes.
   
18-4-104.   Pets; livestock or fowl.
   
18-4-105.   Noncommercial antennas.
   
18-4-106.   Permitted, conditional, and special exception uses.
Subtitle 2. Lot Merger and Unmerger
   
18-4-201.   Scope.
   
18-4-202.   Uses and merger of unimproved lots of substandard area or
dimensions.
   
18-4-203.   Merger of lots in service of a principal use.
   
18-4-204.   Lot merger agreement; effect of merger.
   
18-4-205.   Information upon application for permit; enforcement.
   
18-4-206.   Consolidation without subdivision.
Subtitle 3. RA – Rural Agricultural Districts
   
18-4-301.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 4. RLD – Residential Low Density Districts
   
18-4-401.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 5. R1 – Residential Districts
   
18-4-501.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 6. R2 – Residential Districts
   
18-4-601.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 7. R5 – Residential Districts
   
18-4-701.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 8. R10 – Residential Districts
   
18-4-801.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 9. R15 – Residential Districts
   
18-4-901.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 10. R22 – Residential Districts
   
18-4-1001.   Bulk regulations.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 18-4-101. Scope.
   This title applies to all residential districts.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-4-102. Limitation on the number of dwellings on a lot.
   Except as provided otherwise in this Code, there may be only one single-
family detached dwelling on a lot.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05)
§ 18-4-103. Limitations on mobile homes.
   A mobile home may not be stored on land or occupied for dwelling purposes
unless located in a mobile home park licensed under §
11-9-103 of this Code or on a manufactured home space licensed under §
11-9-104 of this Code.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 57-20)
§ 18-4-104. Pets; livestock or fowl.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, “miniature pig” means a
type of swine that is less than 22 inches tall at the shoulder when fully
grown, including a pot-bellied pig and is spayed or neutered.
   (b)   Pets. The keeping of pets for other than commercial purposes is
allowed.
      (1)   The keeping of cats is limited to no more than nine per household.
      (2)   The keeping of dogs shall be in accordance with the following
schedule:
 
Number of Dogs Minimum Lot Size
1 to 4         No requirement
5 to 6         25,000 square feet
7 or more      40,000 square feet, plus 5,000 square feet for each additional
               dog above 7
 
      (3)   The keeping of miniature pigs as pets shall be in accordance with
the following schedule:
 
Number of Miniature Pigs Minimum Lot Size
1 – 2                  47,500 square feet
 
      (4)   Miniature pigs shall be kept within a fenced area.
   (c)   Livestock or fowl. The keeping of livestock or domestic fowl is
allowed in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Livestock may be kept on a lot of 40,000 square feet or greater and
may not exceed a ratio of one animal unit per 40,000 square feet. An animal
unit is defined as follows:
2 horses or mules                              = 1 animal unit
2 head of cattle                               = 1 animal unit
4 ponies, burros, miniature horses, or donkeys = 1 animal unit
10 sheep or goats                              = 1 animal unit
8 swine                                        = 1 animal unit
8 llamas                                       = 1 animal unit
8 alpacas                                      = 1 animal unit
Other animals, 2,000 pounds                    = 1 animal unit
 
      (2)   Domestic fowl may be kept on a lot 40,000 square feet or greater
and may not exceed a ratio of one bird unit per 40,000 square feet. A bird unit
for lots 40,000 square feet or greater is defined as follows:
 
32 chickens            = 1 bird unit
16 ducks               = 1 bird unit
8 turkeys              = 1 bird unit
8 geese                = 1 bird unit
1 ostrich              = 1 bird unit
2 emus                 = 1 bird unit
Other fowl, 100 pounds = 1 bird unit
 
      (3)   Chickens and ducks may be kept on a lot of 20,000 square feet or
greater improved by a single family dwelling and may not exceed a ratio of one
bird unit per 20,000 square feet. A bird unit for lots 20,000 square feet or
greater but less than 40,000 square feet is defined as follows:
 
8 chickens – hens onl= 1 bird unit
4 ducks                = 1 bird unit
 
      (4)   Chickens, not including roosters, may be kept on a lot of less than
20,000 square feet improved by a single family dwelling in accordance with the
following schedule:
 
Minimum Lot Size   Maximum Number of Chickens
10,000 square feet    4
15,000 square feet    6
 
      (5)   Combinations of animals are allowed if the lot is 40,000 square
feet or greater and the allowed ratio of animal units to square footage is
maintained.
      (6)   All livestock and fowl shall be kept within a fenced area. Chickens
or ducks on lots less than 40,000 square feet shall be kept in a secured
enclosure with a chicken coop.
      (7)   Except for coops or enclosures for chickens or ducks on lots less
than 40,000 square feet, accessory structures relating to livestock or fowl and
manure storage shall be located at least 50 feet from side and rear lot lines.
      (8)   Coops and enclosures for chickens or ducks on lots less than 40,000
square feet shall be located at least 25 feet from side or rear lot lines and
five feet from an onsite dwelling.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 79-13; Bill No. 85-17; Bill No. 70-18;
Bill No. 73-20; Bill No. 6-25)
§ 18-4-105. Noncommercial antennas.
   A noncommercial antenna structure in a residential district shall comply
with the following:
      (1)   the height of the structure may not exceed the lesser of 100 feet
or the width or depth of the property as determined by a line bisecting the
structure and measured from one side of the lot line to the other or from the
front lot line to the rear lot line at the shortest distance between the two
lines;
      (2)   the setback for the central vertical portion of the antenna
structure shall be at least 10 feet from each lot line for a structure up to 35
feet high and 10 feet plus one additional foot for each three feet in excess of
35 feet for a structure over 35 feet high; and
      (3)   each rigid radiating element of the structure shall be set back at
least 10 feet from any lot line.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-4-106. Permitted, conditional, and special exception uses.
   The permitted, conditional, and special exception uses allowed in each of
the residential districts are listed in the chart in this section using the
following key: P = permitted use; C = conditional use; SE = special exception
use. A blank means that the use is not allowed in the district. Except as
provided otherwise in this article, uses and structures customarily accessory
to the listed uses also are allowed, except that guest houses as accessory
structures are prohibited and outside storage as an accessory use is limited to
the lesser of 10% of the allowed lot coverage or 500 square feet.
Permitted, Conditional, and Special Exception Uses RA RLD R1 R2 R5 R10 R15 R22
Permitted, Conditional, and Special Exception Uses  RA RLD R1 R2 R5 R10 R15 R22
Agritourism                                         C  C   C
Airports and airfields                              SE     SE
Alcoholic beverage uses as accessory to other uses  C  C   C  C  C  C   C   C
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics             SE SE  SE
Assisted living facilities                             SE  SE SE SE SE  SE  SE
Assisted living facilities I, community-based       P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
Assisted living facilities II, community-based      C  C   C  C  C  C   C   C
Bed and breakfast homes                             C      C  C  C
Bed and breakfast inns                              SE     SE SE SE
Bird sanctuaries                                    C  C
Business complexes                                         C
Camps, private, for seasonal residence only         P  P
Campgrounds, commercial recreational                SE SE  SE
Carnivals, circuses, and fairs, temporary           C  C   C  C  C  C   C   C
Cemeteries                                          SE SE  SE
Child care centers other than as a home occupation  SE SE  SE SE SE SE  SE  SE
Christmas tree sales                                P  P   P  P
Clay and borrow pits or sand and gravel operations  SE
Commercial recreational facilities, including
miniature golf; driving ranges; tennis, racquet,
and handball barns or courts; artificial ski           SE  SE
slopes; indoor soccer; bowling alleys; BMX bike,
skateboard or roller blade parks; and skating rinks
Commercial telecommunication facilities permanently SE SE  SE SE SE SE  SE  SE
located on the ground
Commercial telecommunication facilities permanently
located on the ground on land owned by a
governmental entity or a volunteer fire company or  C  C   C  C  C  C   C   C
located in a transmission right- of-way and not
attached to a transmission line pole or tower or
within 100 feet of a transmission line right-of-way
Commercial telecommunication facilities that are
antennas attached to a nonresidential structure if
the antenna does not exceed 15 feet in height above P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
the structure, does not project more than two feet
beyond the facade, and does not support lights or
signs unless required for safety reasons
Commercial telecommunication facilities for testing
purposes or emergency services for a period not
exceeding 30 days if the facility is a monopole not P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
exceeding 100 feet in height and is located at
least 300 feet from any dwelling
Composting facilities                               C
Conference retreat facilities                       SE SE  SE
Construction or sales trailers, temporary, in an    P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
approved development actively under construction
Conversion of existing single-family detached                 SE SE
dwellings to duplex dwellings
Country clubs, private clubs, and service,
nonprofit, charitable organizations with less than  C  C   C  C  C  C   C   C
125 onsite parking spaces
Country clubs, private clubs, and service,
nonprofit, and charitable organizations with 125 or SE C   C  C  C  C   C   C
more onsite parking spaces
Dwelling units, accessory                           C  C   C  C  C  C   C
Dwelling unit, abutting heavy industrial zone              P  P
Dwellings, duplex                                          C  C  C  C   C
Dwellings, fourplex                                           C  C  C   C   C
Dwellings, multifamily                                     C  C  C  P   P   P
Dwellings, multiplex                                             C  C   C   C
Dwellings, single-family detached                   P  P   P  P  P  P   P
Dwellings, townhouses and stacked townhouses               C  C  C  C   C   C
Dwellings, triplex                                            C  C  C   C   C
Eating disorder treatment facility                         SE
Farm alcohol production facility                    C  C   C
Farm dual uses                                      C  C
Farm or agricultural heritage site special event, 9 C  C   C
to 15 annual events
Farm or agricultural heritage site special event,   SE SE  SE
16 to 30 annual events
Farm or agricultural heritage site stay             C  C   C
Farm tenant houses                                  C  C   C  C
Farming                                             P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
Festival, renaissance                               SE
Garden center                                       C  C   C  C
Golf courses                                        P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
Golf course facilities, private                     C  C   C  C  C  C   C   C
Government reuse facilities (see Title 12)                 C
Group homes I                                       P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
Group homes II                                      C  C   C  C  C  C   C   C
Heliports                                           SE SE  SE
Home occupations                                    C  C   C  C  C  C   C   C
Hospice facilities                                  P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
Housing for the elderly of moderate means                     C  C  C   C   C
Kennels, commercial                                 SE SE  SE
Landscaping and tree contracting                    SE SE
Landscaping and tree contracting with accessory     SE
recycling of logs into firewood
Libraries, museums, parks, and similar uses of a
noncommercial nature that are located on a lot with P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
an historic structure or activity
Licensed grower of cannabis, as defined in State    C
law and regulation
Licensed processor of cannabis, as defined in State C
law and regulation
Mobile home outside of a mobile home park on a      P
contiguous lot of at least 60 acres
Mobile home parks                                   SE SE  SE SE SE SE  SE
Nurseries with landscaping and plant sales          C  C   C  C
Nursing homes                                       SE SE  SE SE SE SE  SE  SE
Piers and launching ramps, community                SE SE  SE SE SE SE  SE  SE
Piers, recreational                                 C  C   C  C  C  C   C   C
Piers, private residential, if accessory to a       P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
dwelling unit
Planned unit developments (see Title 12)            SE SE  SE SE SE SE  SE  SE
Produce markets                                     C  C   C  C
Public utility essential services                   P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
Public utility uses                                 SE SE  SE SE SE SE  SE  SE
Recovery residences                                 P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
Religious facilities on a lot of at least two acres P      P  P  P  P   P   P
with less than 300 onsite parking spaces
Religious facilities on a lot of at least two acres SE     P  P  P  P   P   P
with 300 or more onsite parking spaces
Religious facilities on a lot of at least 5 acres
if the coverage for all buildings, including onsite    P
parking, is not more than 30% of the lot
Religious facilities, existing, with less than 300
onsite parking spaces that abut and have direct     P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
access to a collector or higher classification road
Restaurants, taverns, retail sales, and consumer                        C   C
services in a multifamily structure
Rifle, pistol, skeet, or archery ranges             SE     SE
Roadside stands consisting of temporary seasonal
structures that sell produce and other agricultural P  P   P  P
goods
Rooming houses                                                      C   C   P
Schools, private academic, in existence on or       P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
before May 12, 2005
Schools, public charter and private academic, with  C  C   C  C  C  C   P   P
less than 125 onsite parking spaces
Schools, public charter and private academic, with  SE C   C  C  C  C   P   P
125 or more onsite parking spaces
Small cell system                                   C  C   C  C  C  C   C   C
Small wind energy systems or meteorological towers  C  C   C  C  C
on a lot of at least three acres
One small wind energy system or meteorological      SE SE  SE SE SE
tower on a lot less than three acres
Solar energy generating facility – accessory      P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
Solar energy generating facility – community      SE
Solar energy generating facility – utility scale  SE
Stables, commercial or community, and riding clubs  C  C   C
Staging areas for County capital projects           P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
Storage, bulk for agricultural products             SE
Swimming pools and recreational facilities,
community, if located at least 50 feet from each    P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
residential lot line or dwelling unit
Swimming pools, private                             P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
Taxidermists, excluding butchering, rendering, or   P
tanning
Theaters, live performances, temporary outdoor      P      P  P
Veterinarian clinic, large animal                   C
Volunteer fire stations                             P  P   P  P  P  P   P   P
Waterman's commercial use in existence as of        P  P   P  P  p
January 1, 1990
Waterman's home commercial use                      C  C   C  C  C
Wildlife and game preserves                         P  P
Workforce housing                                                C  C   C
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 54-05; Bill No. 55-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07;
Bill No. 77-07; Bill No. 79-07; Bill. No. 97-08; Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 45-09;
Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 10-11; Bill No. 13-11; Bill No. 14-11; Bill No. 56-11;
Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 21-14; Bill No. 82-14; Bill No. 8-15;
Bill No. 23-15; Bill No. 72-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 28-16; Bill No. 30-16;
Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 67-18;
Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 14-19; Bill No. 54-19; Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 97-19;
Bill No. 6-20; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 57-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20;
Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 33-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 56-23;
Bill No. 61-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 17-24; Bill No. 63-24;
Bill No. 72-24; Bill No. 29-25)
SUBTITLE 2. LOT MERGER AND UNMERGER
§ 18-4-201. Scope.
   This subtitle:
      (1)   does not affect the validity and operation of lot consolidation
agreements executed before September 25, 2003, and the merger of lots under the
lot consolidation agreements shall remain in full force and effect;
      (2)   does not affect the validity and operation of record plats used to
combine lots under the predecessor provisions to what is now §
18-4-202;
      (3)   does not restrict the right of an owner of contiguous lots to
subdivide the lots under
Article 17 of this Code;
      (4)   does not apply to the use of contiguous lots for purposes of water,
sewer, or stormwater management; and
      (5)   does not apply to contiguous lots used pursuant to §
18-2-204(c)(3).
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 4-18)
§ 18-4-202. Uses and merger of unimproved lots of substandard area or
dimensions.
   (a)   Definition. For purposes of this section, “unimproved lot” means a lot
on which no part of a principal use is located.
   (b)   When dwelling on substandard lot generally permitted or prohibited. A
dwelling may be constructed on a lot that does not comply with the minimum area
or dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located
if the lot complied with any applicable minimum area and dimensional
requirements at the time it was created, except that in the absence of
compliance with subsection (c), a dwelling may not be constructed if the lot
was contiguous to and under the same ownership as one or more unimproved lots
on January 1, 1987, unless the lot or combination of lots is a minimum of
20,000 square feet and is being developed for one single family-detached
dwelling.
   (c)   Exception to general prohibition. A dwelling may be constructed on a
lot that was contiguous to and under the same ownership as one or more
unimproved lots on January 1, 1987 if (1) the lot is served by public water and
sewer or (2) the lot is merged with the contiguous unimproved lot or lots to
create a lot that complies with or comes as close as possible to complying with
the minimum area requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is
located and the owner executes and records a lot merger agreement as a
condition precedent to receiving a building permit for the dwelling.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 21-25)
§ 18-4-203. Merger of lots in service of a principal use.
   (a)   General prohibition against use of multiple lots to serve principal
use. On and after September 25, 2003, multiple lots under the same ownership
may not be used for the purpose of serving a principal use or be merged for the
purpose of serving a principal use unless the requirements of this section are
met. Contiguous lots under the same ownership may be used for the purpose of
serving a principal use without being merged if the principal use is a
religious facility with less than 300 onsite parking spaces that abuts and has
direct access to a collector or higher classification road.
   (b)   Merger by operation of law. Contiguous lots under the same ownership
that are separated by a boundary line upon or across which a principal use is
located on or after September 25, 2003, merge by operation of law on that date,
and the Office of Planning and Zoning thereafter shall require the owner of the
merged lots to execute and record a lot merger agreement as a condition
precedent to receiving a permit for demolition, development, grading, or
construction activity.
   (c)   Merger by agreement. Contiguous lots shall be merged by the owner of
the lots for the purpose of serving a principal use, and the owner shall
execute and record a lot merger agreement as a condition precedent to receiving
a permit that requires use of the lots in service of a principal use.
   (d)   Unmerger. Some or all of lots merged under subsections (b) or (c), or
under a lot consolidation agreement executed and recorded before September 25,
2003, may be unmerged if:
      (1)   the lots no longer are used in service of a principal use;
      (2)   the lots comply with the minimum area and dimensional requirements
of the zoning district in which the lots are located in effect at the time of
the unmerger;
      (3)   all or part of any lots in the critical area were part of a
subdivision approved on or after August 22, 1988; and
      (4)   the owner executes and records in the land records of the County at
the owner's expense an instrument unmerging the lots in the form required by
the Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (e)   Accessory uses or structures. Subsection (d)(1) shall not be construed
to prohibit the Office of Planning and Zoning from allowing an accessory use or
structure to remain on a lot even if that use or structure would become
unlawful after the unmerger if:
      (1)   necessary to avoid an unnecessary hardship, such as the removal of
a proposed shared garage or joint use pier;
      (2)   the accessory structure is approved pursuant to §
18-2-204(c)(3) and the construction of a principal use on the lot does not
require removal of the existing accessory structure to meet the requirements of
this article without the need for a variance; and
      (3)   the conditions for allowing the use or structure to remain are
specified in the instrument described in subsection (d)(4).
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 64-17; Bill No. 67-18)
§ 18-4-204. Lot merger agreement; effect of merger.
   (a)   Requirements. A lot merger agreement shall:
      (1)   be in the form required by the Office of Planning and Zoning and
signed by the County and the owner of the lots;
      (2)   be recorded by the owner in the land records of Anne Arundel County
at the owner's expense and bind the subsequent owners of the lots; and
      (3)   not affect the legal description of or title to the lots.
   (b)   Effective date. Except as provided in §
18-4-203(b), a merger of lots shall take effect on the date specified in the
lot merger agreement.
   (c)   Effect of merger. Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, lots
merged under this subtitle shall be treated as a single lot for purposes of
this article.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-4-205. Information upon application for permit; enforcement.
   (a)   Information. The owner of a lot shall submit the information required
by the Office of Planning and Zoning concerning the ownership of contiguous
lots upon application for:
      (1)   a building permit for a dwelling on the lot that does not comply
with the minimum area or dimensional requirements of the zoning district in
which the lot is located in effect at the time the application is submitted; or
      (2)   a permit that requires use of one or more of the contiguous lots in
service of a principal use.
   (b)   Enforcement action. The Office of Planning and Zoning may require an
owner who failed to execute and record a lot merger agreement as required by
this subtitle to execute a lot merger agreement as a condition of resolving an
enforcement action under
Title 17.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-4-206. Consolidation without subdivision.
   Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to authorize merger of a lot any
part of which is within a platted and recorded road or right-of-way.
(Bill No. 60-10)
SUBTITLE 3. RA – RURAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-4-301. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in an RA District:
Minimum lot size                                                             40,000 square feet
Maximum coverage by structures                                               25% of gross area
Minimum width at front building restriction line; for waterfront lots the    150 feet
building restriction line is measured from the rear lot line
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Front lot line                                                         40 feet
   Rear lot line                                                          35 feet
   Side lot line                                                          15 feet
   Combined side lot lines                                                40 feet
   Corner side lot line                                                   40 feet
P   rincipal arterial or higher classification road                       50 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures other than sheds that do not
exceed 64 square feet in area and eight feet in height:
   Front lot line                                                         50 feet
                                                                             15 feet or, for structures less than 8 feet in
                                                                             height (other than swimming pools, tennis courts,
   Side and rear lot lines                                                basketball courts, and similar private recreational
                                                                             facilities accessory to single-family detached,
                                                                             duplex, or semi-detached dwellings), 10 feet
   Corner side lot line                                                   40 feet
Maximum height limitations:
   Principal structures                                                   45 feet
   Accessory structures                                                   45 feet if all setbacks are increased by one foot
                                                                             for each foot of height in excess of 25 feet
                                                                             One dwelling unit per 20 acres plus one additional
                                                                             dwelling unit for residue acreage that exceeds 10
   Maximum density                                                        acres and, for sites over 50 acres, one additional
                                                                             dwelling unit for every 50 acres and one additional
                                                                             dwelling unit for residue acreage that exceeds 25
                                                                             acres
Cluster development:
   Minimum lot size                                                       20,000 square feet
   Maximum lot size                                                       120,000 square feet
   Minimum width at front building restriction line                       80 feet
   Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
      Front lot line                                                   5 feet, but if parking is located in the front yard,
                                                                             18 feet
      Rear lot line                                                    15 feet
      Side lot lines                                                   10 feet
                                                                             40 feet from adjacent residentially zoned and
                                                                             developed property, except that the setback may be
                                                                             reduced by the Planning and Zoning Officer to
      Boundary line of the cluster development site                    preserve environmental features and the setback may
                                                                             be reduced to 25 feet if the adjoining lot is an
                                                                             open space lot or an open area lot created under §
                                                                             17-6-111 of this Code
                                                                             10 feet or, for structures less than 8 feet in
   Minimum setbacks from side and rear lot lines for accessory structures height (other than swimming pools, tennis courts,
other than sheds that do not exceed 64 square feet in area and eight feet in basketball courts, and similar private recreational
height                                                                       facilities accessory to single-family detached,
                                                                             duplex, or semi-detached dwellings), 5 feet
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 72-24)
SUBTITLE 4. RLD – RESIDENTIAL LOW DENSITY DISTRICTS
§ 18-4-401. Bulk regulations.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk
regulations are applicable in an RLD District:
Minimum lot size                                                             40,000 square feet
Maximum coverage by structures                                               25% of gross area
Minimum width at front building restriction line; for waterfront lots the    150 feet
building restriction line is measured from the rear lot line
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Front lot line                                                         50 feet
   Rear lot line                                                          40 feet
   Side lot line                                                          20 feet
   Combined side lot lines                                                50 feet
   Corner side lot line                                                   40 feet
   Principal arterial road                                                75 feet
   Freeway                                                                150 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures other than sheds that do not
exceed 64 square feet in area and eight feet in height:
   Front lot line                                                         60 feet
                                                                             20 feet or, for structures less than 8 feet in
                                                                             height (other than swimming pools, tennis courts,
   Side and rear lot lines                                                basketball courts, and similar private recreational
                                                                             facilities accessory to single-family detached,
                                                                             duplex, or semi-detached dwellings), 10 feet
   Corner side lot line                                                   50 feet
Maximum height limitations:
   Principal structures                                                   45 feet
   Accessory structures                                                   45 feet if all setbacks are increased by one foot
                                                                             for each foot of height in excess of 25 feet
   Maximum density                                                        One dwelling unit per five acres
Cluster development:
   Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
      Front lot line                                                   5 feet, but if parking is located in the front yard,
                                                                             18 feet
      Rear lot line                                                    15 feet
      Side lot lines                                                   10 feet
                                                                             40 feet from adjacent residentially zoned and
                                                                             developed property, except that the setback may be
                                                                             reduced by the Planning and Zoning Officer to
      Boundary line of the cluster development site                    preserve environmental features and the setback may
                                                                             be reduced to 25 feet if the adjoining lot is an
                                                                             open space lot or an open area lot created under §
                                                                             17-6-111 of this Code
                                                                             10 feet or, for structures less than 8 feet in
   Minimum setbacks from side and rear lot lines for accessory structures height (other than swimming pools, tennis courts,
other than sheds that do not exceed 64 square feet in area and eight feet in basketball courts, and similar private recreational
height                                                                       facilities accessory to single-family detached,
                                                                             duplex, or semi-detached dwellings), 5 feet
 
      (2)   A lot with an area of less than 40,000 square feet that was
approved by a record plat prior to April 9, 1987, may be reviewed in accordance
with the bulk regulations of §
18-4-601 and lot size is subject to §
18-4-202.
   (b)   Setback from certain slopes. A 50-foot planted buffer area shall be
located and maintained between the principal structure and the crest of steep
slopes.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 72-24)
SUBTITLE 5. R1 – RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-4-501. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in an R1 District:
                                                                             30,000 square
Minimum lot size                                                             feet; or 15,000
                                                                             for side by
                                                                             side duplex
Maximum coverage by structures                                               50% of gross
                                                                             area
Minimum width at front building restriction line; for waterfront lots the    80 feet
building restriction line is measured from the rear lot line
Minimum width at front building restriction line for duplex if located on
more than one lot; for waterfront lots the building restriction line is      40 feet
measured from the rear lot line
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Front lot line                                                         35 feet
   Rear lot line                                                          30 feet
   Side lot line                                                          15 feet
                                                                             0 foot shared
   Side lot line for duplex dwellings on separate lots                    lot line, 15
                                                                             feet side lot
                                                                             line
                                                                             35 feet for
   Corner side lot line                                                   single family
                                                                             detached; or 25
                                                                             feet for duplex
   Principal arterial or higher classification road                       50 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures other than sheds that do not
exceed 64 square feet in area and eight feet in height:
   Front lot line                                                         50 feet
                                                                             15 feet or 10
                                                                             feet for
                                                                             structures less
                                                                             than 8 feet in
                                                                             height (other
                                                                             than swimming
   Side and rear lot lines                                                pools, tennis
                                                                             courts,
                                                                             basketball
                                                                             courts, and
                                                                             similar private
                                                                             recreational
                                                                             facilities)
                                                                             35 feet for
   Corner side lot line                                                   single family
                                                                             detached; or 25
                                                                             feet for duplex
Maximum height limitations:
   Principal structures                                                   45 feet
                                                                             45 feet if all
                                                                             setbacks are
                                                                             increased by
   Accessory structures                                                   one foot for
                                                                             each foot of
                                                                             height in
                                                                             excess of 25
                                                                             feet
                                                                             One dwelling
Maximum density                                                              unit per 40,
                                                                             000 square feet
Maximum density for adult independent dwelling units served by public sewer  Three dwelling
and located within a two-mile radius of an assisted living facility or a     units per acre
County owned and operated library or community center
Cluster development:
                                                                             None, except
                                                                             for adult
                                                                             independent
                                                                             dwelling unit
                                                                             developments
                                                                             served by
                                                                             public sewer
   Minimum lot size                                                       with a minimum
                                                                             net area of 50
                                                                             acres, each of
                                                                             which units
                                                                             shall be on a
                                                                             lot not less
                                                                             than 10,000
                                                                             square feet
                                                                             Determined by
                                                                             setbacks and
                                                                             constraints
   Maximum individual lot coverage by structures                          imposed by
                                                                             characteristics
                                                                             of lot,
                                                                             coverage not to
                                                                             exceed 50%
                                                                             80 feet or, for
                                                                             adult
                                                                             independent
                                                                             dwelling unit
   Minimum width at front building restriction line                       developments
                                                                             served by
                                                                             public sewer
                                                                             with a minimum
                                                                             net area of 50
                                                                             acres, 60 feet
   Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
                                                                             5 feet, but if
                                                                             parking is
      Front lot line                                                   located in the
                                                                             front yard, 18
                                                                             feet
      Rear lot line                                                    10 feet
      Side lot lines                                                   7 feet
                                                                             40 feet from
                                                                             adjacent
                                                                             residentially
                                                                             zoned and
                                                                             developed
                                                                             property,
                                                                             except that the
                                                                             setback may be
                                                                             reduced by the
                                                                             Planning and
                                                                             Zoning Officer
      Boundary line of the cluster development site                    to preserve
                                                                             environmental
                                                                             features and
                                                                             the setback may
                                                                             be reduced to
                                                                             25 feet if the
                                                                             adjoining lot
                                                                             is an open
                                                                             space lot or an
                                                                             open area lot
                                                                             created under
                                                                             17-6-111of this
                                                                             Code
                                                                             7 feet or 5
                                                                             feet for
                                                                             structures less
                                                                             than 8 feet in
                                                                             height (other
   Minimum setbacks from side and rear lot lines for accessory structures than swimming
other than sheds that do not exceed 64 square feet in area and eight feet in pools, tennis
height                                                                       courts,
                                                                             basketball
                                                                             courts, and
                                                                             similar private
                                                                             recreational
                                                                             facilities)
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 63-22;
Bill No. 72-24)
SUBTITLE 6. R2 – RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-4-601. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in an R2 District:
Minimum lot size:
   If not served by public sewer                                          20,000 square feet
   If served by public sewer                                              10,000 square feet
   Duplex and fourplex dwellings on separate lots                         5,000 square feet
Maximum coverage by structures                                               60% of gross area
Minimum width at front building restriction line; for waterfront lots the    70 feet
building restriction line is measured from the rear lot line
Minimum width at front building restriction line for duplex if located on
more than one lot; for waterfront lots, the building restriction line is     35 feet
measured from the rear lot line
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Front lot line                                                         25 feet
   Rear lot line                                                          20 feet
   Side lot line                                                          7 feet
   Side lot line for duplex dwellings on separate lots                    0 foot shared lot line, 7 feet side lot line
   Corner side lot line                                                   20 feet
   Principal arterial or higher classification road                       40 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures other than sheds that do not
exceed 64 square feet in area and eight feet in height:
   Front lot line                                                         40 feet
                                                                             7 feet or 5 feet for structures less than 8 feet in height (other than
   Side and rear lot lines                                                swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball courts, and similar private
                                                                             recreational facilities)
   Corner side lot line                                                   50 feet
Maximum height limitations:
   Principal structures                                                   35 feet
   Accessory structures                                                   25 feet or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less
Maximum density:
   If not served by public sewer                                          One dwelling unit per 20,000 square feet
   If served by public sewer                                              2.5 dwelling units per acre
Maximum density for adult independent dwelling units served by public sewer
and located within a two-mile radius of an assisted living facility or a     Five dwelling units per acre
County owned and operated library or community center
Cluster development:
   Maximum individual lot coverage by structures                          Determined by setbacks and constraints imposed by characteristics of lot,
                                                                             coverage not to exceed 60%
   Minimum width at front building restriction line                       50 feet
   Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
      Front lot line                                                   5 feet, but if parking is located in the front yard, 18 feet
      Rear lot line                                                    10 feet
      Side lot lines                                                   7 feet
                                                                             40 feet from adjacent residentially zoned and developed property, except
                                                                             that the setback may be reduced by the Planning and Zoning Officer to
      Boundary line of the cluster development site                    preserve environmental features and the setback may be reduced to 25 feet
                                                                             if the adjoining lot is an open space or an open area lot created under §
                                                                             17-6-111 of this Code
   Minimum setbacks from side and rear lot lines for accessory structures 7 feet or 5 feet for structures less than 8 feet in height (other than
other than sheds that do not exceed 64 square feet in area and eight feet in swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball courts, and similar private
height                                                                       recreational facilities)
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 63-22;
Bill No. 72-24)
SUBTITLE 7. R5 – RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-4-701. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in an R5 District:
Minimum lot size:
   If not served by public sewer                                          10,000 square
                                                                             feet
   If served by public sewer                                              5,000 square
                                                                             feet
Maximum coverage by structures                                               65% of gross
                                                                             area
Minimum width at front building restriction line; for waterfront lots the    50 feet
building restriction line is measured from the rear lot line
Minimum width at front building restriction line for duplex if located on
more than one lot; for waterfront lots, the building restriction line is     25 feet
measured from the rear lot line
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Front lot line                                                         20 feet
   Rear lot line                                                          15 feet
   Side lot lines                                                         7 feet
                                                                             0 foot shared
   Side lot line for duplex dwellings on separate lots                    lot line, 7
                                                                             feet side lot
                                                                             line
   Corner side lot line                                                   15 feet
   Principal arterial or higher classification road                       35 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures other than sheds that do not
exceed 64 square feet in area and eight feet in height:
   Front lot line                                                         40 feet
                                                                             7 feet or 5
                                                                             feet for
                                                                             structures less
                                                                             than 8 feet in
                                                                             height (other
                                                                             than swimming
   Side and rear lot lines                                                pools, tennis
                                                                             courts,
                                                                             basketball
                                                                             courts, and
                                                                             similar private
                                                                             recreational
                                                                             facilities)
   Corner side lot line                                                   15 feet
Maximum height limitations:
   Principal structures                                                   50 feet
   Multifamily and multiplex dwellings                                    50 feet
                                                                             25 feet or the
                                                                             height of the
   Accessory structures                                                   principal
                                                                             structure,
                                                                             whichever is
                                                                             less
Maximum density                                                              Five dwelling
                                                                             units per acre
Maximum density for adult independent dwelling units served by public sewer  Six dwelling
and located within a two-mile radius of an assisted living facility or a     units per acre
County owned and operated library or community center
Cluster development:
                                                                             Determined by
                                                                             setbacks and
                                                                             constraints
   Maximum individual lot coverage by structures                          imposed by
                                                                             characteristics
                                                                             of lot,
                                                                             coverage not to
                                                                             exceed 75%
   Minimum width at front building restriction line                       40 feet
   Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
                                                                             5 feet, but if
                                                                             parking is
      Front lot line                                                   located in the
                                                                             front yard, 18
                                                                             feet
      Rear lot line                                                    10 feet
      Side lot lines                                                   7 feet
                                                                             40 feet from
                                                                             adjacent
                                                                             residentially
                                                                             zoned and
                                                                             developed
                                                                             property,
                                                                             except that the
                                                                             setback may be
                                                                             reduced by the
                                                                             Planning and
                                                                             Zoning Officer
      Boundary line of the cluster development site                    to preserve
                                                                             environmental
                                                                             features and
                                                                             the setback may
                                                                             be reduced to
                                                                             25 feet if the
                                                                             adjoining lot
                                                                             is an open
                                                                             space lot or an
                                                                             open area lot
                                                                             created under
                                                                             17-6-111 of
                                                                             this Code
                                                                             7 feet or 5
                                                                             feet for
                                                                             structures less
                                                                             than 8 feet in
                                                                             height (other
   Minimum setbacks from side and rear lot lines for accessory structures than swimming
other than sheds that do not exceed 64 square feet in area and eight feet in pools, tennis
height                                                                       courts,
                                                                             basketball
                                                                             courts, and
                                                                             similar private
                                                                             recreational
                                                                             facilities)
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 14-21;
Bill No. 63-22; Bill No. 72-24)
SUBTITLE 8. R10 – RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-4-801. Bulk regulations.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following
bulk regulations are applicable in an R10 District:
Minimum lot size                                                                     None
Maximum coverage by structures                                                       75% of gross
                                                                                     area
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Front lot line for structures and a rear or side facade abutting a roadway:
      Arterial road or higher classification                                   35 feet
      Collector road or lower classification                                   20 feet
   Private access drives and parking courts                                       10 feet
   All other lot lines                                                            15 feet
   Distance between opposing front facades                                        30 feet
   Single family detached, duplex, triplex, fourplex, and multiplex dwellings:
      Front lot line                                                           20 feet
                                                                                     0 foot
                                                                                     shared lot
      Side lot line for duplex dwellings on separate lots                      line, 7 feet
                                                                                     side lot
                                                                                     line
      Corner side lot line                                                     15 feet
      Rear lot line                                                            15 feet
   Multifamily dwelling structures:
      Minimum distance between multifamily structures located on the same lot
(closest projecting edge):
         Facades with windows                                               30 feet
         Windowless facades                                                 15 feet
      Rear lot line                                                            15 feet
      Side lot line                                                            10 feet
      Corner side lot line                                                     15 feet
Minimum setbacks from road for garage or carport                                     18 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures other than sheds that do not exceed 64
square feet in area and eight feet in height:
   Front lot line                                                                 40 feet
                                                                                     7 feet or 5
                                                                                     feet for
                                                                                     structures
                                                                                     less than 8
                                                                                     feet in
                                                                                     height
                                                                                     (other than
                                                                                     swimming
   Side and rear lot lines                                                        pools,
                                                                                     tennis
                                                                                     courts,
                                                                                     basketball
                                                                                     courts, and
                                                                                     similar
                                                                                     private
                                                                                     recreational
                                                                                     facilities)
   Corner side lot line                                                           15 feet
Maximum height limitations:
   Multifamily structures                                                         75 feet
   Multiplex dwellings                                                            50 feet
   Single family detached, duplex, triplex, and fourplex dwellings                50 feet
                                                                                     20 feet or
                                                                                     the height
                                                                                     of the
   Accessory structures                                                           principal
                                                                                     structure,
                                                                                     whichever is
                                                                                     less
                                                                                     10 dwelling
Maximum density                                                                      units per
                                                                                     acre
 
   (b)   Exception. A single-family detached dwelling on a lot in a recorded
subdivision shall comply with the bulk regulations of the R5 District.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 72-24)
SUBTITLE 9. R15 – RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-4-901. Bulk regulations.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following
bulk regulations are applicable in an R15 District:
Maximum coverage by structures                              75% of gross area
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Front lot line                                        20 feet
   Side lot line                                         15 feet
                                                            0 foot shared lot
   Side lot line for duplex dwellings on separate lots   line, 7 feet side
                                                            lot line
   Corner side lot lines                                 20 feet
   Rear lot line                                         20 feet
Minimum distance between multifamily structures located on
the same lot (closest projecting edge):
   Facades with windows                                  30 feet
   Facades that are windowless                           15 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures other than sheds
that do not exceed 64 square feet in area and eight feet in
height:
                                                            7 feet or 5 feet
                                                            for structures less
                                                            than 8 feet in
                                                            height (other than
   Side and rear lot lines                               swimming pools,
                                                            tennis courts,
                                                            basketball courts,
                                                            and similar private
                                                            recreational
                                                            facilities)
   Corner side lot line                                  15 feet
Maximum height limitations:
   Multifamily structures                                90 feet
   Multiplex dwellings                                   50 feet
   Single family detached, duplex, triplex, and fourplex 50 feet
dwellings
                                                            20 feet or the
                                                            height of the
   Accessory structures                                  principal
                                                            structure,
                                                            whichever is less
Maximum length of a single elevation unless special
architectural, landscaping, or topographic treatment, such  250 feet
as a change of material, texture, depression, berm, or
other similar change, is used
Maximum density                                             15 dwelling units
                                                            per acre
 
   (b)   Exception. A single-family detached dwelling on a lot in a recorded
subdivision shall comply with the bulk regulations of the R5 District.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 72-24)
SUBTITLE 10. R22 – RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-4-1001. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in an R22 District:
Maximum coverage by structures                              75% of gross area
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Front lot line                                        20 feet
   Side lot line                                         25 feet
   Corner side lot line                                  30 feet
   Rear lot line                                         30 feet
Minimum distance between multifamily structures located on
the same lot (closest projecting edge):
   Facades with windows                                  30 feet
   Facades without windows                               15 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures other than sheds
that do not exceed 64 square feet in area and eight feet in
height:
                                                            7 feet or 5 feet
                                                            for structures less
                                                            than 8 feet in
                                                            height (other than
   Side and rear lot lines                               swimming pools,
                                                            tennis courts,
                                                            basketball courts,
                                                            and similar private
                                                            recreational
                                                            facilities)
   Corner side lot line                                  15 feet
Maximum height limitations:
                                                            None if all
                                                            setbacks are
   Multifamily structures                                increased by one
                                                            foot for each two
                                                            feet of height in
                                                            excess of 150 feet
   Multiplex dwellings                                   50 feet
   Single family detached, duplex, triplex, and fourplex 50 feet
dwellings
                                                            20 feet or the
                                                            height of the
   Accessory structures                                  principal
                                                            structure,
                                                            whichever is less
Maximum density                                             22 dwelling units
                                                            per acre
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 72-24)
TITLE 5. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
18-5-101.   Scope.
   
18-5-102.   Permitted, conditional, special exception, and business complex
auxiliary uses.
Subtitle 2. C1 – Local Commercial Districts
   
18-5-201.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 3. C2 – Commercial Office Districts
   
18-5-301.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 4. C3 – General Commercial Districts
   
18-5-401.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 5. C4 – Highway Commercial Districts
   
18-5-501.   Bulk regulations.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 18-5-101. Scope.
   This title applies to all commercial districts.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-5-102. Permitted, conditional, special exception, and business complex
auxiliary uses.
   The permitted, conditional, and special exception uses allowed in each of
the commercial districts, and uses auxiliary to a business complex, are listed
in the chart in this section using the following key: P=permitted use; C =
conditional use; SE = special exception use; and A = auxiliary to a business
complex use. A blank means that the use is not allowed in the district. Except
as provided otherwise in this article, uses and structures customarily
accessory to permitted, conditional, and special exception uses also are
allowed.
Permitted, Conditional, Special Exception, and Business Complex C1 C2 C3 C4
Auxiliary Uses
Permitted, Conditional, Special Exception, and Business Complex     C1 C2 C3 C4
Auxiliary Uses
Adult bookstores                                                             C
Adult day care centers                                              P  P  P  P
Adult movie theaters                                                         C
Alcoholic beverage uses as accessory to other uses                  C  C  C  C
Amusement parks                                                              SE
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics                             P  P  P  P
Animal hospitals with non-medical overnight stays and veterinary       C  C  C
clinics with non-medical overnight stays
Appliance sales and service facilities                                    P  P
Arcades                                                                   P  P
Arcades located at least 1,000 feet from an existing dwelling with  P  A
a maximum floor area of 3,000 square feet
Assisted living facilities                                             C  C
Auction establishments                                                       P
Automobile and truck detailing shops                                      P  P
Automobile and truck dismantling and recycling facilities                    SE
Automobile and truck repair and painting facilities                          P
Automobile and truck rental establishments                                   P
Automobile and truck towing storage yard, temporary storage not to           P
exceed 90 days
Automobile gasoline stations                                        SE    SE C
Automobile and truck parts, supply stores, and tire stores                P  P
Automobile service facilities providing oil change, lubrication,          P  P
and related services
Automobile towing facilities in conjunction with automobile               SE SE
gasoline service stations
Automobile, truck, and recreational vehicle sales                         C  P
Bakery or donut shops                                               P  A  P  P
Bakeries, wholesale                                                          P
Banks                                                               P  P  P  P
Banquet halls                                                             P  P
Barbershops                                                         P  A  P  P
Bicycle, motorscooter, and moped sales and service facilities                P
Bicycle, motorscooter, moped sales and service without outside      P     P
storage
Billiard and pool halls                                                   P  P
Bingo, commercial                                                            C
Boat showroom or sales facilities                                            P
BRAC Mixed Use Development                                                   C
Brewery, craft                                                               P
Building material storage, including sales and yards                         P
Bulk storage for agricultural products                                    P  P
Bus terminals                                                                P
Business complexes                                                  P  P  P  P
Business complexes with auxiliary uses                                 C
Carnivals, circuses, and fairs, temporary                           C  C  C  C
Carpet and vinyl flooring stores                                          P  P
Carpet cleaning establishments                                               P
Carwashes                                                           C  C  P  P
Catering establishments                                                   P  P
Child care centers                                                  P  P  P  P
Christmas tree sales                                                P  P  P  P
Civic facilities, community centers, libraries, and museums         P  P  P  P
Clubs, private, and service, nonprofit, and charitable              P  P  P  P
organizations
Coffee roasters                                                              P
Commercial recreational facilities, including miniature golf;
driving ranges; tennis, racquet, and handball barns or courts;
artificial ski slopes; indoor soccer; bowling alleys; BMX bike,        P  P  P
skateboard or roller blade parks; electric go-carting; and skating
rinks
Commercial telecommunication facilities permanently located on the  C  C  C  C
ground
Commercial telecommunication facilities that are antennas attached
to a structure if the antenna does not exceed 15 feet in height
above the structure, does not project more than two feet beyond the P  P  P  P
facade, does not support lights or signs unless required for safety
reasons, and accessory structures meet the requirements of §
18-10-118(7) of this Code
Commercial telecommunication facilities for testing purposes or
emergency services for a period not exceeding 30 days if the        P  P  P  P
facility is a monopole not exceeding 100 feet in height and is
located at least 300 feet from any dwelling
Computer goods, sales, and services                                 P  A  P  P
Conference centers                                                     P  P  P
Construction or sales trailers, temporary, in an approved           P  P  P  P
development actively under construction
Contractor and construction shops and yards                                  P
Convenience stores, gift shops, and newsstands                      P  A  P  P
Cultural centers and exhibits                                       P  P  P
Dance halls                                                               SE SE
Data storage center in the BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area                  C  C
Delicatessens and snack bars                                        P  A  P  P
Department stores                                                         P  P
Distillery, limited                                                          P
Dog day care facilities                                             P     P  P
Dog grooming parlors                                                P     P  P
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments, including pick-up
stations, package plants, and coin-operated facilities, limited to  P  A
establishments with less than 4,000 square feet of floor area
Dry cleaning operations and laundry establishments, including pick-       P  P
up stations, package plants, and coin-operated facilities
Dwelling units, adult independent                                      C  C
Dwelling unit, apartment, as an accessory use provided the entrance P  P  P
is separate from the commercial use
Dwelling, caretaker or resident manager, not to exceed 1,500 square       P  P
feet of floor area
Dwellings, fourplex                                                 C  C  C
Dwellings, multifamily                                              C  C  C  C
Dwellings, multiplex                                                C  C  C
Dwellings, townhouses                                               C  C  C  C
Dwellings, triplex                                                  C  C  C
Electric vehicle towing and storage facilities, temporary storage            P
not to exceed 90 days
Equipment sales, repair, and storage, commercial                             P
Farming                                                             P  P  P  P
Flea markets, indoor                                                      P  P
Flea markets, outdoor                                                        P
Funeral establishments on a collector or arterial road                 P  P  P
Funeral establishments on a local road                                 C  C  C
Furniture, appliance, and carpet stores and showrooms                     P  P
Furniture refinishing establishments                                         P
Greenhouses and garden centers                                            P  P
Grocery stores                                                         A  P  P
Grocery stores with a maximum of 25,000 square feet                 P
Grocery stores with a maximum of 35,000 square feet                    P
Gunsmiths and ammunition sales facilities                                 C  P
Hair, cosmetic facial hair, and nail salons                         P  P  P  P
Hardware stores                                                     P  A  P  P
Health clubs, spas, gymnasiums                                         P  P  P
Health clubs, spas, and gymnasiums with a maximum of 2,500 square   P
feet
Heliports                                                                 SE
Home centers and building supply stores                                   P  P
Home occupations                                                    C  C  C  C
Hospice facilities                                                     P
Hospitals                                                              P  P
Hotels and motels                                                      P  P  P
Housing for elderly of moderate means                               C  C  C
Interior decorating establishments                                     A  P  P
Janitorial supply stores                                                  P  P
Kennels, commercial                                                          C
Licensed dispensary of cannabis, as defined in State law and        C  C  C  C
regulation
Licensed grower of cannabis, as defined in State law and regulation       C  C
Licensed processor of cannabis, as defined in State law and               C  C
regulation
Linen supply establishments                                                  P
Locksmiths                                                          P     P  P
Machine shops, welders, sheet metal shops, and custom woodworking            P
shops, including the assembling of component parts
Mailing and shipping services                                       P  P  P  P
Marine service facilities                                                    P
Marine supply stores                                                      P  P
Meat, seafood, and poultry markets                                  P  A  P  P
Medical or dental stores and laboratories, including assembly of    P  P  P  P
component parts, fabrication, and repair services
Motorcycle repair and sales facilities                                       P
Moving or storage establishments                                             P
Musical instruments, services, and instruction                            P  P
Nightclubs and comedy clubs                                            A  P  P
Nursing homes                                                          C  C
Offices, professional and general                                   P  P  P  P
Opticians and optometrical establishments                           P  P  P  P
Outside storage, accessory to permitted uses, limited to 15% of the P
allowed lot coverage
Outside storage, accessory to permitted uses, located in a side or        P
rear yard, limited to 50% of the allowed lot coverage
Outside storage as a principal use                                           P
Package goods stores                                                C  A  C  C
Parking garages or lots                                             P  P  P  P
Parks, private                                                      P  P  P  P
Pawnshops                                                                    SE
Personal fitness studios                                            P  P  P  P
Pets, livestock, or fowl as permitted by §                         P  P  P  P
18-4-104
Pharmacies                                                          P  A  P  P
Photography studios                                                 P  P  P  P
Piers, commercial                                                   P  P  P  P
Planned unit developments in the BWI/Ft. Meade Growth Area (See        SE SE
Title 12)
Plasma centers                                                      SE SE SE SE
Printing and publishing establishments                                    P  P
Produce markets                                                     P  A  P  P
Psychic, tarot card, and palm reading and fortune telling                 P  P
establishments
Public utility essential services                                   P  P  P  P
Public utility uses                                                 SE SE SE SE
Radio, television, or industrial testing towers                           SE SE
Religious facilities                                                P  P  P  P
Rental establishments                                                     P  P
Restaurants                                                         P  P  P  P
Retail sale of liquefied petroleum gases if accessory to and on the C     C  C
same lot as an allowed use
Retail specialty stores or shops for retail sales, including
antique stores, art supplies, bookstore, candy, cards, clocks,
clothing, consignments, electronics, fabrics, flowers, gifts,
hobbies, housewares, ice cream parlors, jewelry, luggage, musical   P  A  P  P
instruments, news publications, office supply, optical goods, pets,
photographic supplies, sewing machines, shoes and shoe repair,
sporting goods, stamps and coins, stationary, tobacco, toys, video
tapes, wallpaper and paint, window coverings, works of art
Rifle, pistol, skeet, or archery ranges, indoor                           SE
Rifle, pistol, skeet, and archery ranges, indoor or outdoor                  SE
Roadside vendors                                                    P  P  P  P
School bus facilities                                               C  C  C  P
Schools, public charter and schools, private: academic, arts,       P  P  P  P
business, technical, or trade
Scientific research establishments                                     P
Self-service storage facilities                                        SE SE C
Showrooms and sales of specialty building products                        P  P
Sign shops, including painting and fabrication                               P
Small cell system                                                   C  C  C  C
Small engine repair if all work is done inside a building and there P     P  P
is no outside storage
Small wind energy systems or meteorological towers on a lot of at   C  C  C  C
least three acres
One small wind energy system or meteorological tower on a lot less  SE SE SE SE
than three acres
Solar energy generating facility – accessory                      P  P  P  P
Solar energy generating facility – community, rooftop-mounted onlyC  C  C  C
Solar energy generating facility – utility scale, rooftop-mounted C  C  C  C
only
Staging areas for County capital projects                           P  P  P  P
State-licensed medical clinics                                      C  C  C  C
Storage, multilevel watercraft rack, not exceeding 35 feet in
height, provided the rack does not cover more than 60% of the gross          P
area of the property, as an accessory use to boat showroom or sales
facilities
Swimming pool and spa sales, with outdoor display                            P
Swimming pool and spa sales, indoor                                       P  P
Tailor shops                                                        P  A  P
Tanning salons                                                      P  A  P  P
Tattoo parlors and body piercing salons                             A     P  P
Taverns                                                             P  A  P  P
Taxicab stands and services                                            P  P  P
Taxidermists                                                                 P
Telecommuting centers                                               P  A  P
Television stations, radio broadcasting stations, and recording           P  P
studios
Theaters, live performances                                            A  P
Theaters, movie                                                        A  P  P
Truck and trailer rental facilities in conjunction with automobile        SE P
gas stations
Travel agencies                                                     P  P  P
Truck stops                                                                  P
Upholstering shops, including sailmaking shops                            P  P
Vending businesses                                                           P
Video sales and rental establishments with less than 1,500 square   P  A
feet of floor area
Video sales and rental establishments                                     P  P
Volunteer fire stations                                             P  P  P  P
Wholesale trade, warehousing, and storage establishments                     P
Wholesale trade, warehousing, and storage establishments in the        C  C
BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area
Workforce housing                                                      C  C  C
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 54-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 29-06; Bill No. 7-07;
Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 77-07; Bill No. 74-08; Bill No. 70-09; Bill No. 13-10;
Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 13-11; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 28-12;
Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 58-14; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 14-15; Bill No. 21-15;
Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 107-15; Bill No. 55-16; Bill No. 17-
17; Bill No. 20-17; Bill No. 26-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 84-17; Bill No. 3-
18; Bill No. 34-18; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 7-19; Bill No. 20-
19; Bill No. 54-19; Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No.
104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 53-23; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 29-24; Bill
No. 72-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 97-24; Bill No. 2-25; Bill No. 13-25)
SUBTITLE 2. C1 – LOCAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-5-201. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in a C1 District:
Minimum lot size                       11,000 square feet
Maximum coverage by structures and     75% of gross area
parking
Minimum setbacks for principal
structures:
   Front lot line                   20 feet
   Side lot line                    10 feet
   Rear lot line                    20 feet
   All lot lines                    60 feet from right-of-way line of a
                                       divided principal arterial road
Minimum setbacks for accessory
structures:
   Side lot line                    10 feet
   Rear lot line                    10 feet
Minimum lot depth                      100 feet
Maximum floor area ratio               1.0
Maximum height limitations for
development in which less than 50% of  45 feet or to a maximum of 60 feet if
allowable lot coverage consists of     all setback requirements are increased
environmental site design features     by one foot for each foot of height in
approved by the Planning and Zoning    excess of 45 feet
Officer
Maximum height limitations for
development in which more than 50% of  45 feet or to a maximum of 72 feet if
allowable lot coverage consists of     all setback requirements are increased
environmental site design features     by one foot for each foot of height in
approved by the Planning and Zoning    excess of 45 feet
Officer
Rear service area                      Accessible by a 15-foot wide
                                       unobstructed right-of-way
Road access                            Collector or arterial road
Maximum size of retail or other single 25,000 square feet of floor area or, for
use establishment                      offices, 50,000 square feet of floor
                                       area
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 60-10)
SUBTITLE 3. C2 – COMMERCIAL OFFICE DISTRICTS
§ 18-5-301. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in a C2 District:
Minimum lot size                                                                 20,000 square
                                                                                 feet
Maximum coverage by structures and parking                                       80% of gross
                                                                                 area
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Rear lot line                                                              25 feet
                                                                                 60 feet from
                                                                                 right-of-way
   All lot lines                                                              line of a
                                                                                 divided
                                                                                 principal
                                                                                 arterial road
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures in the side or rear yard:
   Side lot line                                                              10 feet
   Rear lot line                                                              10 feet
Minimum lot depth                                                                100 feet
Maximum floor area ratio:
   Generally                                                                  1.0
   For a mix of office, retail, and residential uses with at least 30% of the 2.0
total floor area devoted to residential uses and for hospitals
Maximum height limitations:
                                                                                 60 feet or to
                                                                                 a maximum of
                                                                                 72 feet for
                                                                                 development
                                                                                 in which more
                                                                                 than 50% of
                                                                                 allowable lot
                                                                                 coverage
                                                                                 consists of
                                                                                 environmental
                                                                                 site design
   If two or more lot lines abut a residential district                       features
                                                                                 approved by
                                                                                 the Planning
                                                                                 and Zoning
                                                                                 Officer and
                                                                                 all setbacks
                                                                                 are increased
                                                                                 by one foot
                                                                                 for each foot
                                                                                 of height in
                                                                                 excess of 60
                                                                                 feet
                                                                                 60 feet
                                                                                 except that
                                                                                 there shall
                                                                                 be no maximum
                                                                                 for
                                                                                 development
                                                                                 in which more
                                                                                 than 50% of
                                                                                 allowable lot
                                                                                 coverage
                                                                                 consists of
                                                                                 environmental
   If one lot line abuts a residential district                               site design
                                                                                 features
                                                                                 approved by
                                                                                 the Planning
                                                                                 and Zoning
                                                                                 Officer and
                                                                                 all setbacks
                                                                                 are increased
                                                                                 by one foot
                                                                                 for each
                                                                                 three feet of
                                                                                 height in
                                                                                 excess of 60
                                                                                 feet
                                                                                 Accessible by
                                                                                 a 15-foot
Rear service area                                                                wide
                                                                                 unobstructed
                                                                                 right-of-way
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 60-10)
SUBTITLE 4. C3 – GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-5-401. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in a C3 District:
Minimum lot size                      10,000 square feet
Maximum coverage by structures and    80% of gross area
parking
Minimum setbacks for principal
structures:
   Side lot line                   None, except when abutting a residential
                                      district 25 feet
   Rear lot line                   None, except when abutting a residential
                                      district 15 feet
   All lot lines                   60 feet from right-of-way line of a
                                      divided principal arterial road
Minimum setbacks for accessory
structures in the side or rear yard:
   Side lot line                   10 feet
   Rear lot line                   10 feet
Minimum lot depth                     150 feet
Maximum floor area ratio              2.0
Maximum height limitations for
development in which less than 50% of 60 feet except that all setbacks are
allowable lot coverage consists of    increased by one foot for each foot of
environmental site design features    height in excess of 45 feet
approved by the Planning and Zoning
Officer
Maximum height limitations for
development in which more than 50% of 72 feet if all setback requirements are
allowable lot coverage consists of    increased by one foot for each foot of
environmental site design features    height in excess of 45 feet
approved by the Planning and Zoning
Officer
Rear service area                     Accessible by a 15-foot wide unobstructed
                                      right-of-way
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 60-10)
SUBTITLE 5. C4 – HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-5-501. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in a C4 District:
Minimum size lot                      10,000 square feet
Maximum coverage by structures and    85% of gross area
parking
Minimum setbacks for principal
structures:
   Front lot line                  20 feet
   Rear lot line                   20 feet
   All lot lines                   60 feet from right-of-way line of a
                                      divided principal arterial road
Minimum setbacks for accessory
structures in the side or rear yard:
   Side lot line                   10 feet
   Rear lot line                   10 feet
Minimum lot depth                     150 feet
Maximum floor area ratio              1.0
Maximum height limitations for
development in which less than 50% of
allowable lot coverage consists of    60 feet
environmental site design features
approved by the Planning and Zoning
Officer
Maximum height limitations for
development in which more than 50% of 72 feet if all setback requirements are
allowable lot coverage consists of    increased by one foot for each foot of
environmental site design features    height in excess of 60 feet
approved by the Planning and Zoning
Officer
Rear service area                     Accessible by a 15-foot wide unobstructed
                                      right-of-way
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 60-10)
TITLE 6. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
18-6-101.   Scope.
   
18-6-102.   Setbacks from existing dwellings in a residential district.
   
18-6-103.   Permitted, conditional, and special exception uses.
Subtitle 2. W1 – Industrial Park Districts
   
18-6-201.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 3. W2 – Light Industrial Districts
   
18-6-301.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 4. W3 – Heavy Industrial Districts
   
18-6-401.   Bulk regulations.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 18-6-101. Scope.
   This title applies to all industrial districts.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-6-102. Setbacks from existing dwellings in a residential district.
   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, each new structure, parking
lot, and driveway constructed after March 31, 2000, on a lot of more than 10
acres in an industrial zoning district shall be located at least 100 feet from
an existing dwelling in a residential district.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-6-103. Permitted, conditional, and special exception uses.
   The permitted, conditional, and special exception uses allowed in each of
the industrial districts are listed in the chart in this section using the
following key: P = permitted use; C = conditional use; SE = special exception
use; and A= auxiliary use to a business complex use. A blank means that the use
is not allowed in the district. Except as provided otherwise in this article,
uses and structures customarily accessory to permitted, conditional, and
special exception uses also are allowed, except that outside storage as an
accessory use in W1 is limited to 15% of the allowed lot coverage.
Permitted, Conditional, and Special Exception Uses W1 W2 W3
Permitted, Conditional, and Special Exception Uses                     W1 W2 W3
Adult bookstores                                                             C
Adult day care centers                                                 P  P
Adult movie theaters                                                         C
Airports and airfields                                                 SE SE SE
Alcoholic beverage uses as accessory to other uses                     C  C  C
Amusement parks                                                           SE SE
Animal hospitals with non-medical overnight stays and veterinary       P  C
clinics with non-medical overnight stays
Artisans and craft work                                                P  P  P
Automobile and truck detailing shops                                   P  P  P
Automobile and truck dismantling and recycling facilities                 SE SE
Automobile and truck rental establishments                             P  P  P
Automobile and truck repair and painting facilities                       P  P
Automobile and truck towing storage yards, temporary storage not to       P  P
exceed 90 days
Automobile gasoline stations                                           C  C  C
Automobile and truck parts, supply stores, and tire stores             P  P  P
Automobile service facilities providing oil change, lubrication, and   P  P  P
related services
Bakery or donut shops                                                  A  A
Bakeries, wholesale                                                    P  P  P
Banks                                                                  P  P
Barbershops                                                            A  A
Boat manufacturing, repair, and service                                   P  P
Bookbinding                                                               P  P
Bottling works                                                            P  P
Bone distillation                                                            P
BRAC Mixed Use Development                                             C
Brewery                                                                   P  P
Brewery, craft                                                         P  P  P
Building material storage, including sales and yards                      P  P
Bus terminals                                                             P  P
Business complexes                                                     P  P  P
Business complexes with auxiliary uses                                 C  C
Cabinetry and woodworking and sales without outside storage            P
Carnivals, circuses, and fairs, temporary                              C  C
Catering establishments                                                P  P
Cement manufacturing                                                         SE
Chemical and allied products, nonmanufacturing                               P
Child care centers                                                     P  P
Clay and borrow pits or sand and gravel operations                        SE SE
Clubs, private, and service, nonprofit, and charitable organizations   P  P  P
Coffee roasters                                                           P  P
Coke or coke products manufacturing                                          SE
Commercial recreational facilities, including miniature golf; driving
ranges; tennis, racquet, and handball barns or courts; artificial ski  P  P
slopes; indoor soccer; bowling alleys; BMX bike, skateboard or roller
blade parks; and skating rinks
Commercial telecommunication facilities permanently located on the     C  C  C
ground
Commercial telecommunication facilities that are antennas attached to
a structure if the antenna does not exceed 15 feet in height above the
structure, does not project more than two feet beyond the facade, does P  P  P
not support lights or signs unless required for safety reasons, and
accessory structures meet the requirements of §
18-10-118(7) of this Code
Commercial telecommunication facilities for testing purposes or
emergency services for a period not exceeding 30 days if the facility  P  P  P
is a monopole not exceeding 100 feet in height and is located at least
300 feet from any dwelling
Communications systems sales and service, manufacturing and wholesale  P  P  P
Computer goods, sales and services                                     P  P  P
Conference centers                                                     P
Construction or sales trailers, temporary, in an approved development  P  P  P
actively under construction
Contractor and construction shops and yards                               P  P
Convenience stores, gift shops, and newsstands                         A  A
Data storage center                                                    P  P  P
Delicatessens and snack bars                                           A  A
Die casting                                                               P  P
Distillery                                                                P  P
Distillery, limited                                                    P  P  P
Dog day care facilities                                                   P
Dog grooming parlors                                                   P  P
Drive-in theaters                                                      SE SE
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments                                   P
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments, including pick-up stations,
package plants, and coin-operated facilities, limited to               A  A
establishments with less than 4,000 square feet of floor area
Dyeing establishments                                                     P  P
Electric vehicle repair facilities                                     P  P  P
Electric vehicle towing and storage facilities, temporary storage not  C  C  C
to exceed 90 days
Equipment, sales, repair and storage, commercial                          P  P
Entertainment complexes, including a multi-screen complex              A
Fabrication and assembly uses                                          P  P  P
Farming                                                                P  P  P
Fertilizer manufacturing                                                     SE
Food product manufacturing                                                P  P
Furniture, appliance, and carpet stores and showrooms                  P  P
Generating plants                                                            P
Grocery stores with a maximum of 25,000 square feet                    A  A
Hair, cosmetic facial hair, and nail salons                            A  A
Hardware stores                                                        A  A
Health clubs, spas, and gymnasiums                                     P  P  P
Heliports                                                              SE SE SE
Home occupations                                                       C  C  C
Hotels and motels                                                      P  A
Industrial piers, wharves, and mooring pilings if located in the          P  P
Chesapeake Bay, Patapsco River, Parish Creek, or Tenthouse Creek
Kennels, commercial                                                    C  P
Laboratories, research and development or testing                      P  P  P
Latex fabrication, not including paint                                    P  P
Licensed dispensary of cannabis, as defined in State law and           C  C  C
regulation
Licensed grower of cannabis, as defined in State law and regulation,   C  C  C
indoor cultivation only
Licensed processor of cannabis, as defined in State law and regulation C  C  C
Lumber yards                                                              P  P
Mailing and shipping services                                          P
Manufacturing and processing, general, including the assembling of
component parts, the creation of products, and the blending of         P  P  P
materials
Manufacturing and processing, heavy, including adhesives; aircraft
parts; asphalt; atmospheric gas; bricks; concrete products; paper;
metal foundries and forges; insulating materials; metal machinery that
includes autos, rail, farm, construction, mining, and industrial             P
machinery; metal refining, stamping, extrusion; paint and allied
products; paper and paper products from pulp; plastic; porcelain and
porcelain enamel; processing of grain, clay, sand, gravel, stone,
synthetic fibers, filaments, and tiles
Marine freight terminals, excluding bulk freight, if located in the       P  P
Chesapeake Bay or Patapsco River
Maritime suppliers and servicing, including piers and wharves for pile    P  P
driving and marine construction operations
Metal products and machinery, manufacturing, fabrication, finishing,
tool and die, machine shops, galvanizing, electroplating, die casting,    P  P
welding
Milk and dairy products, processing and distribution                      P  P
Monument works and statuary production                                    P  P
Motorcycle manufacturing and fabrication                                  P  P
Moving and storage establishments                                         P  P
Natural wood waste recycling facilities                                   SE SE
Offices, professional and general                                      P  P  P
Office supply stores and business service establishments               P
Ore storage                                                                  SE
Outside storage as a principal use                                        P  P
Package goods stores                                                   A  A
Parking garages or lots                                                P  P  P
Parks, private                                                         P
Personal fitness studios                                               P  P  P
Petroleum products, storage for retail sale                               SE SE
Petroleum products, storage on lot in excess of 1,000,000 gallons for        SE
use by W3 district uses or public utilities
Pets, livestock, or fowl as permitted by §                            P  P  P
18-4-104
Pharmacies                                                             A  A
Photoengraving                                                            P  P
Photography studios                                                    P  P
Piers, commercial                                                      P  P  P
Printing and publishing establishments                                 P  P  P
Processing sites for clay, sand, gravel, and similar materials               C
Public utility essential services                                      P  P  P
Public utility uses                                                    SE P  P
Race tracks for horses                                                 C  SE
Race tracks for other than horses                                         SE
Radio and television studios and broadcasting establishments           P  P
Radio, television, or industrial testing towers                           SE SE
Recyclables recovery facilities                                           SE SE
Religious facilities                                                   P  P  P
Rendering plants                                                             SE
Rental establishments                                                  P  P  P
Restaurants                                                            P  P  P
Rubble processing facilities                                                 SE
School bus facilities                                                     P  P
Schools, public charter, and schools, private: academic, arts,         P  P  P
business, technical, or trade
Self-service storage facilities                                        C  C  C
Showrooms and sales of specialty building products                     P  P  P
Sign shops, including painting and fabrication                         P  P  P
Small cell system                                                      C  C  C
Small wind energy systems or meteorological towers on a lot of at      C  C  C
least three acres
One small wind energy system or meteorological tower on a lot less     SE SE SE
than three acres
Solar energy generating facility – accessory                         P  P  P
Solar energy generating facility – community                         C  C  C
Solar energy generating facility – utility scale                     C  C  C
Solid waste transfer stations                                                SE
Stadiums, commercial                                                   SE SE SE
Staging areas for County capital projects                              P  P  P
State-licensed medical clinics                                         C  C  C
Storage of atmospheric gas, coal, grain                                      P
Tattoo parlors and body piercing salons                                P
Taverns                                                                P  P  P
Taxicab stands and services                                            P  P
Taxidermists                                                           P  P  P
Telephone exchanges                                                    P  P  P
Trade expositions                                                      P  P  P
Travel agencies                                                        A
Truck stops                                                               P  P
Video lottery facilities                                               C
Video sales and rental establishments with less than 1,500 square feet A  A
of floor area
Volunteer fire stations                                                P  P  P
Water-dependent facilities                                            P  P  P
Wholesale trade, warehousing, and storage establishments               P  P  P
Wineries                                                                  P  P
Workforce housing                                                      C
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 54-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 64-07; Bill No. 69-07;
Bill No. 82-09; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 73-12; Bill No. 12-13;
Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 21-14; Bill No. 58-14; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 14-15;
Bill No. 21-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 26-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 75-17;
Bill No. 101-17; Bill No. 3-18; Bill No. 25-18; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 54-19;
Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 104-20; Bill No. 47-21; Bill No. 104-
21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 29-24; Bill No. 63-24; Bill No.
81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
SUBTITLE 2. W1 – INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICTS
§ 18-6-201. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in a W1 District:
Lot size:
   Average lot size                   1 acre
   Minimum lot size                   40,000 square feet
   For an industrial park             20 acres
Minimum setbacks for principal
structures:
   Front lot line                     50 feet
   Side lot line                      30 feet
   Rear lot line                      30 feet
   Freeway                            100 feet
   Divided principal arterial road    60 feet
   Any other public road or right-of-w50 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory           25 feet
structures from rear and side lot lines
Maximum coverage by structures and       75% of gross area
parking
Minimum width at front building          150 feet
restriction line
Maximum height limitations:
                                         None if all setbacks are increased by
   Principal structures               one foot for each two feet of height
                                         in excess of 90 feet
                                         None if all setbacks are increased by
   Accessory structures               one foot for each two feet of height
                                         in excess of 25 feet
                                         300 feet in length unless special
                                         architectural, landscaping, or
Maximum single front elevation           topographic treatment, such as a
                                         change of material, texture,
                                         depression, berm, or other similar
                                         change, is employed.
 
(Bill No. 4-05)
SUBTITLE 3. W2 – LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-6-301. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in a W2 District:
Minimum lot size                                            8,000 square feet
Maximum coverage by structures and parking                  80% of gross area
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Front lot line                                        20 feet
   Side lot line                                         15 feet
   Rear lot line                                         30 feet
   Rear lot line that abuts a residentially zoned distric100 feet
   Side or rear lot line that abuts a commercially zoned 20 feet
district
   Freeway                                               100 feet
   Divided principal arterial road                       60 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures in a rear yard:
   Side lot line                                         10 feet
   Rear lot line                                         10 feet
Minimum lot depth                                           100 feet
Minimum width at front building restriction line            75 feet
                                                            75 feet if all
Maximum height limitations for principal structures where   setback
less than 50% of allowable lot coverage consists of         requirements are
environmental site design features approved by the Planning increased by one
and Zoning Officer                                          foot for each two
                                                            feet of height in
                                                            excess of 60 feet
                                                            87 feet if all
Maximum height limitations for principal structures where   setback
more than 50% of allowable lot coverage consists of         requirements are
environmental site design features approved by the Planning increased by one
and Zoning Officer                                          foot for each two
                                                            feet of height in
                                                            excess of 75 feet
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 60-10)
SUBTITLE 4. W3 – HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-6-401. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in a W3 District:
Minimum lot size                                        6,000 square feet
Maximum coverage by structures and parking              80% of gross area
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Front lot line                                    10 feet
   Front lot line abuts a residential area           10 feet
   Side lot line                                     10 feet
   Rear lot line                                     20 feet
   Side or rear lot line abuts a residentially zoned 200 feet
district
   Side or rear lot line abuts a commercially zoned  50 feet
district
   Freeway                                           100 feet
   Divided principal arterial road                   60 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures in a rear
yard:
   Side lot line                                     5 feet
   Rear lot line                                     5 feet
Minimum lot depth                                       100 feet
Minimum width at front building restriction line        75 feet
Maximum height limitations for principal structures,    75 feet if all setback
excluding towers, columns, or a series of columns,      requirements are
towers, or stacks, where less than 50% of allowable lot increased by one foot
coverage consists of environmental site design features for each two feet of
approved by the Planning and Zoning Officer             height in excess of 60
                                                        feet
Maximum height limitations for principal structures,    87 feet if all setback
excluding towers, columns, or a series of columns,      requirements are
towers, or stacks, where more than 50% of allowable lot increased by one foot
coverage consists of environmental site design features for each two feet of
approved by the Planning and Zoning Officer             height in excess of 75
                                                        feet
 
(Bill No. 4-05)
TITLE 7. MARITIME DISTRICTS
Section
   
18-7-101.   Scope.
   
18-7-102.   Maritime Districts.
   
18-7-103.   Determination of marina basin.
   
18-7-104.   Use of marina basin.
   
18-7-105.   Front yard.
   
18-7-106.   Bulk regulations.
   
18-7-107.   Permitted, conditional, and special exception uses.
   
18-7-108.   Ladders and flotation devices.
§ 18-7-101. Scope.
   This title applies to all maritime districts.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-7-102. Maritime Districts.
   (a)   MA1. The MA1-Community Marina District serves only the residents and
guests of a recorded residential riparian subdivision and is owned by a
homeowner’s association.
   (b)   MA1-B. The MA1-B-Neighborhood Marina District provides limited
watercraft services and lots may not exceed three acres.
   (c)   MA2. The MA2-Light Commercial Marina District provides limited
commercial services.
   (d)   MA3. The MA3-Yacht Club District serves only the members and is a non-
profit marina owned and operated by the membership.
   (e)   MB. The MB-General Commercial Marina District offers a full range of
commercial services.
   (f)   MC. The MC-Heavy Commercial Marina District offers a full service
marina or industrial operation.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 3-24)
§ 18-7-103. Determination of marina basin.
   (a)   Maps. The waterway maps prepared by the Office of Planning and Zoning
and adopted in 1979 are adopted as part of this article for the purpose of
determining marina basins.
   (b)   Limits of marina basin. The limits of the marina basin are the mean
high-water line of the site before development or expansion, two side marina
lot line extensions, and a line drawn to connect their channelward ends.
   (c)   Side lot line extensions. The length of each side marina lot line
extension shall be limited to the lesser of:
      (1)   one-half the distance from the mean high-water line to the center
point of a cove;
      (2)   100 feet less than the distance from the mean high-water line to
the edge of the delineated channel and anchorage, except that the channelward
extension of the side marina lot line or the line connecting the channelward
ends may not be less than one-half the distance from the mean high-water line
to the edge of the delineated channel and anchorage; or
      (3)   500 feet from the mean high-water line.
   (d)   Direction of side lot line extensions. The Office of Planning and
Zoning shall designate the direction of a marina basin side lot line extension
along a line:
      (1)   at a 90-degree angle to the mean high-water line of the property at
the intersection of the side marina lot line with the mean high-water line;
      (2)   at a 90-degree angle to the center line of the body of water;
      (3)   extending the side marina lot line past its intersection with the
mean high-water line;
      (4)   connecting the point of intersection between the side marina lot
line and the mean high- water line with the center point of a cove; or
      (5)   generally parallel to existing piers on adjacent properties.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-7-104. Use of marina basin.
   The water area used by a marina shall be limited to the marina basin.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-7-105. Front yard.
   Structures and uses on a lot may not be located in the front yard, except
that water-dependent uses and incidental items, such as dock boxes, trash
containers, dinghy racks, water safety facilities, fire safety facilities,
shoreline protection structures, or signs, may be located in the front yard.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-7-106. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in a maritime district:
Minimum site area                                            One acre above
                                                             mean high water
Maximum coverage by structures and parking in MA1, MA1-B,    70% of gross area
MA2, and MA3 Districts
Maximum dry storage area in MA1, MA1-B, MA2, and MA3         50% of gross area
Districts
Maximum coverage by structures, parking, and dry storage in  80% of gross area
MB and MC Districts
Minimum frontage for access                                  40 feet
Minimum width at waterfront                                  150 feet
Minimum setbacks for all structures:
                                                             Determined by
   Front lot line                                         critical area
                                                             criteria
   Side lot line                                          15 feet
   Rear lot line                                          20 feet
   Road right-of-way                                      40 feet
Minimum setbacks for commercial piers, piling installations, 25 feet from side
launching facilities, covered and uncovered slips            limits of marina
                                                             basin
Minimum setbacks for uncovered slips perpendicular to mean   20 feet from side
high water line                                              limits of marina
                                                             basin
Maximum height limitations:
                                                             40 feet, except
                                                             that a structure
                                                             may exceed the
                                                             height limitation
   Structures                                             if all setbacks
                                                             are increased by
                                                             two feet for each
                                                             foot of excess
                                                             height
   Outside dry storage of cradles and racks, without roof 10 feet
coverage
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 3-24)
§ 18-7-107. Permitted, conditional, and special exception uses.
   The permitted, conditional, and special exception uses allowed in each of
the Maritime group districts are listed in the chart in this section using the
following key: P = permitted use; C = conditional use; SE=special exception
use. A blank means that the use is not allowed in the district. Except as
provided otherwise in this article, uses and structures customarily accessory
to the listed uses also are allowed.
Permitted, Conditional, and Special Exception Uses MA1 MA1-B MA2 MA3 MB MC
Permitted, Conditional, and Special Exception Uses                         MA1 MA1- MA2 MA3 MB MC
                                                                               B
Alcoholic beverage uses as accessory to other uses                                  C   C   C  C
Banquet halls                                                                       P   P   P  P
Bed and breakfast homes                                                             C       C  C
Bed and breakfast inns                                                              SE      SE SE
Commercial telecommunication facilities permanently located on the ground                   SE SE
Commercial telecommunication facilities that are antennas attached to a
structure if the antenna does not exceed 15 feet in height above the
structure, does not project more than two feet beyond the facade, does not                  P  P
support lights or signs unless required for safety reasons, and accessory
structures meet the requirements of §
18-10-118(7) of this Code
Commercial telecommunication facilities for testing purposes or emergency
services for a period not exceeding 30 days if the facility is a monopole  P   P    P   P   P  P
not exceeding 100 feet in height and is located at least 300 feet from any
dwelling
Community structures and club houses                                       P        P   P   P  P
Construction of watercraft                                                          P       P  P
Construction or sales trailers, temporary, in an approved development      P   P    P   P   P  P
actively under construction
Dwellings, marina caretaker’s residence: one for a marina with less than     C    P   P   P  P
250 slips; two for a marina with 250 or more slips
Heliports                                                                                   SE SE
Home occupations                                                           C        C   C   C  C
Hotels and motels                                                                           SE SE
Ice vending machines                                                       P   P    P   P   P  P
Launching ramps and small hoists with a maximum rated lift capacity of     P   P    P
4,000 pounds for the launching and removal of watercraft
Launching ramps, marine railways, travel lifts, fork lifts, hoists,
hydraulic trailers, and other similar facilities for the launching and              P       P  P
removal of watercraft
Maintenance and repair of watercraft                                       P        P   P   P  P
Marinas, commercial                                                                 P       P  P
Marinas, community                                                         P
Marinas, neighborhood                                                          C
Marinas, yacht club                                                                     P
Marine fuel sales                                                                   P       P  P
Marine salvage and towing operations                                                           P
Offices and administration facilities necessary for operating the marina   P        P   P   P  P
Outside storage of crab pots, nets, traps, and other similar devices if             P       P  P
the total area of storage does not exceed 5% of the marina site
Personal fitness studio, water-based                                                P       P  P
Pile driving and marine construction operations                                             P  P
Piers and launching ramps, community                                       C
Piers, commercial                                                              P    P   P   P  P
Piers, recreational                                                        C
Public utility essential services                                          P   P    P   P   P  P
Public utility uses                                                        SE  SE   SE  SE  SE SE
Rental of watercraft, including watercraft charter operations                       P       P  P
Restaurants                                                                         P   P   P  P
Sail making and sail repair                                                                 P  P
Sale of groceries, packaged alcoholic beverages, fishing supplies, and              P   P   P  P
watercraft accessories
Sale of watercraft, marine engines, and watercraft trailers                         P       P  P
Small cell system                                                          C   C    C   C   C  C
Small wind energy systems or meteorological towers on a lot of at least    C   C    C   C   C  C
three acres
One small wind energy system or meteorological tower on a lot less than    SE  SE   SE  SE  SE SE
three acres
Solar energy generating facility – accessory                             P   P    P   P   P  P
Staging areas for County capital projects                                  P   P    P   P   P  P
Storage of watercraft, covered and dry                                              SE  SE  C  P
Storage of watercraft, covered and wet                                              SE  SE  SE P
Storage of watercraft, outside and dry                                     P   C    P   P   P  P
Storage of watercraft in excess of 150 feet                                                    P
Storage, multilevel watercraft rack                                                 SE      C  P
Swimming pools, tennis courts, and other similar recreational facilities   P        P   P   P  P
Taverns                                                                             P       P  P
Volunteer fire stations                                                    P   P    P   P   P  P
Water taxi landings                                                                 P       P  P
Water-related uses, including storage of seafood in live boxes, fish
cleaning, and structures for the storage of crab pots, nets, traps, and             P       P  P
similar devices
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 51-11;
Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 24-16; Bill No. 28-16; Bill No. 30-16; Bill No. 89-18;
Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 3-24)
§ 18-7-108. Ladders and flotation devices.
   (a)   Ladders. Boarding ladders shall be located along the sides of a pier
and along each bulkhead where the water depth at the bulkhead exceeds four feet
in depth at mean high water. Ladders along piers shall be 100 feet apart on
each side of the pier and staggered so that the ladders alternate sides every
50 feet. Ladders along bulkheads shall be placed no more than 50 feet apart.
   (b)   Personal flotation devices. United States Coast Guard approved
personal flotation devices shall be located along each pier or bulkhead at
intervals not exceeding 100 feet.
(Bill No. 4-05)
TITLE 8. MIXED USE DISTRICTS
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
18-8-101.   Scope.
   
18-8-102.   Mixed Use Districts.
   
18-8-103.   Definitions.
   
18-8-104.   Site size.
Subtitle 2. Uses under the Standard Method of Development
   
18-8-201.   Residential, commercial, and industrial districts.
Subtitle 3. Uses under the Optional Method of Development
   
18-8-301.   Permitted uses; conditional uses.
   
18-8-302.   Combination of uses.
   
18-8-303.   Bulk regulations; open area and parking requirements.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 18-8-101. Scope.
   This title applies to all mixed use districts.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-8-102. Mixed Use Districts.
   (a)   MXD-V. The village mixed use district is intended for small-scale,
walkable, low intensity mixed use development with residential and local-
serving retail and office uses in buildings up to three stories.
   (b)   MXD-G. The general mixed use district is intended for mixed use
development providing a wide range of general commercial and employment uses,
combined with residential uses at a low to medium suburban scale in buildings
up to six stories.
   (c)   MXD-N. The neighborhood mixed use district is intended for mixed use
development with a variety of residential dwelling types in a compact community
with buildings up to eight stories and with a range of retail and employment
uses primarily serving the surrounding community and with a high level of
pedestrian connectivity throughout the development.
   (d)   MXD-S. The suburban center mixed use district is intended for mixed
use development in a medium to large scale suburban center with buildings up to
15 stories and with a range of residential types, retail, and employment uses,
including some light industrial uses.
   (e)   MXD-U. The urban mixed use district is intended for compact, high
intensity mixed use development that is more urban in scale, includes
multifamily residential uses and a wide range of retail and employment uses
compatible with a dense urban environment in buildings up to 15 stories, and
provides multimodal connectivity throughout the development.
(Bill No. 75-24)
§ 18-8-103. Definitions.
   In this title, the following words have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   “Optional method of development” means development in which more
intense development is allowed in return for the development being subject to
greater discretionary approval over all elements of the development to achieve
a better quality of design or other amenities.
      (2)   “Standard method of development” means development as a matter of
right under applicable zoning and other regulations.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 75-24)
§ 18-8-104. Site size.
   The minimum gross area for a site to be developed under the optional method
of development is three acres, except that a site with a gross area of less
than three acres may be developed under the optional method of development if
it adjoins a site developed or being developed under the optional method of
development for which a sketch plan has been approved and can be integrated
with the development of the adjoining site in the manner described in §
17-7-604 of this Code.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 75-24)
SUBTITLE 2. USES UNDER THE STANDARD METHOD OF DEVELOPMENT
§ 18-8-201. Residential, commercial, and industrial districts.
   (a)   Residential. For a lot that was in a residential zoning district
immediately before being zoned to a mixed use district, the uses allowed under
the standard method of development are single-family detached dwellings,
including home occupations and accessory structures and uses, that comply with
the requirements of an R1 District.
   (b)   Commercial and industrial. For a site that was in a commercial or
industrial district immediately before being zoned to a mixed use district, the
uses are only those uses allowed in the mixed use district applicable to the
site, the floor area ratio may not exceed 0.1, and the uses shall otherwise
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which the site was
located.
(Bill No. 4-05)
SUBTITLE 3. USES UNDER THE OPTIONAL METHOD OF DEVELOPMENT
§ 18-8-301. Permitted uses; conditional uses.
   (a)   Uses allowed.
      (1)   The permitted and conditional uses under the optional method of
development are listed in the chart in this section using the following key: P
= permitted use; C = conditional use; SE = special exception use. A blank space
means that the use is not allowed in the district. Uses and structures
customarily accessory to the listed uses also are allowed.
      (2)   Any use lawfully in existence in a mixed use district prior to
February 2, 2025 that became prohibited as of February 2, 2025, may continue,
provided the use does not cease operation for 36 consecutive months. Any
change, expansion, or alteration of the use on or after February 2, 2025 shall
comply with this subtitle or Title 15.
   (b)   Categories in chart. The following chart divides the uses allowed
under the optional method of development into the categories of residential,
retail and service, office, light industrial, civic/institutional, and other
uses, and the uses are subject to the requirements described in §
18-8-302.
Uses MXD-V MXD-G MXD-N MXD-S MXD-U
Uses                                                               MXD- MXD- MXD- MXD- MXD-
                                                                   V    G    N    S    U
Residential
Assisted living facilities                                         C    C    C    C    C
Assisted living facilities I, community-based                      P    P    P    P    P
Assisted living facilities II, community-based                     P    P    P    P    P
BRAC mixed use development                                              C    C    C    C
Dwelling units, accessory                                          C    C    C    C
Dwellings, duplex                                                  P    P    P    P    P
Dwellings, fourplex                                                P    P    P    P    P
Dwellings, multifamily                                             P    P    P    P    P
Dwellings, multiplex                                               P    P    P    P    P
Dwellings, single-family detached                                  P    P    P    P
Dwellings, townhouses and stacked townhouses                       P    P    P    P    P
Dwellings, triplex                                                 P    P    P    P    P
Group homes I                                                      P    P    P    P    P
Group homes II                                                     P    P    P    P    P
Home occupations                                                   C    C    C    C    C
Housing for the elderly of moderate means                          C    C    C    C    C
Nursing homes                                                      C    C    C    C    C
Rooming houses                                                     P    P    P    P    P
Workforce housing                                                  C    C    C    C    C
Retail and Service
Adult day care centers                                             P    P    P    P    P
Alcoholic beverage uses as accessory to other uses                 C    C    C    C    C
Antique shops                                                      P    P    P    P    P
Appliance sales and service facilities                                  P    P    P    P
Arcades                                                                 P    P    P    P
Art galleries                                                      P    P    P    P    P
Artisans and craft work                                            P    P    P    P    P
Automobile and truck detailing shops                                    P    P    P
Automobile and truck parts, supply stores, and tire stores              P    P    P
Automobile and truck rental establishments                              P         P
Automobile gasoline stations                                       C    C    C    C    C
Automobile repair facilities and painting facilities                    P         P
Automobile service facilities providing oil change, lubrication,        P    P    P    P
and related services
Automobile towing facilities in conjunction with automobile                       SE
gasoline service stations
Bakery or donut shops                                              P    P    P    P    P
Banks                                                              P    P    P    P    P
Banquet halls                                                           P    P    P    P
Barbershops                                                        P    P    P    P    P
Bed and breakfast homes                                            C    C    C    C    C
Bed and breakfast inns                                             SE   SE   SE   SE   SE
Bicycle, motor scooter, and moped sales and service                     P    P    P    P
Billiard and pool halls                                                 P    P    P    P
Bowling alleys                                                          P    P    P    P
Brewery, craft                                                          P    P    P    P
Business complexes                                                 P    P    P    P    P
Business complexes with auxiliary use                              C    C    C    C    C
Carnivals, circuses, and fairs, temporary                          C    C    C    C    C
Carpet and vinyl flooring stores                                        P    P    P    P
Carwashes                                                               P    P    P
Carwashes accessory to automobile gasoline stations                P    P    P    P    P
Catering establishments                                                 P    P    P    P
Child care centers                                                 P    P    P    P    P
Clock shops for sale or repair                                     P    P    P    P    P
Commercial parking lots or garages                                 P    P    P    P    P
Commercial recreational facilities, including miniature golf,
driving ranges, tennis, racquet, and handball barns or courts,
artificial ski slopes, indoor soccer; bowling alleys, BMX bike,         P    P    P    P
skateboard or rollerblade parks, electric go-carting, and skating
rinks
Computer goods, sales and services                                 P    P    P    P    P
Convenience stores, gift shops, and newsstands                     P    P    P    P    P
Country clubs, private clubs, and service organizations or         P    P    P    P    P
institutions
Country clubs, private clubs, service organizations, and nonprofit
charitable or philanthropic organizations or institutions in       P    P    P    P    P
existence on or before December 31, 2015
Cultural centers and exhibits                                      P    P    P    P    P
Delicatessens and snack bars                                       P    P    P    P    P
Department stores                                                       P    P    P    P
Distillery, limited                                                     P    P    P    P
Dog day care facilities                                                 P    P    P    P
Dog grooming parlors                                               P    P    P    P    P
Dry cleaning operations and laundry establishments, including           P    P    P    P
pickup stations, package plants, and coin-operated facilities
Dry cleaning operations and laundry establishments, including
pickup stations, package plants, and coin-operated facilities,     P
limited to establishments with less than 4,000 square feet of
floor area
Entertainment complexes, including multi-screen complexes               P    P    P    P
Florist shops                                                      P    P    P    P    P
Funeral establishments                                                  P    P    P    P
Furniture, appliance, and carpet stores and showrooms                   P    P    P    P
Greenhouses and garden centers                                          P    P    P
Grocery stores                                                          P    P    P    P
Grocery stores with a maximum of 35,000 square feet                P
Hair, cosmetic facial hair, and nail salons                        P    P    P    P    P
Hardware stores                                                    P    P    P    P    P
Health clubs, spas, and gymnasiums                                 P    P    P    P    P
Home centers and building supply stores                                 P    P    P
Hospice facilities                                                 P    P    P    P    P
Hospitals                                                                         P
Hotels, motels, and hostels                                        P    P    P    P    P
Interior decorating establishments                                 P    P    P    P    P
Janitorial supply stores                                                P         P
Kennels, commercial                                                          C    C
Licensed dispensary of cannabis, as defined in State law and       C    C    C    C    C
regulations
Licensed grower of cannabis, as defined in State law and                C         C
regulations, indoor cultivation only
Licensed processor of cannabis, as defined in State law and             C         C
regulations
Linen supply establishments                                             P    P    P
Locksmiths                                                         P    P    P    P    P
Mailing and shipping services                                      P    P    P    P    P
Meat, seafood, and poultry markets                                 P    P    P    P    P
Motorcycle repair facilities                                            P         P
Moving or storage establishments                                                  P
Nightclubs and comedy clubs                                             P    P    P    P
Outside storage, accessory to permitted uses, located in a side or P    P    P    P    P
rear yard, limited to 35% of the allowed lot coverage
Package goods stores                                               C    C    C    C    C
Parking lots or garages                                            P    P    P    P    P
Parks, private                                                     P    P    P    P    P
Personal fitness studios                                           P    P    P    P    P
Pharmacies                                                         P    P    P    P    P
Picture-framing establishments                                     P    P    P    P    P
Piers, commercial                                                  P    P    P    P    P
Piers, community                                                   C    C    C    C    C
Piers, recreational                                                C    C    C    C    C
Produce markets                                                    P    P    P    P    P
Race tracks for horses                                                            C
Religious facilities                                               P    P    P    P    P
Restaurants                                                        P    P    P    P    P
Restaurants, taverns, retail sales, and consumer services in a          P    P    P    P
multifamily dwelling
Retail specialty stores or shops for retail sales including
antiques, art supplies, books, candies, cards, clocks, clothing,
consignments, electronics, fabrics, flowers, gifts, hobbies,
housewares, ice cream parlors, jewelry, luggage, musical
instruments, news publications, office supplies, optical goods,    P    P    P    P    P
pets, photographic supplies, sewing machines, shoes and shoe
repair, sporting goods, stamps and coins, stationary, tobacco,
toys, video tapes, wallpapers and paints, window coverings, and
works of art
Roadside stands consisting of temporary seasonal structures for    P    P    P    P    P
selling produce and other agricultural goods
Roadside vendors                                                   P    P    P    P    P
Schools, public charter, and schools, private: academic, arts,     P    P    P    P    P
business, technical or trade
Self-service storage facilities                                         C    C    C
Showrooms and sales of specialty building products                      P    P    P    P
Small engine repair if all work is performed inside a building     P    P    P    P    P
without outside storage
Swimming pools, community and semi-public                          P    P    P    P    P
Tailor shops                                                       P    P    P    P    P
Tanning salons                                                     P    P    P    P    P
Tattoo parlors and body-piercing salons                            P    P    P    P    P
Taverns                                                            P    P    P    P    P
Taxicab stands and services                                        P    P    P    P    P
Television studios, radio broadcasting stations, and recording          P    P    P    P
studios, excluding freestanding towers
Theaters, live performance                                         P    P    P    P    P
Theaters, movie                                                    P    P    P    P    P
Trade expositions                                                       P    P    P    P
Travel agencies                                                    P    P    P    P    P
Upholstering shops and sailmaking shops                                 P    P    P
Variety stores                                                     P    P    P    P    P
Volunteer fire stations                                            P    P    P    P    P
Office
Office, professional and general                                   P    P    P    P    P
Opticians or optometrical establishments                           P    P    P    P    P
State-licensed medical clinics                                     C    C    C    C    C
Telecommuting centers                                              P    P    P    P    P
Veterinary clinics, if over-night stays are limited to those            P    P    P    P
necessary for medical treatment, without outside runs or pens
Light Industrial
Bakeries, wholesale                                                               P
Brewery                                                                           P
Building material storage, including sales and yards                              P
Building material storage and sales, not including yards                P    P    P
Cabinetry and special lumber mill working and sales                               P
Coffee roasters                                                         P         P
Contractor and construction shops, not including yards                  P         P
Data storage centers                                                              P
Distillery                                                                        P
Equipment sales, repair, and storage, commercial                                  P
Fabrication and assembly uses                                                     P
Food product manufacturing                                                        P
Laboratories, research and development or testing                                 P
Manufacturing and processing, general, including assembly of                      P
component parts, creation of products, and blending of materials
Printing and publishing establishments                                  P         P
Rental establishments                                                   P         P
Retail display rooms for sales at industrial establishments                       P
Wholesale trade, warehousing, and storage establishments                               P
Permitted and conditional uses in the W1 District in accordance
with the requirements of subsection (c) and not otherwise provided      P    P    P    P
for in the residential, retail and service, or office categories
of this subsection.
Civic/Institutional
Civic facilities, community centers, libraries, museums, parks,    P    P    P    P    P
and similar noncommercial uses
Other
Bus terminals                                                      P    P    P    P    P
Commercial telecommunication facilities for testing purposes or
emergency services for a period not exceeding 30 days if the       P    P    P    P    P
facility is a monopole not exceeding 100 feet in height and
located at least 300 feet from any dwelling
Commercial telecommunication facilities permanently located on the C    C    C    C    C
ground
Commercial telecommunication facilities that are antennas attached
to a structure if the antenna does not exceed 15 feet in height
above the structure, does not project more than two feet beyond
the facade, does not support lights or signs unless required for   P    P    P    P    P
safety reasons, and accessory structures meet the requirements of
§
18-10-118(7)
Construction or sales trailers, temporary, in an approved          P    P    P    P    P
development actively under construction
Public utility, essential services                                 P    P    P    P    P
Public utility uses                                                SE   SE   SE   SE   SE
Small wind energy systems                                          SE   SE   SE   SE   SE
Small wind energy systems or meteorological towers on a lot of at  C    C    C    C    C
least three acres
Solar energy generating facility – accessory                     P    P    P    P    P
Solar energy generating facility – canopies over parking lots or P    P    P    P    P
garages
Solar energy generating facility – community, rooftop-mounted onlC    C    C    C    C
Staging areas for County capital projects                          P    P    P    P    P
Transportation, multimodal stations                                P    P    P    P    P
 
   (c)   Additional requirements. Except for a solar energy generating facility
– community or solar energy generating facility – utility scale, the permitted
and conditional uses allowed in the W1 District are permitted in MXD-G, MXD-N,
MXD-S, and MXD-U Districts provided:
      (1)   the location is within the Airport Noise Zone, is on land
remediated for environmental requirements under federal or State law, is on
land that has been reclaimed pursuant to an approved final reclamation plan
under State or federal law, or consists of lots abutting remediated or
reclaimed land; and
      (2)   the requirements of §
18-8-302 and Title 10 are met.
(Bill No. 75-24; Bill No. 31-25)
§ 18-8-302. Combination of uses.
   (a)   Required. Development in a mixed use district shall include at least
one allowed use from at least two of the following land use categories set
forth in the chart in §
18-8-301: residential, retail and service, office, light industrial, or civic/
institutional.
   (b)   Exception.
      (i)   On a site located in the BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area, as shown on
the official map adopted by the County Council entitled “BWI/Fort Meade Growth
Area, 2016”, the mix of uses required in subsection (a) may be replaced with
multifamily dwellings subject to the conditions and density limits set forth in
§
18-10-127(1)(iii).
      (ii)   On a site located in the BRAC Mixed Use Development area expanded
boundary that is not being developed as a BRAC Mixed Use Development and is
being developed as a mixed use development, the mix of uses required in
subsection (a) is not required on an individual lot and may instead be met by
providing the required mix of uses in the mixed use phased development as a
whole.
(Bill No. 75-24; Bill No. 50-25)
§ 18-8-303. Bulk regulations; open area and parking requirements.
   (a)   Bulk regulations. Except as provided otherwise in this article, the
following bulk regulations are applicable in a mixed use district:
 
Bulk Regulations                                MXD-V MXD-G MXD-N MXD-S MXD-U
Maximum residential density (units/per acre)    7     10    15    22    44
Maximum building height (feet)                  36    72    96    180   180
Minimum open area (% of gross site area)        15%   15%   15%   15%   15%
Minimum active recreation area (square feet per 350   350   350   350   350
dwelling unit)
Minimum public activity area (% of useable      10%   10%   10%   10%   10%
nonresidential gross floor area)
 
   (b)   Open area, active recreation area, and public activity area. The
characteristics of required open area, active recreation area, and public
activity area are described in §
17-7-604(4) of this Code and the additional following criteria apply:
      (1)   Open area may include wetland and stream buffers, forest
conservation easements, floodplains, and stormwater management or drainage
facilities;
      (2)   Active recreation area may be located within the required open
area, but may not be located in wetland and stream buffers, forest conservation
easements, floodplains, or stormwater management or drainage facilities; and
      (3)   Public activity area may include recreational amenities.
   (c)   Parking requirements. Parking shall be in accordance with §
17-7-604 of this Code and §
18-3-106.
(Bill No. 75-24)
TITLE 9. OTHER ZONING DISTRICTS
Section
Subtitle 1. Odenton Town Center Districts
   
18-9-101.   Scope.
   
18-9-102.   Historic Village Mix Block.
   
18-9-103.   Uses.
   
18-9-104.   Bulk regulations.
   
18-9-105.   Conditional uses.
   
18-9-106.   Mix of uses.
   
18-9-107.   Parking.
   
18-9-108.   Signage.
Subtitle 2. OS/OS-C – Open Space Districts and Conservation Overlay
   
18-9-201.   Scope.
   
18-9-202.   Permitted, conditional, and special exception uses.
   
18-9-203.   OS District bulk regulations.
   
18-9-204.   OS-C – Open Space Conservation Overlay.
Subtitle 3. TC – Town Center Districts
   
18-9-301.   Scope.
   
18-9-302.   Permitted and special exception uses.
   
18-9-303.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 4. SB – Small Business Districts
   
18-9-401.   Scope.
   
18-9-402.   Permitted, conditional, and special exception uses.
   
18-9-403.   Bulk regulations.
SUBTITLE 1.  ODENTON TOWN CENTER DISTRICTS
§ 18-9-101. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to the Odenton Town Center.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 18-9-102. Historic Village Mix Block.
   Within the OTC-H zoning district, there shall be an overlay entitled the
Historic Village Mix Block, as depicted in the Odenton Town Center Master Plan.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 18-9-103. Uses.
   (a)   Existing uses. Any use lawfully in existence in the Odenton Town
Center prior to March 29, 2024 that became prohibited as of March 29, 2024, may
continue, provided the use does not cease operation for 12 consecutive months.
Any change, expansion, or alteration of the use on or after March 29, 2024
shall comply with Subtitle 8 of Title 7 of Article 17 of this Code and Subtitle
1 of Title 9 of this article, or Title 15 of this article.
   (b)   Use chart. The permitted, conditional, and special exception uses
allowed in each of the Odenton Town Center Districts and Historic Village Mix
Block are listed in this section using the following key: P = permitted use; C
= conditional use; SE = special exception use. A blank means the use is not
allowed in the district or the Historic Village Mix Block.
Uses OTC-C OTC-T OTC-I OTC-E OTC-FM OTC-H Historic Village Mix Block
                                                                                               Historic
Uses                                                             OTC- OTC- OTC- OTC- OTC- OTC- Village
                                                                 C    T    I    E    FM   H    Mix
                                                                                               Block
Residential
Assisted living facilities                                       C    C         C    C
Assisted living facilities I, community-based                    P    P         P    P         P
Assisted living facilities II, community-based                   C    C         C    C         C
Dwelling units, accessory                                        P    P    P    P    P    P    P
Dwellings, duplex                                                P    P    P    P    P    P    P
Dwellings, fourplex                                              P    P    P    P    P
Dwellings, multifamily                                           P    P    P    P    P
Dwellings, multiplex                                             P    P    P    P    P
Dwellings, single-family detached                                     P    P    P    P    P    P
Dwellings, townhouse and stacked townhouse                       P    P    P    P    P         P
Dwellings, triplex                                               P    P    P    P    P
Group homes I                                                    P    P    P    P    P    P    P
Group homes II                                                   C    C    C    C    C    C    C
Home occupations                                                 C    C    C    C    C    C    C
Housing for the elderly of moderate means                        C    C    C    C    C         C
Nursing homes                                                    C    C         C    C
Rooming houses                                                   P    P    P    P    P         P
Workforce housing                                                C    C    C    C    C    C    C
Retail and Service
Adult day care centers                                           P    P    P    P    P         P
Alcoholic beverage uses as accessory to other uses               C    C    C    C    C         C
Arcades                                                          P    P    P    P    P
Artisans and craft work                                          P    P    P    P    P         P
Automobile and truck detailing shops                                  P    P    P    P
Automobile and truck parts, supply stores, and tire stores            P    P    P    P
Automobile and truck rental establishments                            P    P    P    P
Automobile gasoline stations                                          C    C    C    C
Automobile repair facilities and painting facilities                  P    P    P    P
Automobile service facilities providing oil change, lubrication,      P    P    P    P
and related services
Automobile towing facilities in conjunction with automobile           SE   SE   SE   SE
gasoline service stations
Bakery or donut shops                                            P    P    P    P    P         P
Banks                                                            P    P    P    P    P         P
Banquet halls                                                    P    P    P    P    P
Barbershops                                                      P    P    P    P    P         P
Bed and breakfast homes                                                                   C    C
Bed and breakfast inns                                                                    SE   SE
Bicycle, motor scooter, and moped sales and service              P    P    P    P    P         P
Billiard and pool halls                                          P    P    P    P    P
Bowling alleys                                                   P    P    P    P    P
Business complexes                                               P    P    P    P    P         P
Business complexes with auxiliary use                            C    C    C    C    C         C
Carnivals, circuses, and fairs, temporary                        P    P    P    P    P
Carpet and vinyl flooring stores                                 P    P    P    P    P
Carwashes                                                             P    P    P    P
Carwashes accessory to automobile gasoline stations                   P    P    P    P
Catering establishments                                          P    P    P    P    P         P
Child care centers                                               P    P    P    P    P         P
Commercial parking lots or garages                               P    P    P    P    P         P
Commercial recreational facilities, including miniature golf,
driving ranges, tennis, racquet, and handball barns or courts,
artificial ski slopes, indoor soccer; bowling alleys, BMX bike,  P    P    P    P    P         P
skateboard or rollerblade parks, electric go-carting, and
skating rinks
Computer goods, sales and services                               P    P    P    P    P         P
Convenience stores, gift shops, and newsstands                   P    P    P    P    P         P
Country clubs, private clubs, and service organizations or       P    P    P    P    P         P
institutions
Country clubs, private clubs, service organizations, and
nonprofit charitable or philanthropic organizations or                                    P
institutions in existence on or before December 31, 2015
Cultural centers and exhibits                                    P    P    P    P    P    P    P
Delicatessens and snack bars                                     P    P    P    P    P         P
Department stores                                                P    P    P    P    P         P
Dog day care facilities                                               P    P    P    P
Dog grooming parlors                                                  P    P    P    P
Dry cleaning operations and laundry establishments, including              P    P    P
pickup stations, package plants, and coin- operated facilities
Dry cleaning operations and laundry establishments, including
pickup stations, package plants, and coin- operated facilities,  P    P
limited to establishments with less than 4,000 square feet of
floor area
Entertainment complexes, including multi-screen complexes        P    P    P    P    P
Funeral establishments                                           P    P    P    P    P         P
Furniture, appliance, and carpet stores and showrooms            P    P    P    P    P
Greenhouses and garden centers                                   P    P    P    P    P         P
Grocery stores                                                   P    P    P    P    P         P
Hair, cosmetic facial hair, and nail salons                      P    P    P    P    P         P
Hardware stores                                                  P    P    P    P    P         P
Health clubs, spas, gymnasiums                                   P    P    P    P    P
Heliports                                                             SE   SE   SE   SE
Home centers and building supply stores                          P    P    P    P    P         P
Hospitals                                                        P    P    P    P    P         P
Hotels, motels, and hostels                                      P    P    P    P    P
Interior decorating establishments                               P    P    P    P    P         P
Janitorial supply stores                                         P    P    P    P    P         P
Kennels, commercial                                                   C    P    C    C
Licensed dispensary of cannabis, as defined in State law and     SE   SE   SE   SE   SE        SE
regulations
Licensed grower of cannabis, as defined in State law and              C    C    C    C
regulations, indoor cultivation only
Licensed processor of cannabis, as defined in State law and           C    C    C    C
regulations
Linen supply establishments                                      P    P    P    P    P
Locksmiths                                                       P    P    P    P    P         P
Mailing and shipping services                                    P    P    P    P    P
Meat, seafood, and poultry markets                               P    P    P    P    P
Motorcycle repair facilities                                          P    P    P    P
Moving or storage establishments                                      C    P    P    P
Nightclubs and comedy clubs                                      P    P    P    P    P
Outside storage, accessory to permitted uses, located in a side       P         P    P
or rear yard, limited to 50% of the allowed lot coverage
Package good stores                                              C    C    C    C    C         C
Parking lots or garages                                          P    P    P    P    P
Parks, private                                                   P    P    P    P    P    P    P
Personal fitness studios                                         P    P    P    P    P
Pharmacies                                                       P    P    P    P    P         P
Picture-framing establishments                                   P    P    P    P    P         P
Produce markets                                                  P    P    P    P    P    P    P
Religious facilities                                             P    P    P    P    P    P    P
Restaurants                                                      P    P    P    P    P         P
Restaurants, taverns, retail sales, and consumer services in a   P    P    P    P    P
multifamily dwelling
Retail specialty stores or shops for retail sales of antiques,
art supplies, books, candies, cards, clocks, clothing,
consignments, electronics, fabrics, flowers, gifts, hobbies,
housewares, ice cream parlors, jewelry, luggage, musical
instruments, news publications, office supplies, optical goods,  P    P    P    P    P         P
pets, photographic supplies, sewing machines, shoes and shoe
repair, sporting goods, stamps and coins, stationery, tobacco,
toys, video tapes, wallpapers and paints, window coverings, and
works of art
Roadside stands consisting of temporary seasonal structures for  P    P    P    P    P    P    P
selling produce and other agricultural goods
Roadside vendors                                                 P    P    P    P    P         P
Schools, public charter, and schools, private: academic, arts,   P    P    P    P    P         P
business, technical or trade
Self-service storage facilities                                  C    C    P    P    P
Showrooms and sales of specialty building products               P    P    P    P    P         P
Small engine repair if all work is performed inside a building        P    P    P    P
without outside storage
Swimming pools, community and semi-public                        P    P    P    P    P         P
Tailor shops                                                     P    P    P    P    P         P
Tanning salons                                                   P    P    P    P    P         P
Tattoo parlors and body- piercing salons                         P    P    P    P    P         P
Taverns                                                          P    P    P    P    P         P
Taxicab stands and services                                      P    P    P    P    P
Television studios, radio broadcasting stations, and recording   P    P    P    P    P
studios, excluding freestanding towers
Theaters, live performance                                       P    P    P    P    P
Theaters, movie                                                  P    P    P    P    P
Trade expositions                                                P    P    P    P    P
Travel agencies                                                  P    P    P    P    P         P
Upholstering shops and sailmaking shops                          P    P    P    P    P         P
Variety stores                                                   P    P    P    P    P         P
Veterinary clinics, if over- night stays are limited to those    P    P    P    P    P         P
necessary for medical treatment, without outside runs or pens
Volunteer fire stations                                          P    P    P    P    P
Office
Office, professional and general                                 P    P    P    P    P         P
Office, professional and general in existence on or before                                P
December 31, 2015
State-licensed medical clinics                                   C    C    C    C    C         C
Telecommuting centers                                            P    P    P    P    P         P
Light Industrial
Bakeries, wholesale                                                        P
Brewery, craft                                                   P    P    P    P    P         P
Building material storage, including sales and yards                       P
Building material storage and sales, not including yards              C
Cabinetry and special lumber mill working and sales                   C    P
Coffee roasters                                                  P    P    P    P    P         P
Contractor and construction shops and yards                                P
Contractor and construction shops, not including yards                C
Data storage centers                                                       P
Equipment sales, repair, and storage, commercial                      P    P
Food product manufacturing                                                 P
Laboratories, research and development or testing                     C    P
Manufacturing and processing, general, including assembly of          C    P
component parts, creation of products, and blending of materials
Outside storage as a principal use                                         P
Printing and publishing establishments                                C    P
Rental establishments                                                 C    P
Retail display rooms for sales at industrial establishments           P    P
Shipping or cargo containers, trailers, truck compartments or              P
similar portable storage containers for onsite storage
Wholesale trade, warehousing, and storage establishments              C    P
Civic/Institutional
Civic facilities, community centers, libraries, museums, parks,  P    P    P    P    P         P
and similar noncommercial uses
Other
Bus terminals                                                    P    P    P    P    P    P    P
Commercial telecommunication facilities for testing purposes or
emergency services for a period not exceeding 30 days if the     P    P    P    P    P    P    P
facility is a monopole not exceeding 100 feet in height and
located at least 300 feet from any dwelling
Commercial telecommunication facilities permanently located on   C    C    C    C    C    C    C
the ground
Commercial telecommunication facilities that are antennas
attached to a structure if the antenna does not exceed 15 feet
in height above the structure, does not project more than two
feet beyond the facade, does not support lights or signs unless  P    P    P    P    P    P    P
required for safety reasons, and accessory structures meet the
requirements of §
18-10-118(7)
Construction or sales trailers, temporary, in an approved        P    P    P    P    P    P    P
development actively under construction
Public utility, essential services                               P    P    P    P    P    P    P
Public utility uses                                              SE   SE   SE   SE   SE   SE   SE
Small wind energy systems or meteorological towers on a lot less SE   SE   SE   SE   SE        SE
than three acres
Small wind energy systems or meteorological towers on a lot of   C    C    C    C    C         C
at least three acres
Solar energy generating facility–accessory                     P    P    P    P    P    C    C
Solar energy generating facility–canopies over parking lots or P    P    P    P    P
garages
Solar energy generating facility–community, rooftop-mounted onlC    C    C    C    C
Staging areas for County capital projects                        P    P    P    P    P
Transportation, multimodal stations                              P
 
(Bill No. 84-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-9-104. Bulk regulations.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following
bulk regulations are applicable in the Odenton Town Center. A blank means there
is no applicable bulk regulation.
Bulk Regulations OTC-C OTC-T OTC-I OTC-E OTC-F M OTC-H Historic Village Mix
                                                       Block
                                                                                         Historic
Bulk Regulations                                    OTC-C     OTC- OTC- OTC- OTC- OTC-H  Village
                                                              T    I    E    F M         Mix
                                                                                         Block
Maximum floor area ratio, excluding structured      4         2    1    1    1           1
parking
Maximum density (dwelling units per acre)                                         3
Minimum height for properties less than two acres   25        25
for principal structure (feet)
Maximum height for principal structure (feet)       100       100  50   50   50   35     45
Maximum height for accessory structure, or the
height of the principal structure, whichever is     100       100  50   50   50   25     45
less (feet)
                                                    0-20; or
                                                    0-45 for
Front setback (minimum- maximum) (feet)             minor and 0–40–50–40–430–450–45
                                                    principal
                                                    arterial
                                                    roads
Side setback (feet)                                                               7
Setback from Maryland Route 32 (minimum–maximum)  35-45
(feet)
Minimum corner side setback (feet)                                                15
Minimum front setback for accessory structure                                     50
(feet)
Minimum lot size (square feet)                                                    14,000
Maximum lot coverage by structures (percentage of                                 20%
gross area)
Minimum lot width (feet)                                                          70
   (b)   Height calculation. When determining the height of a principal
structure, towers, spires, chimneys, and other similar uninhabited features may
extend beyond the height of the roof of the principal structure and do not
count toward the maximum height.
   (c)   Setbacks. Front setbacks are calculated from the property line in the
location as it will exist after any required dedication of right-of-way.
   (d)   Other approvals. The Planning and Zoning Officer may approve a bulk
regulation other than one set forth in this section in accordance with §
17-7-810 of this Code.
   (e)   Noise mitigation; Maryland Route 32. For residential development or
nonresidential development with activity spaces adjacent to Maryland Route 32,
the developer shall:
      (1)   conduct a noise study using Federal Highway Administration
prediction methods to identify the noise mitigation measures that are necessary
to reduce highway traffic sound level:
         (i)   to be at or below 66 dba in residential activity spaces and at
or below 45 dba in indoor residentially occupied building spaces; or
         (ii)   where possible, to be at or below 66 dba in nonresidential
activity spaces; and
      (2)   subject to the results of the noise study, if noise mitigation is
required:
         (i)   include any required indoor noise mitigation measures on the
building architectural plans; and
         (ii)   provide outdoor noise mitigation measures to meet the noise
levels set forth in item (1) in an activity space maintained by a homeowners
association, community association, or council of condominium unit owners and
noted on the final plan or the final record plat to be recorded in the land
records; or in the absence of an activity space, provide a noise mitigation
maintenance easement that shall be noted on the final plan or the final record
plat to be recorded in the land records.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 18-9-105. Conditional uses.
   The following requirements shall apply to the conditional uses in this
section in lieu of any requirements in Title 10:
      (1)   Housing for elderly of moderate means shall:
         (i)   consist of rental dwelling units only;
         (ii)    comply with the conditions set forth in §
18-10-142(8); and
         (iii)    be encumbered by a recorded covenant, enforceable by the
County or its designee, that shall comply with the conditions set forth in §
18-10-142(1)(i) through (iii).
      (2)   Workforce housing consisting of dwelling units of any type or
mixture shall:
         (i)   be encumbered by a recorded covenant enforceable by the County
or its designee that shall comply with the conditions set forth in §
18-10-176(2)(i) through (v);
         (ii)   comply with the conditions set forth in §
18-10-176(8); and
         (iii)   have home prices set at rates certified by the County or its
designee to be affordable to a household with an income that does not exceed
80% of the median income adjusted for household size for the Baltimore Primary
Metropolitan Statistical Area, as defined and published annually by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
      (3)   An assisted living facility shall comply with the following
requirements:
         (i)   The minimum setback from all property lines shall be 35 feet;
         (ii)   An assisted living facility may be operated in conjunction with
a nursing home or adult independent dwelling units or both, whether or not
owned by the same entity;
         (iii)   A nursing home or adult independent dwelling units may be
located on the same lot as the assisted living facility or on one or more
abutting lots, and, if located on one or more abutting lots, item (i) does not
apply to the lot lines shared by such abutting lots;
         (iv)   Comprehensive care units may be provided; and
         (v)   Activity spaces shall be located in a manner to shield
surrounding residential property from the effects of noise, hazards, or other
offensive conditions.
      (4)   A bed and breakfast home shall comply with the following
requirements:
         (i)   The home shall be located in an owner-occupied single-family
detached dwelling on a lot of at least 11,000 square feet;
         (ii)   The home may contain no more than five guest rooms for the
lodging of guests for no more than 14 consecutive days. The owner shall
maintain a reservation log of the arrival and departure dates of all guests for
inspection by the Office of Planning and Zoning; and
         (iii)   Guest rooms may not contain any cooking facilities, and food
service shall be provided only for guests in a group dining area of the home.
      (5)   For a business complex with auxiliary uses, the auxiliary uses may
not occupy more than 50% of the floor area of the business complex.
      (6)   A nursing home shall comply with the following requirements:
         (i)   The minimum setback from all property lines shall be 35 feet;
         (ii)   A nursing home may be operated in conjunction with an assisted
living facility or adult independent dwelling units or both, whether or not
owned by the same entity;
         (iii)   An assisted living facility or adult independent dwelling
units may be located on the same lot as the nursing home or on one or more
abutting lots, and, if located on one or more abutting lots, item (i) does not
apply to the lot lines shared by such abutting lots;
         (iv)   Each access drive shall be located at least 40 feet from any
residentially zoned property; and
         (v)   Activity space shall be located in a manner to shield
surrounding residential property from the effects of noise, hazards, or other
offensive conditions.
      (7)   Self-service storage facilities shall be located within an enclosed
structure with no external access to individual storage units, and on-site
loading and unloading facilities shall be located at the rear of a building.
Existing self-storage facilities are not required to locate loading areas to
the rear of the site.
      (8)   Solar energy generating facility – accessory shall comply with the
following requirements:
         (i)   The facility may not be mounted on the rooftop of a contributing
historic structure listed on or eligible for the National Register of Historic
Places, unless approved by the Cultural Resources Section of the Office of
Planning and Zoning. If approved, the facility shall be mounted on a secondary
façade to shield the facility from view, the facility shall have minimal impact
to historic materials, and the facility shall be capable of being removed
without impact to the structure; and
         (ii)   The facility may not be located on or within the viewshed of a
property listed on or eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
      (9)   Moving or storage establishments and any light industrial uses
allowed under §
18-9-103(b) shall comply with the following requirements:
         (i)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least two acres;
         (ii)   The facility shall have a minimum frontage of at least 200 feet
on a public road; and
         (iii)   Outside storage of materials or products is prohibited.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 18-9-106. Mix of uses.
   A development with a gross area of five acres or more in the OTC-C zoning
district shall contain a mix of any allowed residential, commercial, light
industrial, and civic or institutional uses as set forth in this article. The
mix of uses may be in a single building or throughout the property and are
exempt from other mix of use requirements in this Code.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 18-9-107. Parking.
   (a)   Parking requirements.
      (1)   Except as provided in this section, the number of required parking
spaces shall be in accordance with Subtitle 1 of Title 3.
      (2)   A developer may request reduced parking requirements or a joint use
parking arrangement in accordance with §
18-3-105.
      (3)   Parking required for a new use shall be available either on-site or
near a site in leased spaces or public facilities.
      (4)   When feasible, adjoining property owners in the OTC-C zoning
district shall create shared parking lots. Connections between parking lots may
be required to minimize curb cuts onto a road.
   (b)   Surface parking.
      (1)   Surface parking areas shall be placed to the rear, between, or to
the side of buildings.
      (2)   A single, double-loaded row of parking between the building and the
roadway is permitted in the OTC-T, OTC-I, OTC-E, and OTC-FM zoning districts
and shall be screened from the roadway using landscaping, low walls, or other
means approved by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (c)   Bicycle parking.
      (1)   One bicycle parking space for every 20 vehicle parking spaces shall
be provided.
      (2)   Bicycle parking shall be in a visible and prominent location that
is well-lit, physically protected from automobile parking to prevent vehicles
from intruding into the bicycle parking area, and for multifamily dwellings
shall be covered or protected from the weather.
      (3)   A minimum radius of five feet clear of obstructions or structures
around bicycle parking shall be provided.
   (d)   Electric vehicle charging station. For multifamily dwellings and mixed
use development, an electric vehicle charging station shall be required at a
rate of one electric vehicle charging station for every 50 vehicle parking
spaces required. For a business complex with three or more uses, an electric
vehicle charging station shall be required at a rate of one electric vehicle
charging station for every 75 vehicle parking spaces required. Electric vehicle
charging station spaces shall count towards the total number of parking spaces.
(Bill No. 84-23)
§ 18-9-108. Signage.
   (a)   Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (1)   “Hanging or blade sign” means a sign that projects from the side of
a building.
      (2)   “Monument sign” means a ground-level freestanding sign.
      (3)   “On-site directional sign” means a sign that directs vehicular
traffic to a use or area within a property.
   (b)   Generally. Signage shall comply with the requirements of this section
and Subtitle 3 of Title 3. In cases of conflict, this section shall apply.
   (c)   On-site directional signs. On-site directional signs may not exceed
four square feet in area for each sign face or a height of three feet above
grade level.
   (d)   Façade signs. The following façade signs shall comply with the
conditions set forth.
      (1)   Wall signs:
         (i)   shall be mounted flush to a building façade or affixed along a
channel or other mounting mechanism, and may not protrude more than six inches
from a building;
         (ii)   may take the form of panels or individual letters; and
         (iii)   shall be located within an area above the ground floor door
and window level, and below the second floor window sill level.
      (2)   Awning and canopy signs:
         (i)   shall have letter sizes of no more than eight inches tall in the
OTC-H zoning district, or no more than 12 inches tall in all other Odenton Town
Center zoning districts;
         (ii)   shall have no more than 50% of the valance areas as part of a
sign area; and
         (iii)   shall be compatible with and complementary to the color and
material of the building to which it is attached.
      (3)   Hanging or blade signs:
         (i)   may not exceed 10 square feet;
         (ii)   shall be hung perpendicular to, and may not project more than
four feet from, the façade of a building; and
         (iii)   shall have no less than 7.5 feet clearance above grade.
   (e)   Additional signs. In addition to any other signs allowed by this Code,
one sign not exceeding a total area of 400 square feet is permitted on a
property with a theater establishment.
   (f)   Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall comply with the
following:
      (1)   The total sign area may not exceed the lesser of one square foot
for each one foot of the road frontage or boundary line of a site where the
sign will be facing, or 200 square feet.
      (2)   Exposed supports or wires are not permitted in the OTC-C zoning
district.
      (3)   Except as provided in subsection (i), monument signs:
         (i)   shall sit flush to the ground with a base that is as wide as, or
wider than, the sign face;
         (ii)   may not exceed a height of 20 feet from grade level, or 24 feet
from grade level along arterial roads;
         (iii)   shall display the street address when a development does not
directly abut a road or the range of addresses for each use in a multi-use
development;
         (iv)   shall have a maximum of 50 square feet of sign area per side
and shall have no more than two sign faces separated by no more than a 30-
degree angle;
         (v)   shall be limited to one sign for each 500 feet, or fraction of
500 feet, of road frontage with customer entrances; and
         (vi)   shall be visible from abutting roads.
   (g)   Pedestrian directory signs.
      (1)   One freestanding pedestrian directory sign is permitted for each
250 feet of road frontage facing the primary building façade. In addition, one
freestanding pedestrian directory sign is permitted for each 500 feet of road
frontage facing other building facades featuring a customer entrance. In
addition to a freestanding sign, a pedestrian directory sign may be a wall
sign.
      (2)   Pedestrian directory signs:
         (i)   shall be located at pedestrian network intersections;
         (ii)   shall incorporate a directory of area businesses and a map or
other graphic means of direction;
         (iii)   may not exceed seven feet from grade level; and
         (iv)   shall have a maximum of 30 square feet of sign area for the
front and the back, individually.
   (h)   Temporary signs. In addition to the temporary signs allowed by § 18-3-
306, additional temporary signs complying with the following may be posted
during business hours only:
      (1)   A temporary sign with a pole base may not exceed a height of four
feet from ground level or a sign area of nine square feet.
      (2)   A sandwich sign may not exceed a height of three feet from ground
level or a maximum width of two feet.
      (3)   A temporary sign shall be located on private property or within the
public sidewalk if it does not interfere with vehicular access, pedestrian
movement, or wheelchair access to, through, and around the site.
   (i)   Residential developments. Signs in a residential development shall
comply with the following:
      (1)   A multi-family residential development or subdivision with up to
100 dwelling units may have a one monument or wall sign not exceeding 48 square
feet in area.
      (2)   A multi-family residential development or subdivision with more
than 100 dwelling units may have two monument or wall signs. If one sign is
used, it may not exceed 128 square feet in area. If two signs are used, each
sign may not exceed 64 square feet in area.
   (j)   Prohibited signs. The following sign types are prohibited:
      (1)   inflatable;
      (2)   pylon and pole;
      (3)   vehicle mounted signs;
      (4)   electronic message boards or back-lit signs on properties located
in the OTC-H zoning district;
      (5)   animated signs; and
      (6)   twirlers, propellers, and wind-activated devices, including feather
banners.
(Bill No. 84-23)
SUBTITLE 2. OS/OS-C – OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS AND CONSERVATION OVERLAY
§ 18-9-201. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to all Open Space Districts.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-12)
§ 18-9-202. Permitted, conditional, and special exception uses.
   The permitted, conditional, and special exception uses allowed in Open Space
Districts (OS) and in the Open Space Conservation Overlay (OS-C) are listed in
the chart in this section using the following key: P = permitted use; C =
conditional use; SE = special exception use. Except as provided otherwise in
this article, uses and structures customarily accessory to the listed uses also
are allowed.
Permitted, Conditional, and Special Exception Uses OS OS-C
Permitted, Conditional, and Special Exception Uses                           OS OS-
                                                                                C
Alcoholic beverage uses as accessory to other uses                           C
Barns, stables, and kennels for the sheltering, breeding, boarding, hiring,  P
or selling of an animal and for storage of crops raised on the premises
Camps, nonprofit, including dormitories, cabins, and structures for          P  P
administrative, maintenance, and custodial activities
Commercial telecommunication facilities permanently located on the ground    SE
Commercial telecommunication facilities that are antennas attached to a
nonresidential structure if the antenna does not exceed 15 feet in height
above the structure, does not project more than two feet beyond the facade,  P
does not support lights or signs unless required for safety reasons, and
accessory structures meet the requirements of §
18-10-118(7) of this Code
Commercial telecommunication facilities for testing purposes or emergency
services for a period not exceeding 30 days if the facility is a monopole    P
not exceeding 100 feet in height and is located at least 300 feet from any
dwelling
Conservation uses, practices, and structures for the maintenance of the      P  P
natural environment
Farming, if the use does not change the stability of the land                P  P
Golf courses                                                                 P
Golf course facilities, private                                              C
Home occupations                                                             C  C
Launching ramps                                                              P  P
Nurseries with landscaping and plant sales                                   C  C
Pets, livestock, or fowl as permitted by §                                  P  P
18-4-104
Piers, private                                                               P  P
Piers, recreational                                                          C  C
Public utility essential services                                            P
Public utility uses                                                          SE
Recreational uses, active                                                    C
Recreational uses, passive                                                   P  P
Residential uses, existing                                                   P  P
Solar energy generating facility – accessory                               P  P
Staging areas for County capital projects                                    P
Structures for administrative and custodial uses of the principal use of the
site if building coverage, including parking, does not exceed 20% of the     P
site and the structures are not located in the natural drainage system 
Structures, permanent, accessory to active recreational uses, including
concession stands, shower and locker rooms, athletic and maintenance
equipment storage, bleachers or stands with a seating capacity for no more   C
than 100 people, non- illuminated scoreboards, playground equipment, and
stables
Structures, permanent, accessory to active recreational uses including
bleachers or stands with a seating capacity not to exceed 250 people,        SE
outdoor lighting other than for public safety, illuminated scoreboards, and
public address or amplified sound systems
Structures, temporary, for boating, swimming, fishing, hunting, golf
courses, ice skating, nature study, picnic areas, play areas, stables, and   P
stands for the sale of products raised on the premises
Volunteer fire stations                                                      P
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 69-12;
Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 28-16; Bill No. 30-16; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 89-18;
Bill No. 7-20)
§ 18-9-203. OS District bulk regulations.
   (a)   Setbacks. Except as provided otherwise in this article, a use or
structure other than a pier, conservation use, passive recreational use, or
beach shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line and 75 feet from any
road right-of-way.
   (b)   Height limitation. The maximum height for a principal structure is 45
feet. The maximum height for an accessory structure is 25 feet.
   (c)   Coverage. The maximum coverage by structures and parking is 20% of the
gross area.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 69-12)
§ 18-9-204. OS-C – Open Space Conservation Overlay.
   (a)   Scope. The OS-C – Open Space Conservation Overlay is an overlay that
applies to the following habitats or features located in an Open Space
District:
      (1)   Forest Interior Dwelling Species ("FIDS") Habitat, as defined in
subsection (c); or
      (2)   environmentally sensitive features, as defined in
Article 17 of this Code, including, but not limited to, tidal and nontidal
wetlands, bogs, 100-year floodplains, streams, steep slopes, and all associated
buffers.
   (b)   Purpose. The purpose of the OS-C Overlay is to protect and preserve
FIDS Habitats, tidal and nontidal wetlands, bogs, 100-year floodplains,
streams, steep slopes, and all associated buffer areas created by this Code.
These purposes include, but are not limited to, protecting and preserving
floodplains and wetlands associated with floodplains in their natural state,
protecting and preserving streams and bogs in their natural state, protecting
and preserving wildlife habitat associated with streams, wetlands, floodplains
and bogs, preventing soil erosion and sedimentation in tidal and nontidal
waters by protecting steep slopes, protecting and preserving scenic values, and
protecting and preserving wildlife habitat.
   (c)   FIDS Habitat. A FIDS Habitat is any forest tract that is greater than
50 acres with at least 10 acres that is 300 feet or more from the nearest
forest edge, or a riparian forest that is at least 300 feet in total width and
greater than 50 acres in total forest area.
   (d)   Other requirements. The requirements of this section are in addition
to other requirements of this Code.
   (e)   Conflict with other law. If any provision of this section conflicts
with other County law, the more restrictive provision shall prevail.
   (f)   Variance required. The requirements of this section may be altered
only by variance as provided in this Article and
Article 3 of this Code.
   (g)   Violations and enforcement. Violations of this section shall be
enforced by the Department of Inspections and Permits under the provisions of
Article 16 and
Article 18 of this Code.
   (h)   Existing uses. Uses permitted in an OS-C District that were in
existence on October 1, 2012 may continue except that intensification or
expansion shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Any use that
ceases to exist or ceases operation for 12 consecutive months shall be subject
to the provisions of this Code.
(Bill No. 69-12)
SUBTITLE 3. TC – TOWN CENTER DISTRICTS
§ 18-9-301. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to all Town Center Districts.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-9-302. Permitted and special exception uses.
   The permitted and special exception uses allowed in each of the Town Center
Districts are listed in the chart in this section using the following key: P =
permitted use; SE = special exception use. Except as provided otherwise in this
article, uses and structures customarily accessory to the listed uses also are
allowed.
 
Permitted and Special Exception Uses
Any use allowed in a C3 District in accordance with the requirements of this
subtitle and those requirements of                                           P
Title 5 that are consistent with this title
Any multifamily use allowed in an R15 or R22 District in accordance with the
requirements of this subtitle and those requirements of                      P
Title 4 that are consistent with this title
Hospice facilities                                                           P
Nursing homes                                                                P
Solar energy generating facility – accessory                               P
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 13-11; Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 89-18)
§ 18-9-303. Bulk regulations.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following
bulk regulations are applicable in a Town Center District:
Minimum lot size                        None
Minimum width at front building         50 feet
restriction line
                                        60 feet except that all setbacks are
Maximum height limitations              increased by one foot for every foot of
                                        height in excess of 45 feet
Floor area ratio excluding onsite       2.0
parking
Distance between structures:
   Residential or hotel uses         50 feet
   Commercial                        30 feet
Minimum coverage by open area for
multifamily residential uses, excluding 20% of gross area
any grade level parking
 
   (b)   Exceptions. For a lot that is less than 20,000 square feet, the floor
area may be increased by 10 square feet for each square foot of open area
provided in excess of the minimum open area. For a lot exceeding 20,000 square
feet, the floor area ratio may be increased by 0.2 for every 2,000 square feet
of additional open area provided in excess of the minimum open area. Open area
includes any open area at grade with less than 50% cover but does not include
grade level parking courts. Floor area may be increased in an amount equal to
the area of any parking provided over and above that required by
Title 3. The floor area increases allowed under this subsection may not exceed
a floor area ratio of 0.6. The additional open areas and parking areas provided
under this subsection may be located on a different site if each area is
located no more than 200 feet from the subject site and a pedestrian access way
is provided and separated from vehicular activity.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 72-24)
SUBTITLE 4. SB – SMALL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
§ 18-9-401. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to all Small Business Districts.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-9-402. Permitted, conditional, and special exception uses.
   The permitted, conditional, and special exception uses allowed in the Small
Business Districts are listed in the chart in this section using the following
key: P = permitted use; C = conditional use; SE = special exception use. Except
as provided otherwise in this article, uses and structures customarily
accessory to the listed uses also are allowed.
Permitted, Conditional, and Special Exception Uses
Permitted, Conditional, and Special Exception Uses
Adult day care centers                                                       P
Alcoholic beverage uses as accessory to other uses                           C
Antique shops                                                                P
Art galleries                                                                P
Bakeries if all goods are prepared and offered for sale on the premises      P
Barbershops                                                                  P
Bed and breakfast homes                                                      P
Bed and breakfast inns                                                       P
Bicycle, skateboard, and roller blade sales and service                      P
Bookstores, except adult bookstores                                          P
Business complexes                                                           P
Child care centers                                                           P
Civic facilities, community centers, libraries, and museums                  P
Clock sales and repair                                                       P
Clothing stores                                                              P
Coffee shops                                                                 P
Commercial telecommunication facilities for testing purposes or emergency
services for a period not exceeding 30 days if the facility is a monopole    P
not exceeding 100 feet in height and is located at least 300 feet from any
dwelling
Computer goods, sales, and services                                          P
Construction or sales trailers, temporary, in an approved development        P
actively under construction
Convenience stores, gift shops, and newsstands                               P
Delicatessens and snack bars                                                 P
Dog day care facilities, without outside runs or pens                        P
Dog grooming parlors, without outside runs or pens                           P
Dwelling unit, apartment, as an accessory use provided the entrance is       P
separate from the commercial use
Dwellings, single-family detached                                            P
Farming                                                                      P
Florist shops                                                                P
Gift shops                                                                   P
Group homes                                                                  P
Hair, cosmetic facial hair, and nail salons                                  P
Hardware stores                                                              P
Hobby shops                                                                  P
Home occupations                                                             C
Hospice facilities                                                           P
Ice cream stores                                                             P
Interior decorating and designer showrooms                                   P
Jewelry stores                                                               P
Locksmiths                                                                   P
Mailing and shipping services                                                P
Offices, professional and general                                            P
Opticians and optometric establishments                                      P
Outside storage, accessory to permitted uses, limited to 10% of the allowed  P
lot coverage
Personal fitness studios                                                     P
Pets, livestock, or fowl as permitted by §                                  P
18-4-104
Pharmacies                                                                   P
Photographic studios and camera shops                                        P
Picture framing shops                                                        P
Produce markets                                                              P
Public utility essential services                                            P
Public utility uses                                                          SE
Religious facilities                                                         P
Restaurants                                                                  P
Retail specialty stores or shops for retail sales, including antique stores,
art supplies, bookstores, candy, cards, clocks, clothing, consignments,
electronics, fabrics, flowers, gifts, hobbies, housewares, ice cream
parlors, jewelry, luggage, musical instruments, news publications, office    P
supply, optical goods, pets, photographic supplies, sewing machines, shoes
and shoe repair, sporting goods, stamps and coins, stationery, tobacco,
toys, video tapes, wallpaper and paint, window coverings, works of art
Saddlery and tack shops                                                      P
Schools, public charter, and schools, private: academic, arts, business,     P
technical, or trade
Shoe repair shops                                                            P
Solar energy generating facility – accessory                               P
Staging areas for County capital projects                                    P
Tailor shops                                                                 P
Tanning salons                                                               P
Telecommuting centers                                                        P
Travel agencies                                                              P
Upholstering shops, including sailmaking shops                               P
Veterinary clinics if overnight stays are limited to those necessary for     P
medical treatment, without outside runs or pens
Volunteer fire stations                                                      P
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 54-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 13-11;
Bill No. 14-11; Bill No. 63-11; Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 88-13; Bill No. 26-17;
Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 104-20; Bill No. 3-23; Bill No. 92-23; Bill No. 14-24;
Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-9-403. Bulk regulations.
   Except as provided otherwise in this article, the following bulk regulations
are applicable in a Small Business District:
Minimum lot size:
   If not served by public sewer               20,000 square feet
   If served by public sewer                   11,000 square feet
Maximum coverage by all structures                50% of gross area
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Front lot line                              20 feet
   Side lot line                               7 feet
   Corner side lot line                        15 feet
   Rear lot line                               20 feet
   Principal arterial or higher classification 40 feet
road
                                                  The lesser of the setback
                                                  required by this section or a
                                                  setback equal to the average
                                                  of the setbacks of existing
                                                  principal structures on
Front and side setbacks on properties adjacent to abutting lots, except that if
developed lots                                    only one abutting lot is
                                                  improved, the required
                                                  setback shall be determined
                                                  by averaging the setback on
                                                  the improved lot and the
                                                  setback required under this
                                                  section.
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures:
   Front lot line                              30 feet
   Side lot line, rear lot line                7 feet
   Corner side lot line                        15 feet
Maximum height limitations:
   Principal structure                         40 feet
   Accessory structure                         30 feet
Maximum floor area for structures on properties
with frontage on a minor arterial road or higher:
   Principal structures                        10,000 square feet
   Principal structures – religious facilitie15,000 square feet
   Accessory structures                        3,000 square feet
Maximum floor area for all other structures:
   Principal structures                        5,000 square feet
   Accessory structures                        2,000 square feet
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 7-10; Bill No. 92-23 ; Bill No. 14-24)
TITLE 10. REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDITIONAL USES
Section
   
18-10-101.   Adult bookstores.
   
18-10-102.   Adult movie theater.
   
18-10-103.   Agritourism.
   
18-10-104.   Alcoholic beverage uses as accessory to other uses.
   
18-10-105.   Animal Hospitals and Veterinary Clinics with non-medical overnight
stays.
   
18-10-106.   Assisted living facilities.
   
18-10-107.   Assisted living facilities II, community-based.
   
18-10-108.   Automobile gasoline stations.
   
18-10-109.   Automobile, truck, and recreational vehicle sales.
   
18-10-110.   Bed and breakfast homes.
   
18-10-111.   Bingo, commercial.
   
18-10-112.   Bird sanctuaries.
   
18-10-113.   BRAC Mixed Use Development.
   
18-10-114.   Business complexes in a residential district.
   
18-10-115.   Business complexes with auxiliary uses.
   
18-10-116.   Carnivals, circuses, and fairs, temporary.
   
18-10-117.   Carwashes.
   
18-10-118.   Commercial telecommunication facilities.
   
18-10-119.   Composting facilities.
   
18-10-120.   Country clubs, private clubs, and service and nonprofit charitable
organizations with less than 125 onsite parking spaces.
   
18-10-121.   Country clubs, private clubs, and service and nonprofit charitable
organizations with 125 or more onsite parking spaces.
   
18-10-122.   Data storage centers in the BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area.
   
18-10-123.   Dwelling units, accessory.
   
18-10-124.   Dwelling units, adult independent.
   
18-10-125.   Dwellings, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, and multiplexes.
   
18-10-126.   Dwelling unit, marina caretaker’s residence.
   
18-10-127.   Dwellings, multifamily.
   
18-10-128.   Dwellings, townhouses, and stacked townhouses.
   
18-10-130.   Farm alcohol production facility.
   
18-10-131.   Farm dual uses.
   
18-10-132.   Farm or agricultural heritage site special event, 9 to 15 annual
events.
   
18-10-133.   Farm or agricultural heritage site stay.
   
18-10-134.   Farm tenant houses.
   
18-10-135.   Funeral establishments.
   
18-10-136.   Garden centers.
   
18-10-137.   Golf course facilities, private.
   
18-10-138.   Government reuse facilities.
   
18-10-139.   Group homes II.
   
18-10-140.   Gunsmiths and ammunition sales facilities.
   
18-10-141.   Home occupations.
   
18-10-142.   Housing for the elderly of moderate means.
   
18-10-143.   Kennels, commercial.
   
18-10-144.   Licensed dispensaries, growers and processors of cannabis.
   
18-10-145.   Neighborhood marinas.
   
18-10-146.   Nurseries with landscaping and plant sales.
   
18-10-147.   Nursing homes.
   
18-10-148.   Package goods stores.
   
18-10-149.   Piers and launching ramps, community.
   
18-10-150.   Piers, recreational.
   
18-10-151.   Processing facilities for clay, sand, gravel, and similar
materials.
   
18-10-152.   Produce market.
   
18-10-153.   Race track for horses.
   
18-10-154.   Recreational uses, active.
   
18-10-155.   Restaurants, taverns, retail sales, and consumer services in a
multifamily structure.
   
18-10-156.   Retail sale of liquefied petroleum gases accessory to and on the
same lot as an allowed use.
   
18-10-157.   Rooming houses.
   
18-10-158.   School bus facilities.
   
18-10-159.   Schools, private academic and public charter, with less than 125
onsite parking spaces.
   
18-10-160.   Schools, private academic and public charter, with 125 or more
onsite parking spaces.
   
18-10-161.   Self-service storage facilities.
   
18-10-162.   Small cell systems.
   
18-10-163.   Small wind energy systems.
   
18-10-164.   Solar energy generating facility – community.
   
18-10-165.   Solar energy generating facility – utility scale.
   
18-10-166.   Stables or riding clubs.
   
18-10-167.   State-licensed medical clinics.
   
18-10-168.   Storage of watercraft, covered and dry.
   
18-10-169.   Storage of watercraft, outside and dry.
   
18-10-170.   Storage, multilevel watercraft rack.
   
18-10-171.   Structures, permanent, accessory to active recreational uses.
   
18-10-172.   Veterinarian clinic, large animal.
   
18-10-173.   Video lottery facilities.
   
18-10-174.   Waterman’s home commercial use.
   
18-10-175.   Wholesale trade, warehousing, and storage establishments in the
BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area.
   
18-10-176.   Workforce housing.
Attorney’s note – Conditional uses shall comply with the requirements of this
title and with the requirements of the district in which the use is located to
the extent not inconsistent with this title.
Attorney’s note – In 2019 the Maryland Court of Appeals held that state law
preempts by implication local zoning law with respect to solar energy
generating systems that require a certificate of public convenience and
necessity issued by the Maryland Public Service Commission, but cautioned that
local zoning law should still receive due consideration by the Public Service
Commission in rendering its ultimate decision, Board of County Commissioners of
Washington County v. Perennial Solar, 464 Md. 610, 644–45 (2019).
§ 18-10-101. Adult bookstores.
An adult bookstore shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The use shall be located at least 1,000 feet from the boundary line of
any residential district, dwelling, school, library, park, playground, child
care center, religious facility, video lottery facility, or other adult
bookstore or adult movie theater. For purposes of this subsection, distance
shall be
measured in a straight line from the closest part of the lot on which the adult
bookstore or adult movie theater is located to the nearest boundary line of any
residential district or the nearest lot line on which any dwelling, school,
library, park, playground, child care center, religious facility, video lottery
facility, or other adult bookstore or adult movie theater is located.
   (2)   The use shall have all windows, doors, and other apertures blackened
or obstructed to prevent anyone outside the establishment from viewing its
interior.
   (3)   The proprietor, owner, and employees of the establishment shall
prohibit access to the premises by anyone under the age of 18.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 82-09)
§ 18-10-102. Adult movie theater.
An adult movie theater shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The use shall be located at least 1,000 feet from the boundary line of
any residential district, dwelling, school, library, park, playground, child
care center, religious facility, video lottery facility, or other adult
bookstore or adult movie theater. For purposes of this subsection, distance
shall be measured in a straight line from the closest part of the lot on which
the adult bookstore or adult movie theater is located to the nearest boundary
line of any residential district or the nearest lot line on which any dwelling,
school, library, park, playground, child care center, religious facility, video
lottery facility, or other adult bookstore or adult movie theater is located.
   (2)   The use shall have all windows, doors, and other apertures blackened
or obstructed to prevent anyone outside the establishment from viewing its
interior.
   (3)   The proprietor, owner, and employees of the establishment shall
prohibit access to the premises by anyone under the age of 18.
   (4)   A viewing booth in an adult film arcade:
      (i)   shall have at least one side open to an adjacent public room so
that the area inside the viewing booth is visible to persons in the adjacent
public room;
      (ii)   may not be equipped with a curtain, door, or other device that
allows the interior of the viewing booth to be screened from the view of
persons in the adjacent public room;
      (iii)   shall have lighting of sufficient intensity that a person in the
viewing booth is visible by persons in the adjacent public room; and
      (iv)   shall be separated from an adjacent viewing booth by a wall or
other solid partition sufficient to prevent sexual activity with a person in
the adjacent viewing booth.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 82-09)
§ 18-10-103. Agritourism.
For purposes of this section, “agricultural building” means the buildings
described in § 105.2.1.14 of the Construction Code of Anne Arundel County. If
there will be more than 50 occupants at any one time in an agricultural
building for an agritourism use, the agritourism use shall be limited to a
ground floor level of the building and the Fire Marshal shall inspect the
agricultural building for compliance with the State Fire Prevention Code before
it may be occupied for an agritourism use.
(Bill No. 67-17)
§ 18-10-104. Alcoholic beverage uses as accessory to other uses.
An alcoholic beverage use that is accessory to another use shall comply with
all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The use shall be licensed by the Board of License Commissioners.
   (2)   If the use is to be conducted out of doors or will include live
entertainment or dancing, the area used for the activity shall be located at
least 100 feet from all residentially zoned property.
   (3)   An off-sale alcoholic beverage license use shall be located away from
schools and religious facilities by at least the distance required by § 11-1603
of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of State Code. For structures,
the distance shall be measured in a straight line from entry to entry.
   (4)   An off-sale alcoholic beverage license use for a restaurant or a
package goods store use operated on the same property as and under common
ownership with a restaurant shall be limited to 30% of the floor area of the
restaurant. This restriction does not apply to the sale of package goods
exclusively available through the restaurant or produced by the restaurant.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 28-16; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 48-21)
§ 18-10-105. Animal Hospitals and Veterinary Clinics with non-medical overnight
stays.
For purposes of this subtitle ‘pens or runs’ means a fenced in dedicated area
for animals, where the animal may safely exercise, play, socialize, and relieve
itself while untethered or unleashed.
Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics with non-medical overnight stays shall
comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least one acre.
   (2)   All structures, enclosed pens or enclosed runs for the housing or
shelter of animals shall be located at least 50 feet from residentially zoned
property.
   (3)   Unenclosed pens or runs shall be:
      (i)   no larger than 1,800 square feet in total;
      (ii)   at least 30 feet from residentially zoned property; and
      (iii)   at least 200 feet from an occupied structure.
   (4)   An animal hospital or veterinary clinic located in a structure that
contains uses other than an animal hospital or veterinary clinic shall
incorporate sound attenuation construction designed to minimize the impact of
noise from the animal hospital or veterinary clinic on the other uses in the
structures.
   (5)   An animal hospital or veterinary clinic shall not unreasonably
interfere with other tenants located within the same structure as the animal
hospital or veterinary clinic and the use may not be noxious, offensive, or
otherwise objectionable to surrounding uses.
(Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-106. Assisted living facilities.
An assisted living facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least five acres.
   (2)   Structures shall be located at least 50 feet from all lot lines.
   (3)   Each access drive shall be located at least 40 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
   (4)   An assisted living facility may be operated in conjunction with a
nursing home or with adult independent dwelling units or both. The nursing home
or adult independent dwelling units may be located on the same lot as the
assisted living facility or on one or more abutting lots. If located on one or
more abutting lots, the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) shall not apply
to the lot lines that are shared by such abutting lots.
   (5)   For an assisted living facility that consists of land located outside
the critical area in more than one zoning district:
      (i)   provisions concerning the number of adult independent dwelling
units allowed in a given area of land shall be applied in the aggregate rather
than separately to the individual zoning districts, lots or sites;
      (ii)   provisions concerning public improvements, such as public sewer
and water connections, road, and sidewalks, shall be applied to the assisted
living facility in its entirety;
      (iii)   open area requirements shall be calculated for the entire area of
the assisted living facility; and
      (iv)   the developer shall demonstrate unified control of the entire
assisted living facility and the capability to provide for completion and
continuous operation and maintenance of the facility.
   (6)   Comprehensive care units may be provided.
   (7)   No more than two units for every 100 units may be devoted to temporary
use for guests or family members of residents.
   (8)   The permitted uses in a C1 district are allowed as part of an assisted
living facility if:
      (i)   the uses are centrally located for the use and benefit of the
residents and their guests in structures that are architecturally compatible
with the residential portion of the assisted living facility; and
      (ii)   the floor area of the uses does not exceed 10% of the total floor
area of the units.
   (9)   A pedestrian circulation system interconnecting all parts of the
assisted living facility shall be provided.
(Bill No. 7-07; Bill No. 45-09; Bill No. 21-16; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 72-24;
Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-107. Assisted living facilities II, community-based.
To help ensure that persons with disabilities live and interact with
individuals without disabilities to the fullest extent possible, the owner of a
community-based assisted living facility II may not own two facilities that
adjoin each other and, if a proposed adjoining facility is owned by a business
entity, the owner, the owner’s family, and the owner’s business associates may
not have any interest, financial or otherwise, in the business entity.
(Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-108. Automobile gasoline stations.
An automobile gasoline station shall comply with the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 22,500 square feet
with at least 150 feet of frontage along each road.
   (2)   The facility may not be located at the intersection of local roads.
   (3)   Service bays shall be oriented to the rear or side lot lines.
   (4)   Structures shall be located at least 40 feet from any road right-of-
way, at least 25 feet from any other structure, and at least 10 feet from all
lot lines.
   (5)   Pumps shall be located at least 25 feet from any road right-of-way.
Pump islands shall be located at least 20 feet apart. Pumps and pump islands
shall be located at least 25 feet from a structure not used primarily as an
automobile gasoline station.
   (6)   A canopy over a pump island may not project within 15 feet of a road
right-of-way.
   (7)   Driveways shall be at least 20 feet from each side or rear lot line,
at least 50 feet from any intersecting road right-of-way, and at least 15 feet
and no more than 35 feet wide.
   (8)   Obstructions that adversely affect visibility at a station driveway
are prohibited.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-109. Automobile, truck, and recreational vehicle sales.
Automobile, truck, and recreational vehicle sales facilities shall comply with
all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be on a lot or parcel located within 300 feet of a
lot or parcel where automobile, truck, and recreational vehicle sales are
permitted as a matter of right.
   (2)   The facility shall have vehicular access to an arterial road.
   (3)   The lot or parcel on which the facility is located shall be within a
priority funding area.
   (4)   The facility shall comply with the requirements of the County
Landscape Manual.
   (5)   The facility shall be located on a lot or parcel of at least two
acres, except that a facility may be located on a lot or parcel of at least one
acre if vehicular access is provided to at least two arterial roads.
   (6)   The facility shall be served by public water and sewer.
   (7)   Except for vehicles displayed in a showroom and facilities on a lot or
parcel of at least one acre with vehicular access to at least two arterial
roads, at least 75% of the vehicles available for sale shall be parked behind
the buildings associated with the facility.
(Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 77-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 13-
25)
§ 18-10-110. Bed and breakfast homes.
A bed and breakfast home shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The home shall be located in an owner-occupied single-family detached
dwelling on a lot of at least 11,000 square feet.
   (2)   The home may contain no more than three guest rooms for the lodging of
guests for no more than 14 consecutive days. The owner shall maintain a
reservation log of the arrival and departure dates of all guests for inspection
by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (3)   On a waterfront lot, one boat slip may be provided for the use of
guests.
   (4)   Guest rooms may not contain any cooking facilities, and food service
shall be provided only for guests and only in a group dining area of the
dwelling.
   (5)   Exterior alterations may not be made for the purpose of providing the
home unless necessary to ensure the safety of the structure.
   (6)   If the lot is zoned R1, R2, or R5, it shall be located within the area
shown on the official map adopted by the County Council entitled “Bed &
Breakfast Homes and Bed & Breakfast Inns in R1, R2, and R5 Zoning Districts”,
dated August, 2005, adopted by Bill No. 55-05.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 55-05; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 65-17; Bill No. 67-17;
Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 13-25)
Editor’s note – A small-scale representation of the official map adopted by
Bill No. 55-05 is included as an appendix to this article.
§ 18-10-111. Bingo, commercial.
A commercial bingo facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least one acre and at
least 100 feet from any residentially zoned property.
   (2)   The facility shall have vehicular access to an arterial road and may
not draw traffic through local roads in nearby residential areas.
   (3)   Sufficient vehicular access shall be provided to prevent traffic
congestion, and all points of access shall be located at least 50 feet apart
and at least 50 feet from any road intersection.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-112. Bird sanctuaries.
A bird sanctuary shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least three acres.
   (2)   Buildings and enclosures for the housing or shelter of birds shall be
at least 100 feet from any residentially zoned property and birds may not be
housed within the 100-foot setback.
   (3)   Any dwelling on the property shall be occupied by at least one person
involved in the operation of the bird sanctuary.
   (4)   The bird sanctuary shall be operated by an entity exempt from taxation
under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and may not be operated for
commercial purposes.
   (5)   The entity operating the bird sanctuary shall be accredited by the
American Sanctuary Association or the Global Federation of Animal Sanctuaries.
(Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-113. BRAC Mixed Use Development.
   (a)   Requirements. BRAC Mixed Use Development shall comply with the
following requirements.
      (1)   The property shall be located in the “BRAC Mixed Use Development
Area Expanded Boundary” Area comprising properties within the four mile radius
of U.S. Army Ft. George G. Meade and within the shaded areas depicted on the
official map adopted by the County Council in Bill No. 50-25.
      (2)   The minimum parcel size is five acres in the aggregate.
      (3)   Building height and coverage in a BRAC Mixed Use Development shall
be as provided in the underlying zoning district, and setbacks for principal
structures shall be the lesser of the setback provided in the bulk regulations
applicable to the underlying zoning district or the bulk regulations set forth
in §
18-4-901. The maximum allowable density for residential dwellings in a BRAC
Mixed Use Development shall be 15 dwelling units per acres of gross area.
      (4)   When developed on multiple but contiguous lots within an MXD
district, BRAC Mixed Use Development shall include, to the extent practicable,
integrated design elements and connectivity between the lots to create a
cohesive environment.
   (b)   Uses. The following uses are allowed in a BRAC Mixed Use Development,
in addition to the uses allowed in the underlying zoning district.
      (1)   Uses allowed in R15 districts, including all variations of
dwellings defined in §
18-1-101, subject to the bulk regulations set forth in §
18-4-901 except for building height, coverage, density, and setbacks.
      (2)   Grocery stores greater than 25,000 square feet in size, subject to
the bulk regulations set forth in §
18-5-401 except for building height, coverage and setbacks.
      (3)   Retail specialty stores or shops for retail sales, as defined in §
18-5-102, subject to the bulk regulations set forth in §
18-5-401 except for building height and setbacks.
      (4)   The use requirements of §
18-8-302 do not apply to BRAC Mixed Use Development.
(Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 58-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-
20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 31-22; Bill No. 13-25; Bill No. 50-25)
§ 18-10-114. Business complexes in a residential district.
   (a)   Requirements. A business complex located in a residential district
shall comply with all the following requirements.
      (1)   The business complex shall be located on property owned by a
governmental entity or owned or controlled by a volunteer organization as of
March 29, 2024 that provides first responder services as its primary function
through the use of equipment and apparatus. For purposes of this paragraph,
“controlled by” means subject to a purchase agreement in favor of the volunteer
organization.
      (2)   The business complex shall be located on a lot of at least five
acres.
      (3)   The business complex shall be located on a principal arterial road
or at an intersection of a principal arterial road and a minor arterial road.
      (4)   The business complex may not draw traffic through local roads in
nearby residential areas.
      (5)   The business complex is subject to the bulk regulations set forth
in §
18-5-401.
      (6)   Development in the business complex shall:
         (i)   use environmental site design features approved by the Planning
and Zoning Officer to address 50% of existing lot coverage and 100% of any new
development; and
         (ii)   comply with the requirements of the County Landscape Manual.
      (7)   Any clearing shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
article and
Article 17 of this Code.
      (8)   The business complex shall be served by public water and sewer.
      (9)   The business complex shall be located either:
         (i)   in an area designated commercial in the planned land use map in
the General Development Plan adopted as of May 13, 2021;
         (ii)   on property immediately adjacent to property owned by a
government entity or volunteer organization as identified under paragraph (1);
or
         (iii)   on property immediately adjacent to property identified under
item (ii) if the property is included in the business complex.
   (b)   Additional uses allowed. If the requirements of subsection (a) are
met, the permitted, conditional, and special exception uses allowed in a C1
district or a C3 district under §
18-5-102 are allowed in the business complex.
(Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 94-23; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-115. Business complexes with auxiliary uses.
A business complex with auxiliary uses shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   Auxiliary uses may occupy no more than 50% of the floor area of a
business complex.
   (2)   Any auxiliary use may not occupy more than 25,000 square feet of floor
area.
   (3)   For an entertainment complex, including a multi-screen complex:
      (i)   the facility shall be located in a business complex of at least 100
acres that is located within one mile of a freeway;
      (ii)   the facility shall abut an arterial or greater capacity road; and
      (iii)   not more than one facility may be constructed in the business
complex.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17;
Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-116. Carnivals, circuses, and fairs, temporary.
A temporary carnival, circus, or fair shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   In residential districts:
      (i)   the use shall be located on a lot of at least one acre that is
occupied by an existing institutional use, such as a fire station, school, or
religious facility;
      (ii)   the use may last no longer than 12 days per event and occur no
more than twice in a 365-day period at the same location; and
      (iii)   the lot shall be completely cleared within seven days after the
closing of the use.
   (2)   In commercial and industrial districts:
      (i)   the use shall be located on a lot of at least one acre; and
      (ii)   the principal vehicular access for the use shall be located on a
collector or higher classification road within one-half mile of a freeway or
arterial road and may not draw traffic through local roads in nearby
residentially zoned areas.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17;
Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-117. Carwashes.
A carwash shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   There shall be at least a 50-foot area that includes landscaped
screening in accordance with the County Landscape Manual between a carwash and
the lot line of any residentially zoned property.
   (2)   Vehicular access shall be from a minor arterial or higher
classification road.
(Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-118. Commercial telecommunication facilities.
A commercial telecommunication facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The developer of a facility permanently located on the ground shall:
      (i)   not less than two weeks and not more than 60 days before filing an
application for a building permit, give notice, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to all owners of property located within 250 feet of the lot
lines of the proposed facility as listed on the tax rolls of the County; and
      (ii)   file with the application for a building permit a list of the
names and addresses of all property owners who were notified; a copy of the
notice that was sent; copies of all return receipts; copies of the envelopes of
any notices that were returned as undelivered; and an affidavit that notice was
given as required.
   (2)   The developer of a facility shall provide a certification from a
registered engineer that the structure will meet the applicable design
standards of
Article 15 of this Code for wind loads.
   (3)   The developer of a facility and each applicant for a zoning
certificate of use shall submit a certification from a consultant acceptable to
the Planning and Zoning Officer that the facility or the developer’s use of the
facility will not degrade or interfere with the County’s public safety
communication systems.
   (4)   Within 30 days after the issuance of a zoning certificate of use for a
commercial telecommunications facility and by September 1 of each year
thereafter, the holder of the certificate shall submit a certification from an
engineer acceptable to the Planning and Zoning Officer of the radio frequency
radiation actually measured from the facility, that the measurements are
accurate, and that the measurements meet the applicable Federal Communications
Commission standards and guidelines for those emissions. If at any time the
owner or user of the telecommunication facility cannot provide the
certification required by this subsection, the certificate of use may be
revoked.
   (5)   A tower, antenna, or monopole shall be painted gray or a similar color
that will minimize its visibility. An accessory structure shall be screened and
buffered in accordance with the Landscape Manual so that it is not visible from
abutting residential properties. A facility to be constructed within sight of a
property listed on the National Register of Historic Places shall mitigate any
adverse visual impact of the facility in the manner determined by the Office of
Planning and Zoning. Advertising on a facility is prohibited.
   (6)   A facility may co-locate on the rooftop of an existing nonresidential
structure other than a commercial telecommunication facility and on the rooftop
of multifamily dwellings with more than 10 units without meeting the setback
requirements applicable to commercial telecommunication facilities if the
principal structure is at least 50 feet in height above grade level and the
facility does not extend above the existing roof height by more than 15 feet.
   (7)   A facility attached to a transmission line pole or tower may not
laterally project more than 15 feet beyond the crossarms or other support
extensions affixed to the pole or tower and may not project above the top of
the pole or tower by more than 15 feet if the pole or tower will support one
provider or 25 feet if the pole or tower will support more than one provider.
The pole or tower, including all projections, may not exceed 199 feet in
height. All accessory structures shall be underneath the transmission line
within the drip line of the outermost lines or be located from the edge of the
transmission line right-of-way by a distance equal to at least the minimum
setback required for accessory structures in the zoning district in which the
facility is located.
   (8)   For a facility not attached to a transmission line pole or tower that
is located within 100 feet of a transmission line right-of-way:
      (i)   the principal structure shall be located at least 500 feet from any
offsite dwelling;
      (ii)   the facility may not exceed 199 feet in height;
      (iii)   the principal structure of a facility that is permanently located
on the ground shall be a monopole; and
(iv)accessory structures shall be located within 50 feet of the principal
structure and located 500 feet from any offsite dwelling.
   (9)   A private facility located on land owned by a governmental entity or a
volunteer fire company shall meet the requirements for a commercial
telecommunication facility contained in Title 11.
   (10)   A facility that ceases operation for a period of 12 consecutive
months shall be considered as terminated and shall be removed within 90 days of
termination at the property owner’s expense.
   (11)   For a facility located in a commercial or industrial district, the
facility shall also comply with the following requirements:
      (i)   each structure permanently located on the ground shall be located
by the greater of 200 feet or one foot for each foot of height from the
boundary of a residential district or from the lot line of a residentially
occupied property, school, public park, or platted community recreation area or
open space;
      (ii)   accessory structures shall be screened from adjoining
residentially zoned or residentially developed property in accordance with the
Landscape Manual; and
      (iii)   the height of a structure permanently located on the ground may
not exceed:
            1.   for one provider, 130 feet, or 160 feet for a private facility
located on government-owned land;
            2.   for two providers, 170 feet, or 200 feet for a private
facility located on government-owned land;
            3.   for three providers, 210 feet, or 240 feet for a private
facility located on government-owned land; and
            4.   for four or more providers, 250 feet.
   (12)   A facility may co-locate on another commercial telecommunication
facility existing as of December 31, 2001, without meeting setback requirements
that became effective after December 31, 2001. If the principal structure of a
facility existed as of December 31, 2001, accessory structures are allowed
within 50 feet of the principal structure without meeting applicable setback
requirements that became effective after December 31, 2001.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 10-11; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 17-17;
Bill No. 65-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 2-21;
Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-119. Composting facilities.
A composting facility shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least five acres. The
active composting area of the facility shall be limited to an area of not more
than 25% of the lot, not to exceed 10 acres.
   (2)   The facility shall be located 100 feet from the property line of the
property, 300 feet from a dwelling not owned by the owner of the composting
facility, 100 feet from a domestic well, and 100 feet from a stream, lake or
other body of water, except for an impoundment for use in the composting
process.
   (3)   All vehicular access to the site shall be from a collector road, an
arterial road, or freeway.
   (4)   Space shall be adequate so that trucks using the facility are not
stopped or parked on a road right-of-way.
   (5)    The active composting area of the facility shall be adequately
enclosed, screened and buffered by a fence or natural buffer so as to protect
adjoining uses from dust, odors or debris from the facility.
   (6)   The site shall be cleaned of litter and scattered refuse daily.
   (7)   Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday.
   (8)   A Tier 2 composting facility may not accept animal mortalities for
composting, except for animal mortalities generated on the same lot during the
normal course of operations.
   (9)   A Tier 2 composting facility may not accept industrially produced food
processing materials, including chicken and seafood residuals.
   (10)   The facility shall comply with applicable Fire Prevention Code
requirements as determined by the Fire Marshal.
(Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-
20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-120. Country clubs, private clubs, and service and nonprofit charitable
organizations with less than 125 onsite parking spaces.
A country club, a private club, or a service or nonprofit charitable
organization that has less than 125 onsite parking spaces shall comply with all
of the following requirements.
   (1)   Each structure shall be located at least 100 feet from all lot lines.
   (2)   Required onsite parking may not be located in a required setback.
   (3)   Structures and onsite parking may cover no more than 30% of the lot in
RLD districts and no more than 60% of the lot in other residential districts in
which the use is allowed.
   (4)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 75-16;
Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 2-21;
Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-121. Country clubs, private clubs, and service and nonprofit charitable
organizations with 125 or more onsite parking spaces.
A country club, a private club, or a service or nonprofit charitable
organization that has 125 or more onsite parking spaces shall comply with all
of the following requirements.
   (1)   Each structure shall be located at least 100 feet from all lot lines.
   (2)   Required onsite parking may not be located in a required setback.
   (3)   Structures and onsite parking may cover no more than 30% of the lot in
RLD districts and no more than 60% of the lot in other residential districts in
which the use is allowed.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17;
Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23;
Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-122. Data storage centers in the BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area.
Data storage centers in the BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area shall comply with all of
the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot or contiguous lots that total
at least 25 acres.
Requirements for Conditional Uses§
18-10-122
   (2)   The facility shall comply with all applicable bulk regulations for the
zoning district in which the facility is located, except that the bulk
regulations contained in the following chart shall be met:
 
Minimum Setbacks for Principal Structures:
Front lot line                        50 feet
Side lot line                         30 feet
Rear lot line                         30 feet
Freeway                               100 feet
Divided principal arterial road       60 feet
Any other public road or right-of-way 50 feet
 
   (3)   A variance may not be granted that reduces the minimum setback
requirements specified in subsection (2).
   (4)   The lot or contiguous lots on which the data center is located may not
include residential dwelling units.
   (5)   Outside storage is permitted as an accessory use, provided no more
than 15% of the total allowed lot coverage is used for outside storage.
   (6)   The lot or contiguous lots comprising the facility shall be located in
the BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area, as shown on the official map adopted by the
County Council entitled “BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area, 2016”.
(Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-123. Dwelling units, accessory.
An accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   No more than one accessory dwelling unit per lot is allowed.
   (2)   An accessory dwelling unit may not be a mobile home or a manufactured
home, as defined in §
11-9-101 of this Code.
   (3)   An accessory dwelling unit shall be located:
      (i)   in a separate dwelling unit in a principal single-family detached
dwelling, or connected by a breezeway, open or enclosed, to a principal single-
family detached dwelling;
      (ii)   in an attached or detached garage; or
      (iii)   in a detached structure.
   (4)   An accessory dwelling unit located in a detached structure may not
exceed the lesser of 800 square feet or 50% of the floor area of the principal
single-family detached dwelling. An accessory dwelling unit, or the conversion
of all or part of an existing structure into an accessory dwelling unit, shall
be constructed pursuant to any permits required by this Code.
   (5)   An accessory dwelling unit shall have a separate entrance.
   (6)   An accessory dwelling unit shall use the same street address as the
principal single-family detached dwelling and shall be designated as “Unit B”.
   (7)   The principal single-family detached dwelling or accessory dwelling
unit may be used for short-term residential rentals, as defined in
Article 11 of this Code, if the principal single-family detached dwelling or
accessory dwelling unit is owner-occupied.
   (8)   An accessory dwelling unit in use and in compliance with the
provisions of this section prior to May 27, 2023 is not subject to subsections
(4), (5), (6), or (7), unless the accessory dwelling unit is altered or
expanded after May 27, 2023.
   (9)   (i)   Except as provided in subparagraph (ii), a variance may not be
granted to reduce the minimum setback requirements to an adjacent lot located
in a residential district.
      (ii)   A variance to reduce the minimum setback requirements to an
adjacent lot located in a residential district may be granted if the variance
is for a structure that was in existence before May 27, 2023 and the structure
is being converted to an accessory dwelling unit.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 17-17;
Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21;
Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 6-23; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 13-25)
Editor’s note - Section 2 of Bill No. 6-23 requires an annual report regarding
accessory dwelling units to be prepared and sent to the County Executive and
County Council.
§ 18-10-124. Dwelling units, adult independent.
Adult independent dwelling units in a commercial district shall comply with all
of the following requirements:
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least one acre.
   (2)   Except for the structures and uses listed in §
18-2-301(e) and stormwater management facilities, structures shall be located
at least 50 feet from the boundary line of the development site.
   (3)   Parking areas shall be located at least 15 feet from any residentially
zoned property.
   (4)   Each access drive shall be located at least 40 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
   (5)   The maximum density shall be 22 dwelling units per acre.
   (6)   Group facility and service uses, if provided, shall be centrally
located for the exclusive use and benefit of the residents and their guests in
structures that are architecturally compatible with the residential portion of
the development.
   (7)   A pedestrian circulation system interconnecting all parts of the
community with sidewalks and walkways shall be provided.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17;
Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 102-21;
Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 17-24; Bill No. 72-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-125. Dwellings, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, and multiplexes.
   (1)   Density.
      (i)   Except as provided in paragraph (ii), triplex, fourplex, and
multiplex dwelling density may not exceed 12 units per acre in a C1 district,
22 units per acre in a C2 district, or 15 units per acre in a C3 district.
      (ii)   Except as provided in paragraph (iii), for redevelopment under
Title 7 of Article 17 of this Code in a critical economic, critical corridor,
transit oriented development policy area, a mixed use overlay policy area, or a
corridor revitalization and redevelopment overlay policy area, as defined in
the County’s General Development Plan, triplex, fourplex, and multiplex density
may not exceed 22 units per acre in a C1, C2, or C3 district.
      (iii)   Paragraph (ii) shall not apply to properties located in:
         1.   a critical corridor policy area if a portion of the critical
policy area is designated as mixed use planned land use and the area is
recommended for a sector plan or study in a region plan adopted between May 4,
2024 and December 31, 2024;
         2.   region planning areas 8 and 9 of the County’s Plan 2040 General
Development Plan; and
         3.   a critical corridor policy area that, as of January 1, 2025, is
located in region planning area number 5 of the County’s Plan 2040 General
Development Plan and councilmanic district number 7.
   (2)   Utilities. The development shall be served by public water and sewer.
   (3)   Distances between structures. Minimum distances between structures
located on the same lot (closest projecting edge) are contained in the
following chart.
 
Side facade to side facade          14 feet
Rear facade to rear or front facade 20 feet
Rear facade to side facade          15 feet
Front facade to side facade         20 feet
 
(Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17;
Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 81-22;
Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 72-24; Bill No. 2-25; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-126. Dwelling unit, marina caretaker’s residence.
When a marina caretaker’s residence dwelling unit is located on a property with
a single family dwelling, the square footage of the marina caretaker’s
residence dwelling unit shall be no more than 800 square feet of floor area.
(Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 76-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-127. Dwellings, multifamily.
   (1)   Commercial districts. Multifamily dwellings in a commercial district
shall comply with all of the following requirements.
      (i)   Except as provided in paragraphs (iii) and (iv), density may not
exceed:
 
District Dwelling Units per Acre
C1       12
C2       22
C3       15
C4       15
 
      (ii)   Except as provided in paragraph (iii), the development shall
include commercial uses that equal:
 
District Floor Area Devoted to Commercial Use
C1       25%
C2       50%
C3       50%
C4       50%
 
      (iii)   1.   Except as provided in paragraph 3., for redevelopment under
Title 7 of Article 17 of this Code in a critical economic, critical corridor,
transit oriented development policy area, a mixed use overlay policy area, or a
corridor revitalization and redevelopment overlay policy area, as defined in
the County’s General Development Plan, density may not exceed 22 units per acre
in a C1, C2 or C3 district.
         2.   Except as provided in paragraph 3., for redevelopment under
Title 7 of Article 17 of this Code in a critical economic, critical corridor,
or transit oriented development policy area, a mixed use overlay policy area,
or a corridor revitalization and redevelopment overlay policy area, as defined
in the County’s General Development Plan, no commercial use is required in a
C1, C2, or C3 commercial district.
         3.   Subparagraphs 1. and 2. shall not apply to properties located in:
            a.   a critical corridor policy area if a portion of the critical
policy area is designated as mixed use planned land use and the area is
recommended for a sector plan or study in a region plan adopted between May 4,
2024, and December 31, 2024;
            b.   region planning areas 8 and 9 of the County’s Plan 2040
General Development Plan; and
            c.   a critical corridor policy area that, as of January 1, 2025,
is located in region planning area number 5 of the County’s Plan 2040 General
Development Plan and councilmanic district number 7.
      (iv)   In a C3 district, on a site located in the BWI/Fort Meade Growth
Area, as shown on the official map adopted by the County Council, entitled
“BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area, 2016”, the commercial uses required under
paragraph (ii) may be replaced with multifamily dwellings with density of up to
44 dwelling units per acre for the site.
      (v)   If commercial uses are included within a multifamily dwelling, the
dwelling units shall have entrances that are separate from the entrances to the
commercial uses.
      (vi)   The bulk regulations contained in the following chart shall be
met.
Maximum coverage by structures In accordance with the requirements of the
                               district in which the development is located
                                        In accordance with the requirements of
Maximum coverage by structures          the district in which the development
                                        is located
Minimum setbacks for principal
structures:
Front lot line                          20 feet
Side lot line                           15 feet
Corner side lot lines                   20 feet
Rear lot line                           20 feet
All lot lines                           60 feet from right-of-way line of a
                                        divided principal arterial road
Minimum distance between multifamily
structures located on the same lot
(closest projecting edge):
Facades with windows                    30 feet
Facades that are windowless             15 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory
structures other than sheds that do not
exceed 64 square feet in area and eight
feet in height:
                                        7 feet or 5 feet for structures less
                                        than 8 feet in height (other than
Side and rear lot lines                 swimming pools, tennis courts,
                                        basketball courts, and similar private
                                        recreational facilities)
Corner side lot line                    15 feet
Maximum height limitations:
Principal structures                    72 feet
Accessory structures                    20 feet or the height of the principal
                                        structure, whichever is less
Maximum length of a single elevation
unless special architectural,
landscaping, or topographic treatment,  250 feet
such as a change of material, texture,
depression, berm, or other similar
change, is used
 
   (2)   Residential districts. Multifamily dwellings in R1, R2, and R5
districts shall comply with the following requirements:
      (i)   multifamily dwelling units shall be adult independent dwelling
units;
      (ii)   the development shall be served by public water and sewer; and
      (iii)   the bulk regulations contained in the following chart shall be
met.
Maximum coverage by structures and In accordance with the requirements of the
parking                            district in which the development is
                                   located
Maximum coverage by structures and      In accordance with the requirements of
parking                                 the district in which the development
                                        is located
Minimum setbacks for principal
structures:
Front lot line                          20 feet
Side lot line                           15 feet
Corner side lot lines                   20 feet
Rear lot line                           30 feet
Minimum distance between multifamily
structures located on the same lot
(closest projecting edge):
Facades with windows                    30 feet
Facades that are windowless             15 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory
structures other than sheds that do not
exceed 64 square feet in area and eight
feet in height:
                                        7 feet or 5 feet for structures less
                                        than 8 feet in height (other than
Side and rear lot lines                 swimming pools, tennis courts,
                                        basketball courts, and similar private
                                        recreational facilities)
Corner side lot line                    15 feet
Maximum height limitations:
Principal structures                    45 feet
Accessory structures                    20 feet or the height of the principal
                                        structure, whichever is less
Maximum length of a single elevation    200 feet
                                        In accordance with the requirements of
Maximum density                         the district in which the development
                                        is located
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 17-17;
Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21;
Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 17-24; Bill No. 20-24;
Bill No. 72-24; Bill No. 2-25; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-128. Dwellings, townhouses and stacked townhouses.
Townhouses and stacked townhouses shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The bulk regulations contained in the following chart shall be met:
                                                                              60 feet except that the
                                                                              setback may be 40 feet if
Location of a townhouse structure from a residential lot line located in a    the adjoining lot is an
less intensive zoning district                                                open space lot or open
                                                                              area lot created under §
                                                                              17-6-111 of this Code
Minimum setbacks for a townhouse structure:
                                                                              5 feet, but if parking is
Front lot line:                                                               located in the front yard,
                                                                              18 feet
Side lot line for end units                                                   5 feet
Rear lot line                                                                 10 feet
Distance between townhouse structures:
Front to front between structure facades                                      40 feet
Back to back between structure facades                                        40 feet
Adjacent end units                                                            15 feet
                                                                              16 units if back-to-back;
Maximum units per townhouse structure                                         otherwise,
                                                                              8 units
Minimum width of individual unit                                              16 feet
                                                                              Density may not exceed 12
                                                                              units per acre in a C1
                                                                              district, 22 units per
                                                                              acre in a C2 district, or
Maximum density – not in a redevelopment project under Article 17, Title 7, 15 units per acre in a C3
Subtitle 12                                                                   or C4 district; for all
                                                                              other districts, in
                                                                              accordance with the
                                                                              requirements of the
                                                                              district in which the
                                                                              development is located
                                                                              22 units per acre in C1,
                                                                              C2, C3 and C4 districts
Maximum density – in a redevelopment project under Article 17, Title 7,     for all other districts in
Subtitle 12 except as provided in subsection (2)                              accordance with the
                                                                              requirements of the
                                                                              district in which the
                                                                              development is located
Public water and sewer                                                        Required
 
   (2)   Increased density for a redevelopment project as provided in the chart
in subsection (1) shall not apply to properties located in:
      (i)   a critical corridor policy area if a portion of the critical policy
area is designated as mixed use planned land use and the area is recommended
for a sector plan or study in a region plan adopted between May 4, 2024, and
December 31, 2024;
      (ii)   region planning areas 8 and 9 of the County’s Plan 2040 General
Development Plan; and
      (iii)   a critical corridor policy area that, as of January 1, 2025, is
located in region planning area number 5 of the County’s Plan 2040 General
Development Plan and councilmanic district number 7.
   (3)   The front facade of an individual unit shall be staggered from the
front facade of an adjoining unit by at least two feet in order to create a
variation in the front facades, or the developer shall submit a plan showing
variations or architectural features to provide a variety of facades, features,
and relief acceptable to the Planning and Zoning Officer.
   (4)   Pedestrian connections, such as walking paths, sidewalks, and hiker-
biker trails, shall be provided to connect townhouses, multifamily dwelling
buildings, and open areas within the development.
   (5)   In an R1 or R2 district, townhouses shall be adult independent
dwelling units.
   (6)   In addition to the requirements of subsections (1), (2), (3), and (4),
the following is required for developments located in an R1, R2, and R5
district:
 
Minimum site area                    1 acre
                                     75% of the gross area of the site;
Maximum coverage by structures       coverage shall not be based on each
                                     individual townhome lot
                                     75 feet except that the setback may be
                                     30 feet if the adjoining lot is an open
Minimum setbacks for townhouse       space lot or an open area lot created
structures from the boundary line of under §
the development site                 17-6-111 of this Code or is zoned OS or
                                     located in either the same or a more
                                     intensive residential zone or in a
                                     nonresidential zone
Maximum height limitations:
Principal structures                 50 feet
Accessory structures                 20 feet, or the height of the principal
                                     structure, whichever is less
 
   (7)   In addition to the requirements of subsections (1), (2), and (3), the
following is required for developments located in an R10, R15, and R22
district:
 
                               75% of the gross area of the site; coverage
Maximum coverage by structures shall not be based on each individual townhome
                               lot
Maximum height limitations:
Principal structures           60 feet
Accessory structures           20 feet, or the height of the principal
                               structure, whichever is less
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 55-11; Bill No. 64-11;
Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20;
Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 33-22; Bill No. 81-22;
Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 17-24; Bill No. 72-24; Bill No. 2-25;
Bill No. 13-25; Bill No. 20-25)
§ 18-10-129. Electric vehicle towing and storage facilities.
Electric vehicle towing and storage facilities shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (1)   The facility shall provide for the towing and storage of only electric
vehicles; and
   (2)   Side yard setbacks shall be increased by five (5) feet if the adjacent
property is residentially-zoned.
(Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-130. Farm alcohol production facility.
A farm alcohol production facility shall comply with the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a farm of at least 10 acres and shall
be operated by the farm owner or farm manager.
   (2)   The farm upon which the facility is located shall produce at least one
acre of grain, hops, fruit, or other ingredient, excluding water that is
utilized to produce alcohol. For a facility that produces mead, at least one
acre of land on the farm upon which the facility is located shall be used to
nourish a colony of bees.
   (3)   Except as provided in paragraph (i) or (ii), the minimum setback from
any lot line for any building or storage facility used in connection with farm
alcohol production shall be 100 feet.
      (i)   For existing structures used in connection with alcohol
manufacturing or tastings, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet if the
Planning and Zoning Officer finds that the reduced setback is compatible with
surrounding uses; or
      (ii)   For a farm bounded by a road, the minimum setback from the lot
line to a new structure adjacent to the road may be reduced to 50 feet if the
Planning and Zoning Officer finds that the reduced setback is compatible with
surrounding uses.
   (4)   The floor area for tastings, sale of alcohol produced on-site or
accessory non-alcoholic beverage or food sales may not exceed the floor area
being used for production and storage of alcohol.
   (5)   The facility shall front upon a public road, and public access to and
from the facility, including the tasting room, food sales, and promotional
events, shall be directly on the public road. No point of vehicular access may
be closer than 40 feet to the lot line of a residentially zoned property that
is not part of the farm alcohol production facility. The Planning and Zoning
Officer may approve access through a private road where no direct access onto a
public road is feasible with conditions as follows:
      (i)   Maintenance of the private road shall be subject to a shared
maintenance agreement, with proportional maintenance responsibilities assumed
by the owner of the farm alcohol production facility; and
      (ii)   If there is more than one property owner who has a right to use
the private road, the owner of the farm alcohol production facility shall
provide affidavits of support from each owner. The affidavits shall be approved
as to form by the Planning and Zoning Officer prior to signature.
   (6)   A facility located on a scenic and historic road shall comply with the
provisions of §
17-6-504 of this Code and mitigate any adverse visual impact to abutting
property not owned by the farm operator.
   (7)   Parking areas shall be clearly marked through physical means such as
timbers, fences, or stakes, and shall be arranged to avoid traffic congestion
on public roads. No parking shall be allowed on public or private rights-of-
way.
(Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23;
Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-131. Farm dual uses.
Farm dual uses shall comply with the following requirements.
   (1)   The lot or parcel shall be located in an RA or RLD zoning district
with an agricultural use assessment from the State Department of Assessments
and Taxation and an approved soil conservation and water quality plan from the
Soil Conservation District.
   (2)   The lot or parcel shall be actively farmed, as confirmed by the Soil
Conservation District.
   (3)   The lot or parcel shall be a minimum of 20 acres.
   (4)   The owner or operator of the commercial use shall be the owner of the
lot or parcel.
   (5)   The commercial use shall have no more than five employees that are not
a spouse, child, grandchild, parent, sibling, or grandparent of the owner of
the lot or parcel.
   (6)   The commercial use, including any storage area for equipment utilized
by the commercial use, shall be: no more than 20,000 square feet in area; set
back at least 100 feet from lot boundaries; and screened with a solid fence
that is at least six feet tall or a planted buffer at least 15 feet wide that
the Office of Planning and Zoning determines is sufficient to provide screening
along any adjacent lots and public road right-of-way.
   (7)   No new structures shall be built or utilized as part of the commercial
use.
   (8)   Only gravel or pervious material shall be used for parking or outdoor
storage areas for the commercial use.
   (9)   Farming shall remain the principal use of the lot or parcel.
(Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-132. Farm or agricultural heritage site special event, 9 to 15 annual
events.
A farm or agricultural heritage site special event, 9 to 15 annual events,
shall comply with the following requirements.
   (1)   The minimum lot size for a farm is 10 acres.
   (2)   The minimum lot size for an agricultural heritage site is five acres.
   (3)   Onsite circulation and parking areas shall be designed to minimize
vehicular and pedestrian conflicts.
   (4)   Any outdoor assembly areas shall be located and designed to shield
surrounding residential properties from the effects of noise, hazards, or other
offensive conditions and shall be screened from adjacent residential
properties.
   (5)   Maximum capacity for a special event on a farm, or for an agricultural
heritage site with a lot size over 10 acres, may not exceed 200 attendees.
Maximum capacity for a special event on an agricultural heritage site with a
lot size between 5 and 10 acres may not exceed 50 attendees.
   (6)   No more than 15 farm or agricultural heritage site special events may
be held on the same property within a 12-month period.
   (7)   Operation hours shall be restricted to between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m., Sunday through Thursday; and between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Friday and
Saturday.
   (8)   Each farm or agricultural heritage site special event shall be no
longer than one day.
   (9)   Special event activities shall occur outdoors, unless the use of any
structures or tents is in accordance with the Building Code.
   (10)   A farm or agricultural heritage site special event shall be accessory
and not the principal use on the farm or agricultural heritage site.
   (11)   The owner has owned the property for the immediately preceding two
years and has been engaged in active farming for the immediately preceding two
years.
   (12)   For property in the critical area, provisions of this Code relating
to lot coverage and limits on clearing apply, and include access, parking
regardless of surface, temporary structures, temporary tents, and temporary
pavement surfaces.
   (13)   For property in the critical area, no new lot coverage, including for
access or parking, may be added in the buffer to accommodate the event.
(Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23;
Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 57-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
Editor’s note – Section 3 of Bill No. 69-20 requires the Office of Planning and
Zoning to provide a report to the County Council, on or before January 1 of
each year through 2027, on farm or agricultural heritage site special events
and farm or agricultural site stays.
§ 18-10-133. Farm or agricultural heritage site stay.
A farm or agricultural heritage site stay shall comply with the following
requirements.
   (1)   The farm or agricultural heritage site shall be on a lot of at least
10 acres.
   (2)   The owner or manager of the farm or agricultural heritage site shall
reside on the property and shall be present during the farm or agricultural
heritage site stay.
   (3)   For farms or agricultural heritage sites less than 50 acres, a maximum
of three groups or 12 guests, whichever is less, may stay at one time. For
farms or agricultural heritage sites 50 acres or more, no more than five groups
or 20 guests, whichever is less, may stay at one time. Guests may stay no more
than 14 consecutive days.
   (4)   The owner shall maintain a reservation log of the arrival and
departure dates of all guests for inspection by the Office of Planning and
Zoning.
   (5)   A farm or agricultural heritage site stay shall be accessory and not
the principal use on the farm or agricultural heritage site.
   (6)   A farm or agricultural heritage site stay shall include agricultural
promotion and guest education about the farm operation or the agricultural
heritage site, and shall be subordinate to and in conjunction with agriculture
or agricultural heritage and historic preservation goals.
   (7)   Any building or other improvements or additions made in connection
with a farm or agricultural heritage site stay shall be located and designed to
shield surrounding residential properties from the effects of noise, hazards,
or other offensive conditions.
   (8)   The minimum setback from any lot line for any building or other
improvements or additions used in connection with a farm or agricultural
heritage stay shall be 100 feet.
   (9)   The owner has owned the property for the immediately preceding two
years and has been engaged in active farming for the immediately preceding two
years.
   (10)   For property in the critical area, provisions of this Code relating
to lot coverage and limits on clearing apply, and include access, parking
regardless of surface, temporary structures, temporary tents, and temporary
pavement surfaces.
   (11)   For property in the critical area, no new lot coverage, including for
access or parking, may be added in the buffer to accommodate the event.
(Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23;
Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 57-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
Editor’s note – Section 3 of Bill No. 69-20 requires the Office of Planning and
Zoning to provide a report to the County Council, on or before January 1 of
each year through 2027, on farm or agricultural heritage site special events
and farm or agricultural site stays.
§ 18-10-134. Farm tenant houses.
A farm tenant house shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The house shall be located on a farm of at least 20 acres.
   (2)   The house shall be occupied by at least one person involved in a
farming operation of the property owner.
   (3)   There may be no more than one tenant house for each 50 acres of
farming operation.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 17-17;
Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20;
Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 3-24;
Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-135. Funeral establishments.
A funeral establishment shall comply with the following requirements:
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of a least 20,000 square feet.
   (2)   The facility shall be located at least 25 feet from the lot line of a
residentially zoned or occupied property.
(Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-
20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 81-
22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-
25)
§ 18-10-136. Garden centers.
A garden center shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot that is at least two acres but
not more than five acres.
   (2)   The facility shall be located on an arterial road.
   (3)   Accessory uses include the raising or the keeping of chickens, in
accordance with the requirements of §
18-4-104 of this Code, the raising or the keeping of bees, and the sale of
eggs, honey, and other products relating to chickens and bees.
(Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-
20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 81-
22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-
25)
§ 18-10-137. Golf course facilities, private.
A private golf course facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   Use of the facility shall be restricted to owners, members, and their
guests.
   (2)   The facility may include guest rooms, dining areas, a pro shop, locker
rooms, and fitness facilities.
   (3)   No more than 12 guest rooms are allowed on the facility.
   (4)   Not more than one caretaker’s dwelling is allowed as an accessory
structure within the facility.
   (5)   Sufficient overflow area to accommodate two additional parking spaces
for each hole shall be provided but need not be paved.
(Bill No. 79-07; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16;
Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20;
Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23;
Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-138. Government reuse facilities.
The requirements for a government reuse facility are located in
Title 12.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 75-16;
Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20;
Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23;
Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-139. Group homes II.
To help ensure that persons with disabilities live and interact with
individuals without disabilities to the fullest extent possible, the owner of a
group home II may not own two facilities that adjoin each other and, if a
proposed adjoining facility is owned by a business entity, the owner, the
owner’s family, and the owner’s business associates may not have any interest,
financial or otherwise, in the business entity.
(Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21;
Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24;
Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-140. Gunsmiths and ammunition sales facilities.
Gunsmiths and ammunition sales facilities shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (1)   The facility shall be affiliated through ownership, control, or
contract, with an indoor or outdoor rifle, pistol, skeet, or archery range.
   (2)   A gunsmith engaged in the business of repairing firearms or making or
fitting special barrels, stocks, or trigger mechanisms to firearms, with or
without firearm sales, shall obtain all required licenses and permits required
by law.
(Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 3-
24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-141. Home occupations.
A home occupation shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   A home occupation shall be located and conducted entirely in a
principal dwelling unit and shall be incidental and secondary to the use of the
structure as a dwelling.
   (2)   A home occupation may not change the character of the dwelling unit
and may not exceed 25% of the total floor area.
   (3)   Home occupations are limited to the following:
      (i)   art, handcraft, woodworking, or ceramics studios for the sale of
products made on the premises;
      (ii)   florist or nursery operations for flowers and plants;
      (iii)   hair, cosmetic facial hair, and nail salons;
      (iv)   jewelry, watch, or clock repair;
      (v)   seamstress or tailoring establishments;
      (vi)   photography studios;
      (vii)   professional or general offices;
      (viii)   scissor or saw sharpening operations;
      (ix)   massage practice in which only one State-licensed massage
therapist or practitioner practices massage in the dwelling unit as a sole
practitioner and receives no compensation from any establishment or individual
other than the recipient of the massage;
      (x)   repair and maintenance of firearms, including handguns, rifles,
shotguns, and antique firearms, as those terms are defined in the Criminal Law
Article, § 4-201, of the State Code;
      (xi)   typing and computer services;
      (xii)   direct sale product distribution, such as Amway, Tupperware, and
Avon;
      (xiii)    tutoring and instruction for no more than six students;
      (xiv)   child care for a maximum of 12 children in accordance with the
requirements of the State Child Care Administration;
      (xv)   taxidermy, excluding butchering, rendering, or tanning;
      (xvi)   pet care business, on a lot of 6,000 square feet or greater,
provided the total number of dogs and cats at the residence at any time does
not exceed the number of dogs and cats permitted to be kept on the property
under §
18-4-104(a) of this Code, the homeowner does not board animals in outside
kennels, dogs are kept in a fenced area with a secure locking gate when
outdoors, and the use is not noxious or offensive to surrounding uses;
      (xvii)   cottage food business; and
      (xviii)   pet grooming provided the total number of dogs or cats
permitted on the premises for purposes of grooming services does not exceed 2
at any time unless the dogs or cats are under common ownership, and dogs are
kept in a fenced area with a secure locking gate when outdoors.
   (4)   The operator of a home occupation shall be a resident of the dwelling
unit in which the occupation is located.
   (5)   No more than one nonresident may be employed in the home occupation.
   (6)   The sale or rental of goods or products other than those produced on
the premises by the home occupation is prohibited.
   (7)   Outside storage is prohibited.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 44-14; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15;
Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20;
Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 81-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 104-
20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No.
62-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 91-24; Bill No. 13-25; Bill No.
58-25)
§ 18-10-142. Housing for the elderly of moderate means.
Housing for the elderly of moderate means shall consist of rental dwelling
units only and shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The property shall be encumbered by a recorded covenant enforceable by
the County or its designee, that:
      (i)   requires the units to be occupied by:
            1.   individuals who are 62 years of age or older, except that a
live-in caregiver who is less than 62 years of age is allowed for a resident
with a disability that meets the definition of a disability under 42 U.S.C. §
12102; or
            2.   for a development funded in whole or in part with government
funds contingent on adherence to the definition of “elderly family” in 24
C.F.R. 5.403, a family whose head (including co-head), spouse, or sole member
is a person who is at least 62 years of age or older;
      (ii)   requires that at least 60% of the units be occupied by individuals
with an income that does not exceed 60% of the median income adjusted for
household size for the Baltimore Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area, as
defined and published annually by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development; and
      (iii)   requires that the remaining units be occupied by individuals with
an income that does not exceed 80% of the median income adjusted for household
size for the Baltimore Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area, as defined and
published annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
   (2)   The project shall be located on a lot that abuts a collector or higher
classification road, with vehicular traffic access from that road.
   (3)   Maximum density shall be 22 dwelling units per acre, not to exceed 60
dwelling units in R2 zoning districts or 120 dwelling units in R5 zoning
districts.
   (4)   The floor area of each dwelling unit shall be limited to 1,000 square
feet.
   (5)   (i)Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) maximum coverage by
structures and parking may not exceed 65% of the gross area of the lot.
      (ii)   In R15, R22, and commercial zoning districts, maximum coverage by
structures and parking may not exceed 80% of the gross area of the lot.
   (6)   In R2 and R5 zoning districts, the site shall be located in a priority
funding area.
   (7)   The following bulk regulations apply:
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
Front lot line          30 feet
Side lot line           25 feet
Corner side lot line    30 feet
Rear lot line           30 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures:
Side and rear lot lines 10 feet
Corner side lot line    15 feet
Maximum height limitations:
Principal structures    55 feet
Accessory structures    20 feet
Public water and sewer  Required
 
   (8)   The developer shall establish the allowable maximum rental rates for
the rental units and Anne Arundel County or its designee shall confirm that the
amount of the rental rates is appropriate.
(Bill No. 77-07; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16;
Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20;
Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 7-21; Bill No. 103-21;
Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 21-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 83-23;
Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-143. Kennels, commercial.
A commercial kennel shall comply with all the following requirements.
   (1)   All structures, enclosed coops, and enclosed runs for the housing or
shelter of animals in a commercial kennel shall be located at least 100 feet
from residentially zoned property, and animals may not be housed within the
100-foot setback.
   (2)   A commercial kennel located in a structure that contains uses other
than a commercial kennel shall incorporate sound attenuation construction
designed to minimize the impact of noise from the commercial kennel on the
other uses in the structures.
   (3)   A commercial kennel shall not unreasonably interfere with other
tenants located within the same structure as the commercial kennel and the use
may not be noxious, offensive, or otherwise objectionable to surrounding uses.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 12-13; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15;
Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20;
Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21;
Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 3-24;
Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-144. Licensed dispensaries, growers and processors of cannabis.
   (a)   Dispensary. A licensed dispensary of cannabis, as defined in State law
and regulations, shall comply with all of the following requirements.
      (1)   Except for facilities located in industrial zoning districts,
vehicular access shall be from an arterial road or from a local or higher
classification road that directly accesses an arterial road.
      (2)   “No loitering” signs shall be conspicuously posted in all parking
areas.
      (3)   Displays and depictions of cannabis may not be visible to the
general public.
      (4)   The facility may not have an on-site physician for the purpose of
issuing written certifications for medical cannabis.
      (5)   A licensed dispensary of cannabis may be located in a licensed
dispensary of medical cannabis operating on or before January 1, 2023.
   (b)   Grower. A licensed grower of cannabis, as defined in State law and
regulations, shall comply with all of the following requirements.
      (1)   The facility may not be located within 750 feet of the lot line of
a public or private school; the lot line of real property owned by the Board of
Education; or, except in an RA district, residentially zoned property.
      (2)   In an RA zoning district the facility shall be located on a lot or
parcel of at least 10 acres.
      (3)   Other than any security lighting required by State law or
regulations, no visible light shall emanate from the facility from dusk to
dawn.
   (c)   Processor. A licensed processor of cannabis, as defined in State law
and regulations, shall comply with all of the following requirements.
      (1)   The facility may not be located within 750 feet of the lot line of
a public or private school; the lot line of real property owned by the Board of
Education; or, except in an RA district, residentially zoned property.
      (2)   Processing of cannabis shall be an accessory use to a licensed
grower of cannabis.
      (3)   Other than any security lighting required by State law or
regulations, no visible light shall emanate from the facility from dusk to
dawn.
(Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 77-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-
17; Bill No. 21-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 24-18; Bill No. 77-18; Bill No. 7-
19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-
21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No.
62-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-145. Neighborhood marinas.
A neighborhood marina shall comply with the following requirements.
   (1)   A neighborhood marina may have no more than 20 slips.
   (2)   In addition to a marina caretaker’s residence dwelling unit, a
neighborhood marina may have one single family detached dwelling unit.
   (3)   The lot size of a neighborhood marina may not exceed three acres.
(Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-146. Nurseries with landscaping and plant sales.
A nursery with landscaping and plant sales shall comply with all of the
following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 5 acres.
   (2)   The facility shall be located on an arterial or collector road.
   (3)   Accessory retail or wholesale uses are permitted.
   (4)   Any accessory landscaping or tree cutting operations may not occupy
more than 15% of the lot, excluding required setbacks.
   (5)   The storage and display areas for materials and products used and sold
for landscaping and the cultivation of plants, bushes, trees, and other nursery
items, such as stone, mulch, or fertilizer, may not occupy more than 30% of the
lot, or one acre, whichever is less.
   (6)   A conditional use granted under this section and in use as of April 7,
2014 shall be a lawful use if located on a lot of at least five acres in a R2
zoning district, or on a lot of at least two acres in all other zoning
districts, and if the requirements of subsections (2) through (5) are met.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 16-14; Bill No. 8-15;
Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17;
Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20;
Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 57-22; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23;
Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-147. Nursing homes.
A nursing home shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least five acres plus one
acre for each group of 25 beds, or fraction of 25 beds, in excess of 100.
   (2)   All structures shall be located at least 50 feet from all lot lines.
   (3)   A structure used in whole or part for contagious, mental, or drug or
alcohol addiction cases shall be located at least 200 feet from all lot lines.
   (4)   Any source of potential nuisance, including a laundry operation, power
plant, restaurant, cafeteria, kitchen, ambulance or emergency patient entrance,
unloading area for supplies and food, garbage loading area, incinerator, and
animal laboratory, shall be located at least 200 feet from any residentially
zoned property and at least 50 feet from any road intersection.
   (5)   Each access drive shall be located at least 40 feet from any lot line.
   (6)   Structures and onsite parking may cover not more than 60% of the lot.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15;
Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20;
Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21;
Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24;
Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-148. Package goods stores.
A package goods store shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The use shall be licensed by the Board of License Commissioners.
   (2)   An off-sale alcoholic beverage license use shall be located away from
schools and religious facilities by at least the distance required by § 11-1603
of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article of State Code. For structures,
the distance shall be measured in a straight line from entry to entry.
(Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 28-16;
Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20;
Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21;
Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24;
Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-149. Piers and launching ramps, community.
A community pier or launching ramp shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 30,000 square feet
that is owned by a homeowner’s association.
   (2)   The facility shall be established and operated for the benefit of the
residents of a recorded residential riparian subdivision.
   (3)   Adverse effects on water quality and fish, plant, and wildlife habitat
shall be minimized.
   (4)   Nonwater-dependent structures or operations associated with water-
dependent projects or activities shall be located outside the buffer to the
extent possible.
   (5)   Disturbance to the buffer shall be the minimum necessary to provide a
single point of access to the facility.
   (6)   Food, fuel, or other goods and services may not be offered for sale.
   (7)   Boarding ladders shall be located along the sides of a pier and along
each bulkhead where the water depth at the bulkhead exceeds four feet in depth
at mean high water. Ladders along piers shall be 100 feet apart on each side of
the pier and staggered so that the ladders alternate sides every 50 feet.
Ladders along bulkheads shall be placed no more than 50 feet apart.
   (8)   United States Coast Guard approved personal flotation devices shall be
located along each pier or bulkhead at intervals not exceeding 100 feet.
   (9)   When a community pier with slips is provided as part of a new
residential riparian subdivision, private piers in the subdivision are
prohibited.
   (10)   The number of slips allowed with a community pier shall be the lesser
of the following:
      (i)   one slip for each 50 feet of shoreline in a subdivision located in
an intense or limited development area, and one slip for each 300 feet of
shoreline in a subdivision located in a resource conservation area; or
      (ii)   a density of slips to platted lots or dwellings in the critical
area in accordance with the following chart:
 
Platted Lots or Dwellings Slips
Up to 15                  1 for each lot
16 to 40                  15 or 75%, whichever is greater
41 to 100                 30 or 50%, whichever is greater
101 to 300                50 or 25%, whichever is greater
More than 300             75 or 15%, whichever is greater
 
   (11)   In the event the parcel or lot has riparian rights and the proposed
development is located on a portion of the parcel or lot that is out of the
critical area, these rights may be utilized in accordance with permitted use
criteria established for the critical area classification through the use of a
community facility established in accordance with this section, based on the
actual length of shoreline or potential density that would have been permitted
within the critical area portion of the parcel or lot.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 8-15;
Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17;
Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20;
Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23;
Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-150. Piers, recreational.
A recreational pier shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The pier shall extend from a lot owned by a homeowner’s association
and the lot shall be at least 60 feet wide at the road, 80 feet wide at the
shoreline, and not less than 20 feet wide at any point.
   (2)   The president of the homeowner’s association shall file with the
Office of Planning and Zoning a signed and dated statement that the executive
board of the association or the association as a whole has taken official
action to approve the pier.
   (3)   The pier shall be located at least 15 feet from the lot lines extended
and at least 50 feet from any existing pier or piling.
   (4)   The pier and the landward walk leading to the pier shall be at least
six feet wide.
   (5)   Any walk structure or impervious walk shall be located at least 15
feet from any side lot line and may not unduly obstruct, increase, or redirect
the natural flow of water.
   (6)   Signs shall be installed on both sides at each end of the pier
oriented toward the water indicating that the docking of boats, either
permanently or temporarily, is prohibited.
   (7)   The pier may have no detached piling, buoy, or other device for the
mooring of boats.
   (8)   Boarding ladders shall be located along the sides of a pier and along
each bulkhead where the water depth at the bulkhead exceeds four feet in depth
at mean high water. Ladders along piers shall be 100 feet apart on each side of
the pier and staggered so that the ladders alternate sides every 50 feet.
Ladders along bulkheads shall be placed no more than 50 feet apart.
   (9)   United States Coast Guard approved personal flotation devices shall be
located along each pier or bulkhead at intervals not exceeding 100 feet.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15;
Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17;
Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21;
Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-
23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-151. Processing facilities for clay, sand, gravel, and similar
materials.
A processing facility for clay, sand, gravel, or similar materials shall comply
with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 30 acres.
   (2)   All stationary equipment and stockpiles shall be located at least
1,000 feet from any residentially zoned property or from an existing dwelling
other than a dwelling located at the facility and at least 300 feet from any
road other than internal roadways used exclusively for operations.
   (3)   The facility shall have operational weight scales.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15;
Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20;
Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21;
Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24;
Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-152. Produce market.
A produce market shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The produce market shall be located on a lot of at least two acres.
   (2)   The produce market shall be located on a lot that accesses a minor
arterial or higher road.
   (3)   Structures shall be set back at least 25 feet from the front property
line.
   (4)   Adequate off-street parking is provided such that sight distance is
not affected by traffic and shall comply with §
18-3-104.
   (5)   Signs for the produce market may not exceed 20 square feet in area and
a height of four feet.
   (6)   A produce market may sell produce and other agricultural and
horticultural products.
   (7)   Accessory retail items incidental to sales of produce and agricultural
or horticultural goods, and outside storage of retail items, may not occupy
more than 20% of the lot.
   (8)   The outside storage area must be set back 25 feet from all lot lines
and screened from all road rights of way and adjacent properties by an opaque
screen, whether a fence or wall, not to exceed six feet in height, or berm, and
shall have landscape planting that obscures all storage areas year round. The
stored items may not extend above the height of the screening and shall be in a
side or rear yard.
   (9)   A site plan has been approved by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
(Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16;
Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20;
Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 81-22;
Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24;
Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-153. Race track for horses.
A race track for horses shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   Parking and principal uses, including the grandstand, clubhouse, and
track, shall be located at least 60 feet from all lot lines.
   (2)   Accessory uses, including dormitories, locker rooms, stables, utility
structures, and manure storage areas, shall be located at least 20 feet from
all lot lines. Accessory uses abutting residentially zoned property shall be
located at least 60 feet from the residential lot line.
   (3)   The principal vehicular access shall be located on an arterial or a
collector road within one-quarter mile of a freeway or arterial road and may
not be located on a freeway or a local road.
   (4)   The facility may not draw traffic through local roads in residential
areas.
   (5)   Parking lots for general public use may not be located in a required
setback or less than 50 feet from any lot line.
   (6)   The facility may include the uses set forth in §
18-5-102 for a C3 district.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 92-05; Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 8-15;
Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17;
Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20;
Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23;
Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-154. Recreational uses, active.
Active recreational uses shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   No more than 25 % of the forested area on a lot may be cleared for the
uses.
   (2)   The site shall be reforested at a ratio of one and one-half acres
planted for every acre cleared.
   (3)   In addition to the planting requirements of subsection (2), for every
acre of playgrounds, playing fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, or
swimming pools created, one-half of an acre shall be afforested or reforested
and placed in a protective easement.
   (4)   The uses shall be set back at least 100 feet from any dwelling and 50
feet from all lot lines.
   (5)   The uses shall be set back at least 200 feet from any stream, river,
or waterway.
   (6)   The uses shall be subject to an approved soil conservation and water
quality plan.
   (7)   Vehicular access to the property shall be located on a collector road
or a road of a higher classification.
(Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16;
Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20;
Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 81-22;
Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24;
Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-155. Restaurants, taverns, retail sales, and consumer services in a
multifamily structure.
A restaurant, tavern, retail sales facility, or consumer services facility in a
multifamily structure shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be primarily for the purpose of serving residents
in the multifamily structure.
   (2)   The facility may not exceed 2% of the total floor area of the
structure.
   (3)   The facility may not be on the same floor as a dwelling unit.
   (4)   The facility shall have access from areas that do not serve as common
residential recreational or access ways.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 8-15;
Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17;
Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20;
Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23;
Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-156. Retail sale of liquefied petroleum gases accessory to and on the
same lot as an allowed use.
The retail sale of liquefied petroleum gases accessory to and on the same lot
as an allowed use shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   In a C1 district, the sale of liquefied petroleum gases may be made
only by the purchase of full containers or by the exchange of empty containers
for full containers, the containers may not be filled onsite, and no liquefied
petroleum gases may be stored on the lot other than in the containers available
for purchase or exchange.
   (2)   In commercial districts other than a C1 district:
      (i)   the facility shall be located on a lot of at least 20,000 square
feet;
      (ii)   only one storage tank is allowed and the capacity of the tank may
not have a water capacity of more than 2,000 gallons;
      (iii)   the storage tank shall be at least 25 feet from all lot lines, 25
feet from any inhabitable structure if the tank has a water capacity of more
than 500 gallons, and 10 feet from any inhabitable structure if the tank has a
water capacity of less than 500 gallons;
      (iv)   steel or iron poles at least four inches in diameter and four feet
above the ground shall be set in and filled with concrete not more than three
feet apart around the perimeter of the tank at a distance from the tank equal
to the height of the poles plus six inches;
      (v)   a chain link fence at least six feet high shall be provided with an
access gate at both ends of the tank; and
      (vi)   an emergency telephone number for the gas company servicing the
tank shall be posted in plain view on the tank site and in the onsite offices
where the tank is located.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 8-15;
Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17;
Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20;
Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23;
Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-157. Rooming houses.
The owner of a rooming house may not own two facilities that adjoin each other
and, if a proposed adjoining facility is owned by a business entity, the owner,
the owner’s family, and the owner’s business associates may not have any
interest, financial or otherwise, in the business entity.
(Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21;
Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-
23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-158. School bus facilities.
A school bus facility shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   In C3 zoning districts, the facility shall be located on a lot or
contiguous lots that total at least one acre.
   (2)   Outside storage of school buses shall be limited to the maximum
coverage allowed in the zoning district in which the facility is located.
   (3)   Outside storage areas for school buses shall be screened from
neighboring residentially zoned properties in accordance with the County
Landscape Manual.
   (4)   Each building used for the indoor storage of school buses shall be
located at least 100 feet from any residentially zoned property.
   (5)   Activities and operations shall be located in a manner to shield
surrounding residential property from the effects of noise, hazards, or other
offensive conditions.
   (6)   Space on the site shall be adequate so that school buses are not
stopped or parked on a road right-of-way.
   (7)   Minor repairs to vehicles or equipment are allowed indoors or
outdoors. Any outside repairs performed in the C1 or C2 zoning districts shall
be no less than 200 feet from all existing, occupied residential structures.
   (8)   Body work, engine rebuilding, engine reconditioning, painting, and
similar activities are allowed indoors only. Structures where these activities
are performed in the C1 or C2 zoning districts shall be located no less than
100 feet from all residentially zoned properties.
   (9)   Structures and uses, such as gas storage tanks, gas pumps, charter
buses, and employee waiting areas, shall be accessory to the facility and may
not be the principal use.
   (10)   Vehicular access in C3 zoning districts shall be from an arterial
road or from a local or higher classification road that directly accesses an
arterial road.
   (11)   In C1 and C2 zoning districts, the facility shall be located on a lot
or contiguous lots that total at least five (5) acres and shall adjoin an
arterial road.
   (12)   Vehicular access in C1 and C2 zoning districts shall be by direct
connection to an arterial road.
(Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-
23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 97-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-159. Schools, private academic and public charter, with less than 125
onsite parking spaces.
A private academic school or a public charter school with less than 125 onsite
parking spaces shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least three acres.
   (2)   Each structure shall be located at least 100 feet from a lot line in
an RA district and at least 40 feet from a lot line in other residential
districts.
   (3)   Structures and onsite parking shall cover no more than 60% of the lot.
   (4)   Access in an RA district shall be provided directly from an arterial
road.
   (5)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 54-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06;
Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15;
Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20;
Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21;
Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-
23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-160. Schools, private academic and public charter, with 125 or more
onsite parking spaces.
A private academic school or a public charter school with 125 or more onsite
parking spaces shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least three acres.
   (2)   Each structure shall be located at least 100 feet from a lot line in
an RA district and at least 40 feet from a lot line in other residential
districts.
   (3)   Structures and onsite parking shall cover no more than 60% of the lot.
   (4)   Access in an RA district shall be provided directly from an arterial
road.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 54-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 15-12;
Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16;
Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20;
Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-
22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-
24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-161. Self-service storage facilities.
A self-service storage facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   In an MXD-E district, the facility shall be located on a lot of at
least one acre. In all other districts, the facility shall be located on a lot
of at least two acres.
   (2)   Storage and a residence for a caretaker or resident manager shall be
the only activities conducted at the facility.
   (3)   Outside storage shall be located and secured at the rear of the lot.
   (4)   Access shall be provided as follows:
      (i)   each one-way interior driveway shall have a travel lane at least 15
feet wide;
      (ii)   each two-way interior driveway shall have two travel lanes, each
at least 12 feet wide; and
      (iii)   traffic direction and parking shall be designated by directional
signs or pavement painting.
   (5)   (i)   Except as provided in subparagraph (ii), in a W1 district, self-
service storage facilities shall be within an enclosed central structure and
conform to the design standards of the Industrial Park District in which it is
located.
      (ii)   In a W1 district, a self-service storage facility located on a
principal arterial road may allow the outside storage of vehicles, at the side
or the rear of the lot, as an accessory use and with screening that complies
with the Landscape Manual.
   (6)   In an MXD district, self-service storage facilities shall be within an
enclosed central structure.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 8-15;
Bill No. 21-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 74-16; Bill No. 75-16;
Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 30-18; Bill No. 16-20;
Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21;
Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-
23; Bill No. 2-24; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-162. Small cell systems.
   (a)   In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (1)   “Antenna” means an apparatus designed to emit radio frequency
radiation and operate from a fixed location to provide wireless services, and
includes materials used for arranging, screening, and camouflaging antenna
equipment.
      (2)   “Antenna equipment” means equipment, switches, wiring, cabling,
power sources, shelters, or cabinets associated with an antenna and located at
the same fixed location as the antenna.
      (3)   “Applicable standards” means engineering and safety standards,
including building, fire, safety, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical codes
that regulate or otherwise affect the installation, maintenance, and operation
of the systems authorized or affected by this section, and includes the
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration.
      (4)   “Collocate” means to install or mount a system on a pole.
      (5)   (i)“Make-ready work” means work that the County reasonably
determines to be required to accommodate the installation of a system and to
comply with all applicable standards;
         (ii)   “Make-ready work” includes repair, rearrangement, replacement,
and construction of a pole; inspections; engineering work and certification;
permitting work; tree trimming other than trimming performed for normal
maintenance purposes; site preparation; and electrical power configuration; and
         (iii)   “Make-ready work” does not include routine maintenance.
      (6)   “Pole” means a pole or similar structure that is used or is capable
of being used wholly or partly for the collocation of a system.
      (7)   “Preconstruction survey” means all work or operations required to
determine the make-ready work necessary to accommodate a wireless provider’s
facilities, including field inspection and administrative processing.
      (8)   “Wireless provider’s facility” means all appurtenances or tangible
things related to a small cell system owned, leased, operated, or licensed by a
utility or wireless provider that are or are proposed to be located in a County
right-of-way.
   (b)   A small cell system on private property shall comply with all of the
following requirements.
      (1)   The developer of a system shall:
         (i)   give notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, not
more than 60 days before filing an application for a building permit, to all
owners of property located with a lot line within 250 feet of the proposed
system, as listed on the tax rolls of the County, including the State, the
County, and the Board of Education; and
         (ii)   file with the application for a building permit a list of the
names and addresses of all property owners who were notified; a copy of the
notice that was sent; copies of all return receipts; copies of the envelopes of
any notices that were returned as undelivered; and an affidavit that notice was
given as required.
      (2)   (i)   The developer of a system shall obtain required approvals,
including franchises and permits, before:
            1.   the initial installation or collocation of a system;
            2.   the installation of a pole; or
            3.   the modification of a system or a pole.
         (ii)   As part of the application process, the developer of a system
shall provide:
            1.   detailed plans describing the installation, collocation,
modification, or attachment, including any certifications that may be required;
            2.   a preconstruction survey;
            3.   a description of any necessary make-ready work being performed
by the developer;
            4.   a proposed schedule for completion, certified by a licensed
professional engineer; and
            5.   any other information required by the County that will allow
the County to properly evaluate:
               A.   the safety of the installation, collocation, modification,
or attachment; and
               B.   the compatibility of the installation in the neighborhood
in which the installation is to be located, as set forth in the aesthetic
standards promulgated by the County, which will include screening, spacing,
height, and design of system and poles, and underground installation of wiring.
         (iii)   Developer of a system may file a consolidated application for
wireless provider’s facilities to be collocated within the County pursuant to
guidelines established by the County.
         (iv)   A system shall be fully operational within 180 days after the
date the last or final permit is issued, unless, due to circumstances outside
of the control of the developer, the County and the developer of the system
agree to extend the period. If not, the County may cancel the approval of the
system and require the removal of the system by the developer of the system at
the wireless provider’s sole expense and in a reasonable time specified by the
County.
      (3)   The developer of a system shall provide a certification from a
registered engineer that the system, including any pole, will meet the
applicable design standards of
Article 15 of this Code for wind loads.
      (4)   The developer of a system and each applicant for a zoning
certificate of use shall submit a certification from a consultant acceptable to
the Information Technology Officer that the system or the use of the facility
will not degrade or interfere with the County’s public safety communication
systems.
      (5)   Within 30 days after the issuance of a zoning certificate of use
for a system and by September 1 of each year thereafter, the holder of the
certificate of use shall submit a certification from an engineer that the radio
frequency radiation from the facility meets the applicable Federal
Communications Commission standards and guidelines for those emissions and
shall include all data in support of the certification. If at any time the
owner or a user of the system cannot provide the certification required by this
subsection for any system, the system shall be disabled by the owner or user
until such time as the owner or user can provide the required certification,
and any certificate of use may be revoked. Before the system may be re-enabled
or the certificate of use reissued, the owner or user shall submit a
certification from an engineer acceptable to the County that the engineer has
visited and inspected the system and that the radio frequency radiation from
the facility meets the applicable Federal Communications Commission standards
and guidelines for those emissions.
      (6)   The owner or user of a system shall submit copies of all
notifications from or to the Federal Communications Commission and reporting to
the Federal Communications Commission for any system.
      (7)   A system, including any pole and accessory structures, shall be of
a color and design that is compatible with the neighborhood in which the system
is installed. A system to be constructed within sight of a property listed on
the National Register of Historic Places shall mitigate any adverse visual
impact of the system in the manner determined by the Office of Planning and
Zoning. Advertising on a system is prohibited.
      (8)   A system may be located on the rooftop of an existing
nonresidential structure or of multifamily dwellings with more than 10 units,
but the system may not extend above the existing roof height by more than 15
feet.
      (9)   A system attached to a transmission line pole or tower may not
laterally project more than 15 feet beyond the cross arms or other support
extensions affixed to the pole or tower and may not project above the top of
the pole or tower by more than 15 feet if the pole or tower will support one
provider or 25 feet if the pole or tower will support more than one provider.
The pole or tower, including all 130A projections, may not exceed 199 feet in
height. All accessory structures shall be underneath the transmission line
within the drip line of the outermost lines or be located from the edge of the
transmission line right-of-way by a distance equal to at least the minimum
setback required for accessory structures in the zoning district in which the
facility is located.
      (10)   A system that ceases operation for a period of 12 consecutive
months shall be considered as terminated and shall be removed within 90 days of
termination at the system owner’s expense.
(Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-
20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No.
15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No.
13-25)
§ 18-10-163. Small wind energy systems.
   (a)   Requirements. A small wind energy system or meteorological tower shall
comply with all of the following requirements.
      (1)   The small wind energy system or meteorological tower shall be
located on a lot of three acres or more, except that in a RLD, R1, R2 or R5
zone a small wind energy system or meteorological tower may not exceed one
system for each three acres of land.
      (2)   The wind turbine or meteorological tower shall be located at a
distance of at least 1.1 times the height of the tower from any property line,
non-participating structure, public road or right-of-way, or communication
lines or structures, and provide for a minimum setback of 20 feet from any lot
line for guy cables or tower supports.
      (3)   Roof-mounted turbines are permitted. All components of a roof-
mounted turbine shall meet required setbacks for the principal structure on
which it is located. Roof-mounted turbines may not be mounted on an attached or
multi-family dwelling.
      (4)   The height of a wind turbine or meteorological tower may not exceed
a height of 150 feet. The height of a roof-mounted turbine may not project more
than 35 feet from the roof surface. Total height for a small wind energy system
mounted on a wind tower is the vertical distance from the ground level to the
tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its highest point. For a small
wind energy system mounted on a building, total height is the vertical distance
from the top of the roof or parapet, to the tip of a wind generator blade when
the tip is at its highest point.
      (5)   The wind turbine or meteorological tower shall have a minimum blade
ground clearance of 15 feet.
      (6)   The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not allow step
bolts or ladder accessibility for a minimum height of 12 feet.
      (7)   The wind turbine or meteorological tower and its mounting structure
shall be painted a non-reflective, non-obtrusive color that conforms to the
environment and architecture of the community.
      (8)   The wind turbine or meteorological tower shall not be artificially
lighted, except to the extent required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
      (9)   The small wind energy system or meteorological tower shall comply
with all applicable construction codes and electrical codes and be installed in
accordance with manufacturer plans and certifications.
      (10)   The wind turbine shall not generate noise in excess of the levels
permitted for the zone under Code of Maryland Regulations 26.02.03.02B,
26.02.03.02C, and 26.02.03.02D.
      (11)   The capacity of a small wind energy system may not exceed 25 kw on
a property located in an RLD, R1, R2, or R5 zone and 100 kw in all other zones.
Energy produced by the small wind energy system shall be for the sole use of
the property owner, however, energy output from the system may be delivered to
a power grid to offset the cost of energy on site.
      (12)   Wind turbines must be approved under a small wind certification
program recognized by the Maryland Energy Administration.
      (13)   All signs are prohibited except for manufacturer or installer
identification signs and warning signs or placards.
      (14)   Meteorological towers shall be permitted under the conditions of
this section for a period not to exceed one year.
      (15)   The small wind energy system or meteorological tower may not
adversely effect an historic site, archaeological resource, or cemetery listed
on the County inventory. The placement of a wind turbine within sight of an
historic resource listed on the inventory shall mitigate any adverse visual
impact of the turbine in a manner determined by the Office of Planning and
Zoning. If a wind turbine is to be attached to the roof of an historic
structure listed on the inventory, the method of attachment must be approved by
the Office of Planning and Zoning. Approval of a rooftop wind turbine shall
require installation on a secondary facade, minimal impact to historic
materials, and be a reversible modification. Wind turbines may not be mounted
on rooftops of highly significant properties, including those listed on the
National Register of Historic Places.
      (16)   A small wind energy system or meteorological tower located within
the BWI Marshall Airport Four-Mile District shall comply with all height and
permitting requirements of the Maryland Aviation Administration.
   (b)   Removal of defective system. Any small wind energy system or
meteorological tower that is cited by administrative order of the Department of
Inspections and Permits shall be repaired by the property owner to meet
federal, State and local code requirements, or be removed, within six months of
the date of the administrative order. If the property owner fails to repair or
remove the system as required and the system remains non-operational for more
than six months, the County may pursue an action for removal of the system at
the property owner’s expense.
   (c)   Variances. A variance may not be granted for the requirements
specified in subsection (a).
(Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15;
Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 76-19;
Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21;
Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-
23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-164. Solar energy generating facility – community.
A solar energy generating facility – community shall comply with all of the
following requirements.
   (1)   The developer shall comply with the County Landscape Manual, and the
solar facility, including all equipment and solar panels, shall be enclosed by
a fence no less than seven feet in height. In the event of a conflict between
the Landscape Manual and §
17-6-504 of the Code, the provisions of §
17-6-504 of the Code shall control.
   (2)   The developer of a solar facility located on a scenic or historic road
shall provide a viewshed analysis. The solar facility may not have an adverse
impact on the scenic or historic viewshed. in this subsection, “adverse impact”
means any development that directly or indirectly would alter the road’s
environmental or historic setting, its visual and physical characteristics, or
would diminish the integrity of the scenic or historic road.
   (3)   The developer shall comply with the provisions of the County Forest
Conservation Act,
Article 17, Title 6, Subtitle 3 of this Code, regardless of any state waiver or
reduction of State forest conservation requirements for solar energy systems.
Mitigation for tree removal shall be at the ratio of 3-to-1.
   (4)   A solar facility may not be located on or within the viewshed of a
property listed on the County Inventory of Historic Resources.
   (5)   Except as required for safety or by applicable Federal, State, or
local authority, no visible light shall emanate from the solar facility from
dusk to dawn.
   (6)   Lot coverage may not exceed 80% of the net area of the site. Lot
coverage shall be calculated as the total surface area of all solar panels,
plus all impervious surfaces of any supporting or associated equipment,
including support structures. Surface area of a solar panel shall be calculated
based on the drip line around the perimeter of a panel at minimum tilt.
Impervious surface shall be calculated as the area of the foundation or base of
any component of the solar facility, including individual solar panels.
   (7)   A decommissioning plan shall be submitted to the Office of Planning
and Zoning for approval. The plan shall include a requirement for a grading
permit or standard grading plan and that all on-site equipment associated with
the solar facility shall be removed within 12 months of cessation of
operations. Decommissioning security in accordance with §
17-6-702 of this Code and equal to 125% of the decommissioning costs shall be
posted prior to commencement of the use.
   (8)   The County shall review the amount of the security every five years
and may require additional security or reduce the amount of the posted security
if it determines, in its sole discretion, that the posted security no longer
equals 125% of the decommissioning costs.
   (9)   A solar facility is presumed to cease operations if no power is
generated by the system for a period of 12 consecutive months. The owner of the
solar facility shall have 12 months after cessation of operations to dismantle
and remove the solar facility. If the owner fails to dismantle or remove the
solar facility as required, the County may complete the removal at the owner’s
expense, and shall retain all or any part of the decommissioning security which
shall become the property of the County. Any additional expense incurred by the
County, or any expenses incurred for the removal of a rooftop-mounted solar
facility, shall be collected pursuant to §
1-8-101 of the Code.
   (10)   Facilities proposed for location on properties owned or leased by the
County, sanitary landfills, or reclamation areas are exempt from the
requirements in subsection (6).
   (11)   Rooftop-mounted only facilities are not subject to the requirements
of subsections (1), (3), (6), (7), and (8).
   (12)   A variance may not be granted for the requirements specified in this
section.
   (13)   A facility that requires a Certificate of Public Convenience and
Necessity from the State Public Service Commission is not required to comply
with this section, but the conditions in this section may be the basis of any
recommendation to the Public Service Commission in accordance with § 7-207 of
the Public Utilities Article of the State Code.
(Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-
20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 104-21; Bill No.
81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 53-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No.
3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-165. Solar energy generating facility – utility scale.
   (a)   Requirements. A solar energy generating facility – utility scale shall
comply with all requirements of §
18-10-164 for a solar energy generating facility – community.
   (b)   Variance. A variance may not be granted for the requirements specified
in this section.
(Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-
20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 104-21; Bill No.
81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No.
81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-166. Stables or riding clubs.
A stable or riding club shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   A facility with up to two horses shall be located on a lot of at least
two acres, plus 20,000 square feet for each horse in excess of two horses.
   (2)   A structure enclosing a horse shall be located at least 50 feet from
any nonresidential lot line and 50 feet from any residentially zoned property
line.
   (3)   All manure shall be stored at least 50 feet from any lot line.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 15-12;
Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16;
Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 88-18; Bill No. 89-18;
Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20;
Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-
23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-
25)
§ 18-10-167. State-licensed medical clinics.
A state-licensed medical clinic shall comply with all of the following
requirements:
   (1)   The facility may not be located within 1,000 feet of a dwelling or
school, or within one mile of another State-licensed medical clinic, a plasma
center, a licensed dispensary of cannabis, or a transitional housing facility.
   (2)   Vehicular access shall be located on an arterial road or higher
classification.
   (3)   Access to the facility from the road shall be provided and the
facility may not draw vehicular traffic through local roads in surrounding
residential areas.
   (4)   The clinic shall conspicuously post “no loitering” signs in all
parking areas.
   (5)   A variance may not be granted for the requirements specified in this
section.
(Bill No. 14-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-
16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No.
76-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No.
2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill
No. 56-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill
No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-168. Storage of watercraft, covered and dry.
A covered facility for the dry storage of watercraft shall comply with all of
the following requirements.
   (1)   The combined base area of all covered dry storage structures may not
exceed:
      (i)   10,000 square feet for a one-acre lot;
      (ii)   for a lot larger than one acre, 10,000 square feet plus 1,000
square feet for each acre by which the lot exceeds one acre;
   (2)   The facility shall be located at least 25 feet from each side lot
line.
   (3)   The Office of Planning and Zoning shall designate the location of the
facility in accordance with the criteria set forth in § 18-2-403.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 15-12;
Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 14-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15;
Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 89-18;
Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20;
Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-
23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-
25)
§ 18-10-169. Storage of watercraft, outside and dry.
Outside and dry storage of watercraft shall be limited to non-motorized
watercraft except for one motorized watercraft not exceeding 12 feet in length.
(Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-170. Storage, multilevel watercraft rack.
A multilevel watercraft storage rack shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 1.5 acres above
mean high water.
   (2)   The facility shall be located at least 25 feet from each side lot
line.
   (3)   The coverage of the facility may not exceed the combined total floor
area of all covered dry storage structures.
   (4)   The Office of Planning and Zoning shall designate the location of the
facility in accordance with the criteria set forth in §
18-2-403.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 15-12;
Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 14-15; Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15;
Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 89-18;
Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20;
Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-
23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 13-
25)
§ 18-10-171. Structures, permanent, accessory to active recreational uses.
Permanent structures accessory to active recreational uses shall comply with
all of the following requirements.
   (1)   No more than 25 % of the forested area on a lot may be cleared for the
uses.
   (2)   The site shall be reforested at a ratio of one and one-half acres
planted for every acre cleared.
   (3)   The uses shall be set back at least 100 feet from any dwelling and 50
feet from all lot lines.
   (4)   The uses shall be set back at least 200 feet from any stream, river,
or waterway.
   (5)   The uses shall be subject to an approved soil conservation and water
quality plan.
   (6)   Vehicular access to the property shall be located on a collector road
or a road of a higher classification.
(Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 14-15; Bill No. 44-15;
Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17;
Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20;
Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-
22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-
24; Bill No. 13-25)
§ 18-10-172. Veterinarian clinic, large animal.
   A large animal veterinarian clinic shall comply with all of the following
requirements:
   (1)   The facility may be located on the same lot as a single-family
detached dwelling or a farm tenant house;
   (2)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least five acres;
   (3)   Overnight boarding of horses or livestock are not permitted, except as
required for medical treatment or as permitted under § 105.2.1.14.1 of the
Construction Code;
   (4)   The facility structure shall be set back at least 50 feet from
property lines;
   (5)   The facility may include an attached apartment dwelling for use by a
resident affiliated with the veterinarian clinic; and
   (6)   The facility shall be operated by at least one licensed diplomate of
the American College of Veterinary Surgeons.
(Bill No. 29-25)
§ 18-10-173. Video lottery facilities.
   (a)   Master plan for development. The video lottery facility licensee shall
provide to the Local Development Council a master plan as required by the State
Government Article, § 9-1A-31, of the State Code, and shall assist the County
in preparation of a transportation management plan that details internal
circulation systems, external access points, and pedestrian flows to and from
parking facilities.
   (b)   Requirements. A video lottery facility shall comply with all of the
following requirements.
      (1)   The facility shall comply with the locational requirements imposed
by Article XIX, § 1(c)(3)(i) of the Constitution of Maryland.
      (2)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 50 acres in a W1
– Industrial Park District or a regional commercial complex and shall be
accessible to an arterial or higher classification road.
      (3)   The facility shall comply with all applicable bulk regulations for
the zoning district in which the facility is located.
      (4)   The facility shall comply with a transportation management plan
that is approved by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
      (5)   The facility shall comply with a traffic study that assesses the
impacts of new traffic generated by the proposed use on major roads and
intersections as required by
Article 17 and that is approved by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
      (6)   The facility shall conform to an approved site development plan in
accordance with the requirements of
Article 17.
      (7)   The facility shall conform to approved plans for off-street parking
that show all designated parking areas, including handicapped spaces, bus
parking, loading, and delivery areas.
      (8)   The facility shall include lighting that illuminates all parking
areas and walkways and is focused so as to prevent glare upon surrounding
areas.
      (9)   The facility shall provide 24-hour security for the facility and
adjacent parking areas, separate from security provided by other commercial or
industrial establishments in the vicinity of the facility.
      (10)   The facility shall comply with a written plan approved by the
Planning and Zoning Officer to control loitering and conspicuously post “no
loitering” signs in all parking areas.
      (11)   The facility, including adjacent parking areas, shall be cleared
of litter and refuse daily.
      (12)   The facility shall ensure that noise from the facility does not
exceed a daytime level of 67 dba or a nighttime level of 62 dba at the lot
lines.
      (13)   The facility shall be licensed by the State and subject to State
regulation and enforcement.
   (c)   Alcoholic beverages. A video lottery facility may operate alcoholic
beverage uses as accessory to other uses in the W1 – Industrial Park District
and in a regional commercial complex subject to the requirements of § 18-10-104
and State law and regulation.
(Bill No. 82-09; Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 14-15;
Bill No. 44-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 28-16; Bill No. 30-16; Bill No. 75-16;
Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 76-19;
Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21;
Bill No. 47-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-
23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 29-
25)
§ 18-10-174. Waterman’s home commercial use.
   A waterman’s home commercial use shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
      (1)   The operator of the use shall be a resident of the lot on which the
use is located.
      (2)   The resident waterman shall have a current commercial fishing
license.
      (3)   No more than two nonresidents of the lot may be employed in the
use.
      (4)   Any use of the dwelling shall be clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of the structure as a dwelling unit and may not change the character
of the dwelling unit.
      (5)   All waterman’s equipment, including gear, shedding boxes, and crab
pots, shall be owned by a resident of the lot.
      (6)   There may not be any storage of waterman’s equipment on the pier
out of season except while loading or unloading work boats that are in wet
storage at the property.
      (7)   All waterman’s gear shall be located in an enclosed structure or
stored outside in accordance with the requirements of this title and screened
from adjacent property lines.
      (8)   Outside storage of shedding boxes shall be located in a rear or
side yard and screened from adjacent lot lines.
      (9)   Crab pots that are stored outside shall be located in a rear or
side yard, be screened from adjacent lot lines, and be clean and free of any
attached bait. Stacks of crab pots shall be limited to a height of eight feet.
The location of crab pot storage may not adversely affect the waterview of
dwellings on adjoining waterfront lots.
      (10)   The onsite sale of seafood harvested by a resident is allowed by
the resident only during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday and 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Sunday.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 2-09; Bill No. 82-09; Bill No. 39-10;
Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 8-15; Bill No. 14-15; Bill No. 44-15;
Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 75-16; Bill No. 83-16; Bill No. 17-17; Bill No. 67-17;
Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-20;
Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 47-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No. 104-
21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-
24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 5-25; Bill No. 29-25)
§ 18-10-175. Workforce housing.
   Wholesale trade, warehousing, and storage establishments in the BWI/Fort
Meade Growth Area shall comply with all of the following requirements.
      (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot or contiguous lots that
total at least 25 acres.
      (2)   The facility shall comply with all applicable bulk regulations for
the zoning district in which the facility is located, except that the bulk
regulations contained in the following chart shall be met:
 
Minimum setbacks for principal structures:
   Front lot line                     50 feet
   Side lot line                      30 feet
   Rear lot line                      30 feet
   Freeway                            100 feet
   Divided principal arterial road    60 feet
   Any other public road or right-of-w50 feet
 
      (3)   A variance may not be granted that reduces the minimum setback
requirements specified in subsection (2).
      (4)   The lot or lots on which the facility is located may not include
residential dwelling units.
      (5)   Outside storage is permitted as an accessory use, provided no more
than 15% of the total allowed lot coverage is used for outside storage.
      (6)   The lot or lots comprising the facility shall be located in the
BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area, as shown on the official map adopted by the County
Council entitled “BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area, 2016”.
(Bill No. 84-17; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-
20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 47-21; Bill No.
103-21; Bill No. 104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill
No. 77-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 29-25)
§ 18-10-176. Workforce housing.
   Workforce housing shall comply with all of the following requirements.
      (1)   The project shall consist of dwelling units of any type or mixture
and requirements applicable to dwellings in commercial and mixed use zoning
districts do not apply.
      (2)   The property shall be encumbered by recorded deed restrictions that
require:
         (i)   the units be restricted to occupancy by eligible households
under this section for at least 10 years for home ownership units and at least
30 years for rental units, except that the deed restriction may be 15 years for
“lease to purchase” rental units;
         (ii)   1.   Except as provided in item 2:
               A.   at least 40% of home ownership units be occupied by a
household with an income that does not exceed 100% of the median income
adjusted for household size for the Baltimore Primary Metropolitan Statistical
Area, as defined and published annually by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development; and
               B.   at least 60% of rental units be occupied by a household
with an income that does not exceed 60% of the median income adjusted for
household size for the Baltimore Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area, as
defined and published annually by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development;
            2.   For workforce housing located in an R5 or R10 zoning district
that does not have direct vehicular access to a collector or higher
classification road:
               A.   at least 25% of home ownership units be occupied by a
household with an income that does not exceed 100% of the median income
adjusted for household size for the Baltimore Primary Metropolitan Statistical
Area, as defined and published annually by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development; and
               B.   at least 25% of rental units be occupied by a household
with an income that does not exceed 60% of the median income adjusted for
household size for the Baltimore Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area, as
defined and published annually by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development;
         (iii)   the initial transfer of a home ownership unit to the original
buyer of that unit shall be accompanied by a certification from Anne Arundel
County or its designee that the buyer’s household income does not exceed the
maximum allowed for that unit; and
         (iv)   if the original buyer of a home ownership unit transfers title
to that unit within 10 years, the transfer shall be accompanied by a
certification from Anne Arundel County or its designee that the transferee’s
household income does not exceed the maximum allowed for that unit.
      (3)   (i)   Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, maximum
density shall be 22 dwelling units per acre.
         (ii)   For workforce housing in an R5 zoning district that does not
have direct vehicular access to a collector or higher classification road, the
maximum density shall be 10 dwelling units per acre.
         (iii)   For workforce housing in an R10 zoning district that does not
have direct vehicular access to a collector or higher classification road, the
maximum density shall be 15 dwelling units per acre.
      (4)   (i)   Except as provided in subparagraph (ii), maximum coverage by
structures and parking may not exceed 65% of the gross area of the lot.
         (ii)   In R15, commercial, and industrial zoning districts, maximum
coverage by structures and parking may not exceed 80% of the gross area of the
lot.
      (5)   (i)   For multifamily dwellings, setbacks and height requirements
shall be governed by the bulk regulations for R22 zoning districts.
         (ii)   For townhouses, setbacks and height requirements shall be
governed by §
18-10-128.
         (iii)   For all other dwelling types, setbacks and height requirements
shall be governed by the bulk regulations applicable under this Code.
      (6)   Workforce housing shall be served by public water and sewer.
      (7)   Direct vehicular access shall be located on a collector or higher
classification road, except for workforce housing in an R5 or R10 district that
meets the conditions in this section for workforce housing that does not have
direct vehicular access to a collector or higher classification road.
      (8)   The initial allowable maximum rental rates for rental units shall
be established by the developer and approved by Anne Arundel County or its
designee after obtaining and considering information and data dealing with
current general market and economic conditions and the current minimum rental
rates of privately produced market priced housing.
(Bill No. 54-19; Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 16-20; Bill No. 68-20; Bill No. 69-
20; Bill No. 90-20; Bill No. 2-21; Bill No. 47-21; Bill No. 103-21; Bill No.
104-21; Bill No. 81-22; Bill No. 15-23; Bill No. 62-23; Bill No. 77-23; Bill
No. 83-23; Bill No. 3-24; Bill No. 19-24; Bill No. 81-24; Bill No. 20-25; Bill
No. 29-25)
TITLE 11. REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
Section
   
18-11-101.   Airports and airfields.
   
18-11-102.   Amusement parks.
   
18-11-103.   Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics.
   
18-11-104.   Assisted living facilities.
   
18-11-105.   Automobile and truck dismantling and recycling facilities.
   
18-11-106.   Automobile gasoline stations.
   
18-11-107.   Automobile towing facilities in conjunction with automobile
gasoline stations.
   
18-11-108.   Bed and breakfast inns.
   
18-11-109.   Campgrounds, commercial recreational.
   
18-11-110.   Cement manufacturing.
   
18-11-111.   Cemeteries.
   
18-11-112.   Child care centers other than as a home occupation.
   
18-11-113.   Clay and borrow pits and sand and gravel operations.
   
18-11-114.   Coke and coke products manufacturing.
   
18-11-115.   (Reserved).
   
18-11-116.   Commercial recreational facilities.
   
18-11-117.   Commercial telecommunication facilities.
   
18-11-118.   Conference retreat facilities.
   
18-11-119.   Conversion of existing single-family detached dwellings to duplex
dwellings.
   
18-11-120.   Country clubs, private clubs, and service and nonprofit charitable
organizations with 125 or more onsite parking spaces.
   
18-11-121.   Dance halls.
   
18-11-122.   Drive-in theaters.
   
18-11-123.   Eating disorder treatment facility.
   
18-11-124.   Farm or agricultural heritage site special event, 16 to 30 annual
events.
   
18-11-125.   Fertilizer manufacturing.
   
18-11-126.   Festival, renaissance.
   
18-11-127.   Heliports.
   
18-11-128.   Hotels and motels.
   
18-11-129.   Kennels, commercial.
   
18-11-130.   Landfills, rubble and land-clearing debris landfills.
   
18-11-131.   Landscaping and tree contracting.
   
18-11-132.   Landscaping and tree contracting with accessory recycling of logs
into firewood.
   
18-11-133.   Mobile home parks.
   
18-11-134.   Natural wood waste recycling facilities.
   
18-11-135.   Nursing homes.
   
18-11-136.   Ore storage.
   
18-11-137.   Pawnshops.
   
18-11-138.   Petroleum products, storage for retail sale.
   
18-11-139.   Petroleum products, storage onsite in excess of 1,000,000 gallons
for use by W3 district uses or public utilities.
   
18-11-140.   Piers and launching ramps, community.
   
18-11-141.   Planned unit developments.
   
18-11-142.   Plasma centers.
   
18-11-143.   Public utility uses.
   
18-11-144.   Race tracks for horses.
   
18-11-145.   Race tracks other than horse race tracks.
   
18-11-146.   Radio, television, or industrial testing towers.
   
18-11-147.   Recyclables recovery facilities.
   
18-11-148.   Religious facilities with 300 or more onsite parking spaces.
   
18-11-149.   Rendering plants.
   
18-11-150.   Rifle, pistol, skeet, and archery ranges, indoor.
   
18-11-151.   Rifle, pistol, skeet, and archery ranges, outdoor.
   
18-11-152.   Rubble processing facilities.
   
18-11-153.   Schools, private academic and public charter, with 125 or more
onsite parking spaces.
   
18-11-154.   Self-service storage facilities.
   
18-11-155.   Small wind energy systems.
   
18-11-156.   Solar energy generating facility – community.
   
18-11-157.   Solar energy generating facility – utility scale.
   
18-11-158.   Solid waste transfer stations.
   
18-11-159.   Stadiums, commercial.
   
18-11-160.   Storage, bulk for agricultural products.
   
18-11-161.   Storage of watercraft, covered and wet.
   
18-11-162.   Storage of watercraft, covered and dry.
   
18-11-163.   Structures, permanent, accessory to active recreational uses.
   
18-11-164.   Storage of watercraft, multilevel watercraft rack.
   
18-11-165.   Truck and trailer rental facilities in conjunction with automobile
gasoline stations.
Attorney’s note – Special exception uses shall comply with the requirements of
this title and with the requirements of the district in which the use is
located to the extent not inconsistent with this title. Special exceptions
relating to nonconforming uses are governed by §
18-15-103.
Attorney’s note – In 2019 the Maryland Court of Appeals held that state law
preempts by implication local zoning law with respect to solar energy
generating systems that require a certificate of public convenience and
necessity issued by the Maryland Public Service Commission, but cautioned that
local zoning law should still receive due consideration by the Public Service
Commission in rendering its ultimate decision, Board of County Commissioners of
Washington County v. Perennial Solar, 464 Md. 610, 644–45 (2019).
§ 18-11-101. Airports and airfields.
An airport or airfield shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity
of a large park or other open area or body of water.
   (2)   Landing, takeoff, and utility areas used by aircraft shall have a
dustproof surface.
   (3)   A structure or area used for servicing aircraft shall be located at
least 200 feet from all lot lines and 1,000 feet from a public or private
institution.
   (4)   Approach and departure paths may not be located over a residential
area, an institutional use, or a densely populated area.
   (5)   The day-night noise level may not exceed 70 Ldn at the lot lines.
   (6)   Areas used by aircraft shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any
residentially zoned property on the approach and departure ends of the runway.
   (7)   Parking may not be located within 100 feet of a lot line.
   (8)   The facility shall be surrounded by fencing at least six feet high
with gates to limit access to the area.
   (9)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06)
§ 18-11-102. Amusement parks.
An amusement park shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 50 acres.
   (2)   The facility shall have at least 10 rides, amusements, or amusement
activities that are located at least 50 feet from all lot lines.
   (3)   The facility shall be located on and have access to an arterial road,
and the exit from a freeway shall be located no more than one-half mile from
the closest public entrance into the facility.
   (4)   Separate vehicular access shall be provided in locations that are at
least 50 feet from any public road intersection.
   (5)   The facility shall be located at least 2,000 feet from all
residentially zoned property and one mile from the mean high water line of any
tidal waterway.
   (6)   Go-cart tracks, oval tracks, or closed circuit tracks for go-carts,
race cars, or other motorized vehicles shall be no more than one-quarter mile
in length, may occupy no more than 10% of the total area of the park, shall be
limited to vehicles owned by the owner of the park or a single concessionaire,
and shall utilize vehicles that are no more than six horsepower per vehicle.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-11-103. Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics.
An animal hospital or veterinary clinic shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   All structures, enclosed coops, and enclosed runs for the housing or
shelter of animals and fowl shall be located at least 50 feet from
residentially zoned property.
   (2)   Unenclosed coops and runs shall be located at least 100 feet from
residentially zoned property.
   (3)   The housing of animals may not be located in a required setback.
   (4)   The facility may not be noxious, offensive, or otherwise objectionable
to surrounding residential uses.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-11-104. Assisted living facilities.
An assisted living facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   In RLD districts, the facility shall be located on a lot of at least
10 acres. In R1 and R2 districts, the facility shall be located on a lot of at
least 10 acres, except that a facility that abuts a collector or higher
classification road may be located on a lot of at least five acres. In other
districts, the facility shall be located on a lot of at least five acres. In
all districts, if the facility abuts a nursing home or adult independent
dwelling units, whether or not owned by the same entity, the minimum lot size
may be reduced by 50%.
   (2)   For an assisted living facility in an RLD district:
      (i)   the property in the RLD district shall abut property that is zoned
C2 or C3 and that will be part of the assisted living facility; and
      (ii)   the C2 or C3 property comprising part of the facility shall be
served by public water and sewer.
   (3)   For an assisted living facility that consists of land located outside
the critical area in more than one zoning district:
      (i)   provisions concerning the number of adult independent dwelling
units allowed in a given area of land shall be applied in the aggregate rather
than separately to the individual zoning districts, lots or sites;
      (ii)   provisions concerning public improvements, such as public sewer
and water connections, roads, and sidewalks, shall be applied to the assisted
living facility in its entirety; and
      (iii)   open area requirements shall be calculated for the entire area of
the assisted living facility;
   (4)   The developer shall demonstrate unified control of the entire assisted
living facility and the capability to provide for completion and continuous
operation and maintenance of the facility.
   (5)   An assisted living facility may be operated in conjunction with a
nursing home or with adult independent dwelling units or both, whether or not
owned by the same entity. The nursing home or adult independent dwelling units
may be located on the same lot as the assisted living facility or on one or
more abutting lots. If located on one or more abutting lots, the provisions of
subsection (11) relating to setbacks do not apply to the lot lines that are
shared by such abutting lots.
   (6)   Assisted care units shall be provided in a multifamily structure and
may be provided in duplex dwelling units, stacked townhouse dwelling units, and
townhouse dwelling units, whether or not allowed in the zoning district in
which the facility is located. All assisted care units shall be located on the
same lot. A multifamily structure shall contain a centrally located group
dining facility.
   (7)   Comprehensive care units may be provided.
   (8)   No more than two dwelling units for every 100 dwelling units may be
devoted to temporary use for guests or family members of residents.
   (9)   The permitted uses in a C1 district are allowed in the facility if:
      (i)   the uses are centrally located for the use and benefit of the
residents and their guests in structures that are architecturally compatible
with the residential portion of the assisted living facility; and
      (ii)   the floor area of the uses does not exceed 10% of the floor area
of the units.
   (10)   A pedestrian circulation system interconnecting all parts of the
facility shall be provided.
   (11)   The bulk regulations contained in the following chart shall be met
and are the only bulk regulations applicable to an assisted living facility:
Minimum setbacks from all lot lines    50 feet
                                       The height allowed in the zoning
                                       district in which the facility is
Maximum height limitations for         located, except that (1) the facility
principal structures on lots less than may exceed that height by 10 feet if all
20 acres                               setbacks are increased by two feet for
                                       each foot of excess height, and (2)
                                       duplex, stacked townhouse, and townhouse
                                       dwellings are limited to one story
                                       Ten additional feet above the height
Maximum height limitations for         allowed in the zoning district in which
principal structures on lots of at     the facility is located; and semi-
least 20 acres                         detached and townhouse dwellings are
                                       limited to one story
                                       60% in RLD, R1, R2, and R5 districts and
                                       50% in R10, R15, and R22 districts, with
Open area                              all front yards being open area and with
                                       at least 10% of the open area devoted to
                                       recreational area
                                       One unit per acre in an RLD district; 3
                                       units per acre in an R1 district; 6
Maximum density for adult independent  units per acre in an R2 district; 8
dwelling units                         units per acre in an R5 district; and in
                                       all other districts in accordance with
                                       the density allowed in the district in
                                       which the facility is located
                                       No increase in the density allowed in
                                       the RLD district; 6 units per acre in
Maximum density for all dwelling units the R1 and R2 districts; 8 units per
other than multifamily dwellings and   acre in an R5 district; and in all other
adult independent dwelling units       districts in accordance with the density
                                       allowed in the district in which the
                                       facility is located
Maximum square footage for duplex,
stacked townhouse, and townhouse       1,250 square feet
dwellings
Public sewer                           Required
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 45-09; Bill No. 21-16; Bill No. 49-21;
Bill No. 72-24; Bill No. 16-25)
§ 18-11-105. Automobile and truck dismantling and recycling facilities.
An automobile and truck dismantling and recycling facility shall comply with
all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least two acres.
   (2)   All dismantling and recycling shall be done within a structure at the
facility, and the facility shall have at least 8,000 square feet of activity
under cover. The operation may include the sale of parts from dismantled motor
vehicles.
   (3)   Hulls of vehicles that are automotive dismantling and recycling by-
products may not exceed 500 at any time.
   (4)   The area used to store the remains of dismantled motor vehicles that
have no parts value except as scrap may not exceed one-half of the area
provided for the storage of motor vehicles that are not dismantled.
   (5)   A storage area for vehicles waiting to be dismantled shall have no
more than 250 vehicles per acre per level.
   (6)   Vehicles may be stacked no higher than two levels and only on racks
designed specifically to store vehicles. Above ground storage racks higher than
two levels may be used for the storage of parts from dismantled vehicles.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-11-106. Automobile gasoline stations.
An automobile gasoline station shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 22,500 square feet
with at least 150 feet of frontage along each road.
   (2)   The facility may not be located at the intersection of local roads.
   (3)   Service bays shall be oriented to the rear or side lot lines.
   (4)   Structures shall be located at least 40 feet from any road right-of-
way, at least 25 feet from any other structure, and at least 10 feet from any
lot line.
   (5)   Pumps shall be located at least 25 feet from any road right-of-way.
Pump islands shall be located at least 20 feet apart. Pumps and pump islands
shall be located at least 25 feet from a structure not used primarily as an
automobile gasoline station.
   (6)   A canopy over a pump island may not project within 15 feet from a road
right-of- way.
   (7)   Driveways shall be at least 20 feet from each side or rear lot line,
at least 50 feet from any intersecting road right-of-way, and at least 15 feet
and no more than 45 feet wide.
   (8)   Obstructions that adversely affect visibility at a station driveway
are prohibited.
   (9)   The facility may include a convenience store operation.
   (10)   The facility may include a repair center, but a repair center shall
be limited to minor work to be completed within three days after the vehicle is
dropped off for service.
   (11)   The facility may include a car wash.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 12-12)
§ 18-11-107. Automobile towing facilities in conjunction with automobile
gasoline stations.
An automobile towing facility in conjunction with an automobile gasoline
station shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   Inoperable vehicles may not be stored on the lot for more than 90
days, and the owner or operator of the facility shall maintain a register
listing the owner of each vehicle, the date of arrival and departure of the
vehicle, and the name and address of the owner’s insurance company.
   (2)   Dismantling or demolition of vehicles is prohibited.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-11-108. Bed and breakfast inns.
A bed and breakfast inn shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The inn shall be an owner or manager occupied single-family detached
dwelling located on a lot of at least one acre.
   (2)   The inn shall contain at least four but no more than 12 guest rooms
for the lodging of guests for no more than 14 consecutive days. The owner shall
maintain a reservation log of the arrival and departure dates of all guests for
inspection by the Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (3)   On a waterfront lot, one boat slip may be provided for each guest room
with a maximum of one boat slip for every three guest rooms.
   (4)   Guest rooms may not contain any cooking facilities, and food service
shall be provided only for guests and only in a group dining area of the
dwelling.
   (5)   Exterior alterations may not be made for the purpose of providing the
inn unless necessary to ensure the safety of the structure.
   (6)   If the lot is zoned R1, R2, or R5, it shall be located within the area
shown on the official map adopted by the County Council entitled “Bed &
Breakfast Homes and Bed & Breakfast Inns in R1, R2, and R5 Zoning Districts”,
dated August, 2005, adopted by Bill No. 55-05.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 55-05; Bill No. 65-17)
Editor’s note – A small-scale representation of the official map adopted by
Bill No. 55-05 is included as an appendix to this article.
§ 18-11-109. Campgrounds, commercial recreational.
A commercial recreational campground shall comply with all of the following
requirements:
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 10 acres.
   (2)   An individual or group campsite may not be located on land having a
slope of more than 3%.
   (3)   There may be no more than 15 individual campsites per acre. An
individual campsite shall have at least 1,600 square feet and a parking space,
fireplace, picnic table, and tent or trailer space. There shall be one service
structure for every 15 individual campsites, and the walking distance from the
individual campsites to the service structure may be no more than 350 feet.
   (4)   There may be no more than four group camping sites per acre. The
density for each group camping site may not exceed 25 persons. There shall be
one service structure for every four group camping sites.
   (5)   A picnic area may not be located on land having a slope of more than
10%. The density of a picnic area may not exceed 60 persons per acre.
   (6)   A swimming area shall have at least 75 square feet of beach area per
campsite. The slope for underwater development in a swimming area may be no
more than 6%, and the slope for shore development in a swimming area may be no
more than 10%.
   (7)   The owner or operator of the facility shall maintain a register
listing each camper’s name, date of arrival, and date of departure.
   (8)   An individual or group campsite may not be used by the same camper for
more than a continuous 30-day period within a six-month period.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-11-110. Cement manufacturing.
A cement manufacturing facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 50 acres.
   (2)   Each use except parking shall be located at least 300 feet from a
freeway and 500 feet from any residentially zoned property.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-11-111. Cemeteries.
A cemetery shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   A cemetery shall be located on a lot of at least 20 acres.
   (2)   A structure used for the interment of a body or other remains of a
person, including a mausoleum, vault, or columbarium, shall be located at least
80 feet from any road and 55 feet from all lot lines.
   (3)   A grave or burial lot shall be located at least 30 feet from any road
bounding the cemetery and at least 25 feet from all lot lines.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-11-112. Child care centers other than as a home occupation.
A child care center other than as a home occupation shall comply with all of
the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least one acre for a
center with less than 60 children and on a lot of at least two acres for a
center with 60 children or more.
   (2)   Onsite circulation and parking areas shall be designed to minimize
vehicular and pedestrian conflicts and to provide safe areas for the dropping
off and picking up of passengers.
   (3)   Outdoor play areas or activity areas shall be fenced and located to
the side or rear of the principal structure. The fence shall comply with the
side and rear setbacks for accessory structures as provided in the bulk
regulations of the residential district in which the child care facility is to
be located.
   (4)   The activities on the property shall be located in a manner to shield
surrounding residential property from the effects of noise, hazards, or other
offensive conditions.
   (5)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
   (6)   A facility located in a residential zoning district may not have an
entrance on a minor arterial road or a road of higher classification unless the
entrance to the center is at least 500 feet from the entrance to a subdivision
or commercial property.
   (7)   A special exception granted under this section and in use as of
January 6, 2014 shall be governed by the law in effect as of that date.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06; Bill No. 7-14)
§ 18-11-113. Clay and borrow pits and sand and gravel operations.
A clay and borrow pit or a sand and gravel operation shall comply with all of
the following requirements.
   (1)   All vehicular access to the site shall be provided from a collector
road, an arterial road, a freeway, or a local road that serves only
industrially zoned or commercially zoned property between the facility entrance
and the first intersecting collector road, arterial road, or freeway in all
directions.
   (2)   The extraction and removal operation may not be noxious, offensive, or
otherwise objectionable to surrounding land uses.
   (3)   All significant archaeological sites shall be identified and preserved
under the supervision of the Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (4)   The active operation shall be surrounded by fencing at least six feet
high with gates to limit access to the area.
   (5)   Space on the site shall be adequate so that trucks using the facility
are not stopped or parked on a road right-of-way.
   (6)   Except in a W3 district, the use of machinery in the excavation area
shall be limited to that necessary to extract, screen, wash, and transport
materials generated onsite and all material shall be removed from the
excavation area to a processing site for any additional processing.
   (7)   Except in a W3 district, a permanent legible sign approved by the
Office of Planning and Zoning measuring at least four feet by eight feet shall
be posted and maintained along each public road abutting the property or, if
the property does not abut a public road, one or more signs posted in locations
that can be seen by the public. The sign or signs shall state that the property
has been approved for a clay and borrow pit or sand and gravel operation, the
special exception case number, the applicant’s name, and the name and telephone
number of the operator.
   (8)   Reclamation activity for a distance of 1,000 feet from undisturbed
areas may not increase the site grade above the grade of the adjacent
undisturbed areas.
   (9)   Offsite materials brought to the site of an operation other than for
construction of a berm or for reclamation shall be restricted to the processing
site.
   (10)   Except in a W3 district, the hours of operation in an excavation area
shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
   (11)   Additional rights-of-way for widening or extension of existing roads
shall be dedicated and deeded, as appropriate, if requested by the Department
of Public Works or the State Highway Administration.
   (12)   County inspectors shall be allowed to enter onto the site during
normal business hours to ensure compliance with the terms of any special
exception and the requirements of this section.
   (13)   The operation shall be at least 1,000 feet from any dwelling other
than a dwelling located on the site of the operation that is otherwise
permitted by law, except that the operation is allowed within 1,000 feet of a
dwelling if:
      (i)   the sound level at all lot lines does not exceed an average of 55
dBA and a peak of 65 dBA;
      (ii)   the operation is totally obscured from the sight of the affected
dwelling at the highest normally accessible location of the dwelling to a
maximum height of 30 feet above grade but, during the times set forth in
subsection (10), the operation shall be obscured to the extent practical;
      (iii)   berms are used for sight obstruction and noise abatement to the
extent feasible and, if not feasible, an acceptable alternative is provided;
the berms are constructed with processed fill, consisting of rock and similar
irreducible material that does not permit the formation of voids into which
overlaying soils may be washed, and topsoil intermittently layered with non-
organic soil; at least 12 inches of soil covers all rock or irreducible
material that is larger than eight inches; and the berms are stabilized with
suitable vegetation;
      (iv)   the excavation does not exceed a depth of 50 feet below the
existing surrounding grade with angle of repose maintained during the
excavation and the site is graded or benched to ensure safety at all times;
      (v)   the excavation and any noise abatement method are located at least
300 feet from the affected dwelling and at least 100 feet from the lot line,
but the distance may be reduced if a temporary easement is obtained from the
affected property owner and the easement for the permitted time frame is
contained in the special exception and approved by the County Office of Law;
      (vi)   stabilization of the excavation area is accomplished with a cover
material capable of supporting long-lived vegetation;
      (vii)   reclamation is performed simultaneously with the excavation
operation and completed within two years after the excavation operation has
ceased; and
      (viii)   work ceases immediately for a violation of this subsection or
any conditions imposed by the Administrative Hearing Officer and, if there are
three violations in a 12-month period, the portion of the special exception
that allows work in the 1,000-foot area shall be rescinded and all reclamation
shall be completed within 12 months.
   (14)   The facility may incorporate a processing site for the stockpiling
and processing of material generated onsite and offsite if all of the following
requirements are met.
      (i)   Except in a W3 district, the processing site shall be at least 50
acres; material generated offsite and used for processing with onsite material
in any 12-month period may not exceed 45% of the material generated onsite in
the same period; material generated offsite may be used only for blending with
material generated onsite; the use of machinery shall be limited to that
necessary in the production of finished sand and gravel products from materials
allowed under this subsection; hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday; the time frame for the operation of the
processing site may not exceed 25 years; and a crusher or similar reduction
equipment is prohibited.
      (ii)   All stationary equipment and stockpiles shall be located at least
1,000 feet from a dwelling other than an onsite dwelling and at least 300 feet
from a road other than an internal road used exclusively for onsite operations.
      (iii)   Weight scales shall be operational at all processing sites.
   (15)   A maximum time period for operation of the facility shall be
established as part of the special exception approval and may not be renewed.
   (16)   The site shall be cleared of litter and scattered refuse daily.
   (17)   There shall be a 50-foot natural buffer between the operation and
nontidal wetlands.
   (18)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
   (19)   Combustion ash, including bottom ash and fly ash, may not be used as
fill in reclamation of a clay and borrow pit or a sand and gravel operation.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06; Bill No. 64-07)
§ 18-11-114. Coke and coke products manufacturing.
A facility for coke and coke products manufacturing shall comply with all of
the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 50 acres.
   (2)   Each use except parking shall be located at least 300 feet from a
freeway and 1,000 feet from any residentially zoned property.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-11-115. (Reserved).
§ 18-11-116. Commercial recreational facilities.
A commercial recreational facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least two acres.
   (2)   Activities shall be located in a manner to shield surrounding
residential property from the effects of noise, hazards, or other offensive
conditions.
   (3)   Vehicular access to the property shall be located on an arterial road
or a road of a higher classification.
   (4)   Activities that include motorcycles, motorized dirtbikes, go-carts,
and similar vehicles are not allowed.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-11-117. Commercial telecommunication facilities.
A commercial telecommunication facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   A principal structure permanently located on the ground shall be a
monopole unless the principal structure is located on land owned by a
governmental entity or a volunteer fire company.
   (2)   A structure permanently located on the ground shall be located at
least 200 feet or one foot for each foot of height, whichever is greater, from
the lot line of a:
      (i)   property located in a residential district;
      (ii)   residentially occupied property;
      (iii)   school;
      (iv)   public park; or
      (v)   platted open space or open area;
   (3)   The height of a structure permanently located on the ground may not
exceed:
      (i)   for one provider, 100 feet, or 130 feet for a private facility
located on government-owned land; and
      (ii)   for two or more providers, 140 feet, or 170 feet for a private
facility located on government-owned land.
   (4)   The applicant shall provide affirmative proof in a detailed sworn
statement that all potential commercially zoned sites within 2,500 feet of the
proposed site have been exhausted, and the statement shall include:
      (i)   the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of
commercially zoned property within a 2,500 foot radius of the proposed site;
      (ii)   the reasons why commercially zoned property within a 2,500 foot
radius of the proposed site is not suitable, including specific statements as
to whether the applicant’s use is compatible with other uses of the site, the
property owner will allow use of the site, and the maximum tower height
accommodated by the site is suitable for the applicant’s use.
   (5)   The applicant shall provide affirmative proof in a detailed sworn
statement that all attempts to co-locate the proposed commercial
telecommunication facility on the five geographically closest commercial
telecommunication facilities have been exhausted, and the statement shall
include:
      (i)   the addresses or descriptive locations of the five geographically
closest commercial telecommunication facilities;
      (ii)   the addresses or descriptive locations and a map of the
applicant’s existing or approved commercial telecommunications facilities
within five miles of the proposed telecommunications facility;
      (iii)   the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owners and
operators of the five geographically closest commercial telecommunication
facilities; and
      (iv)   the reasons why the five geographically closest commercial
telecommunication facilities are not suitable for co-location, including
specific statements as to whether:
            1.   the location, height, or nature of the facility would make it
unsuitable for the applicant’s needs;
            2.   physical, electromagnetic, or other interference would make
the commercial telecommunication facility unsuitable for the applicant’s needs;
            3.   the applicant’s use of the commercial telecommunication
facility would interfere with other users;
            4.   structurally improving the facility for the applicant’s use
would cost more than 50% of the facility’s original cost; and
            5.   adding the applicant’s use to the facility would make the
facility taller than would be allowed on the site.
   (6)   In addition to meeting the requirements of subsections (2), (3) and
(5), the height of a commercial telecommunication facility that is permanently
located on the ground in MB, MC, and OS districts may not exceed:
      (i)   for one provider, 130 feet, or 160 feet for a private facility
located on government-owned land;
      (ii)   for two providers, 170 feet, or 200 feet for a private facility
located on government-owned land;
      (iii)   for three providers, 210 feet, or 240 feet for a private facility
located on government-owned land; and
      (iv)   for four or more providers, 250 feet.
   (7)   In addition to meeting the requirements of subsections (2), (3), (5),
and (6), a commercial telecommunication facility that is permanently located on
the ground in an OS district may not:
      (i)   exceed one facility for each 20 acres of land; and
      (ii)   be constructed to hold less than three providers.
   (8)   The facility shall meet the requirements of §
18-10-118(2) through (12).
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 10-11; Bill No. 93-15; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-118. Conference retreat facilities.
A conference retreat facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 50 acres.
   (2)   Each building shall be located at least 100 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
   (3)   Vehicular access shall be located on an arterial road or a road of a
higher classification.
   (4)   One guest room per acre is allowed if the floor area of the guest
rooms does not exceed 40% of the floor area of all enclosed conference areas.
   (5)   Commercial deliveries and services, including trash collection, shall
be limited to the hours of 6:00 am to 6:00 pm.
   (6)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06)
§ 18-11-119. Conversion of existing single-family detached dwellings to duplex
dwellings.
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling to a duplex
dwelling shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The structure to be converted shall have been in existence as a
single-family dwelling for at least five years before the filing of an
application for a special exception.
   (2)   A converted dwelling unit shall have at least two rooms in addition to
a kitchen and bathroom.
   (3)   The lot on which the structure is located shall be at least 14,000
square feet.
   (4)   The lot is served by public water and public sewer.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05)
§ 18-11-120. Country clubs, private clubs, and service and nonprofit charitable
organizations with 125 or more onsite parking spaces.
A country club, private club, or service and nonprofit charitable organization
with 125 or more onsite parking spaces shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   No more than 25% of the net area of the lot may be covered by
structures and onsite parking.
   (2)   Vehicular access to the property shall be located on an arterial road
or a road of a higher classification.
   (3)   Sufficient access to the use shall be provided to avoid congestion of
roads in adjacent residential areas.
   (4)   Each structure shall be located at least 100 feet from any lot line.
   (5)   Required onsite parking may not be located in a required setback.
   (6)   The activities on the property shall be located in a manner to shield
surrounding residential property from the effects of noise, hazards, or other
offensive conditions.
   (7)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06)
§ 18-11-121. Dance halls.
A dance hall shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located at least 1,000 feet in a straight line
from entry to entry from any religious facility, school, library, park, or
recreation area, except that when measuring distance from a public park, the
distance shall be measured from the entry of the dance hall to the lot line of
the park.
   (2)   A written plan to control loitering shall be approved by the
Administrative Hearing Officer, and “No Loitering” signs shall be conspicuously
posted in all parking areas.
   (3)   Patrons shall be prohibited from bringing food or beverages into the
facility.
   (4)   The hours of operation shall be limited to 12:00 noon to 2:00 a.m.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-11-122. Drive-in theaters.
A drive-in theater shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a minor arterial road or a collector
road within one- quarter mile of a freeway or arterial road.
   (2)   Sufficient access shall be provided to avoid congestion of surrounding
roads. Entrances and exits shall be provided at least 150 feet apart and at
least 50 feet from any street intersection.
   (3)   Traffic within the facility shall be one-way only.
   (4)   The facility shall be located at least 200 feet from any residentially
zoned property.
   (5)   Theater screens may not face a freeway or be visible from outside the
facility.
   (6)   Individual loudspeakers shall be provided for each vehicle, and
central loudspeakers are prohibited.
   (7)   Each exit, aisle, and passageway shall be adequately lighted when the
facility is open.
   (8)   Any accessory amusement area, kiddyland, or refreshment stand or booth
shall be for patrons of the facility only.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-11-123. Eating disorder treatment facility.
An eating disorder treatment facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located within one half mile of a principal
arterial road.
   (2)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least four acres.
   (3)   Structures shall be located at least 50 feet from the front and rear
lot lines and 20 feet from the side lot lines.
   (4)   The facility may not have more than 100 eating disorder treatment
units.
   (5)   Maximum coverage by structures and parking may not exceed 60% of the
gross area of the lot.
   (6)   No off-site parking on public streets shall be permitted.
   (7)   The floor area of each eating disorder treatment unit shall be limited
to not more than 1,000 square feet.
   (8)   Any source of potential nuisance, including a laundry operation, power
plant, restaurant, cafeteria, kitchen, unloading area for supplies and food,
garbage loading area, or incinerator shall be located in a manner to shield
surrounding residential property from the effects of noise, light, hazards, and
other offensive conditions.
(Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-124. Farm or agricultural heritage site special event, 16 to 30 annual
events.
A farm or agricultural heritage site special event, 16 to 30 annual events,
shall comply with the following requirements.
   (1)   The minimum lot size is 10 acres.
   (2)   Onsite circulation and parking areas shall be designed to minimize
vehicular and pedestrian conflicts.
   (3)   Any outdoor assembly areas shall be located and designed to shield
surrounding residential properties from the effects of noise, hazards, or other
offensive conditions and shall be screened from adjacent residential
properties.
   (4)   Maximum capacity may not exceed 200 attendees.
   (5)   No more than 30 farm or agricultural heritage site special events may
be held on the same property within a 12-month period.
   (6)   Operation hours shall be restricted to between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m., Sunday through Thursday; and between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Friday and
Saturday.
   (7)   Each farm or agricultural heritage site special event shall be no
longer than one day.
   (8)   Special event activities shall occur outdoors, unless the use of any
structures or tents is in accordance with the Building Code.
   (9)   A farm or agricultural heritage site special event shall be accessory
and not the principal use on the farm or agricultural heritage site.
   (10)   The owner has owned the property for the immediately preceding two
years and has been engaged in active farming for the immediately preceding two
years.
   (11)   For property in the critical area, provisions of this Code relating
to lot coverage and limits on clearing apply, and include access, parking
regardless of surface, temporary structures, temporary tents, and temporary
pavement surfaces.
   (12)   For property in the critical area, no new lot coverage, including for
access or parking, may be added in the buffer to accommodate the event.
(Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 57-24; Bill No. 72-24)
Editor’s note – Section 3 of Bill No. 69-20 requires the Office of Planning and
Zoning to provide a report to the County Council, on or before January 1 of
each year through 2027, on farm or agricultural heritage site special events
and farm or agricultural site stays.
§ 18-11-125. Fertilizer manufacturing.
A facility for fertilizer manufacturing shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 10 acres.
   (2)   Each use except parking shall be located at least 300 feet from a
freeway and 1,000 feet from any residentially zoned property.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-126. Festival, renaissance.
A renaissance festival shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 150 acres.
   (2)   Access shall be provided directly from an arterial road.
   (3)   The Administrative Hearing Officer shall limit the duration of the use
to a maximum number of days per year.
   (4)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-127. Heliports.
A heliport shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   Land areas to be used by helicopters shall have a dustproof surface.
   (2)   The housing and repair of helicopters and all structures or facilities
used to house and repair helicopters shall be located at least 50 feet from all
lot lines and 200 feet from any dwelling or public or private institution.
   (3)   Parking is not allowed within required setbacks.
   (4)   The facility shall be surrounded by fencing at least six feet high
with gates to limit access to the area.
   (5)   The day-night noise level at the lot lines may not exceed 75 Ldn in an
industrial district or a C4 district, or 65 Ldn in any other district.
   (6)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-128. Hotels and motels.
A hotel or motel shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be accessory to a marina and located on a lot of at
least two acres.
   (2)   The lot shall have at least 200 feet of shoreline.
   (3)   An accessory structure shall be located at least 50 feet from the rear
or side lot lines.
   (4)   The principal vehicular access shall be located on an arterial or
collector road.
   (5)   Transient boat slips shall be provided at a rate of one slip for every
10 rooms in the facility.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-129. Kennels, commercial.
A commercial kennel shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least three acres.
   (2)   Buildings, enclosures, and runs for the housing or shelter of animals
shall be located at least 100 feet from any residentially zoned property, and
no animal may be housed within this setback.
   (3)   The use may not be noxious, offensive, or otherwise objectionable to
surrounding residential uses.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20;
Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-130. Landfills, rubble and land-clearing debris landfills.
Rubble landfills and land-clearing debris landfills shall comply with all of
the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 50 acres.
   (2)   All vehicular access to the site shall be provided from a collector
road, an arterial road, a freeway, or a local road that serves only
industrially zoned or commercially zoned property between the facility entrance
and the first intersecting collector road, arterial road, or freeway in all
directions.
   (3)   The facility shall reclaim all or part of a clay and borrow pit or
sand and gravel operation.
   (4)   All significant archaeological sites shall be identified and preserved
under the supervision of the Office of Planning and Zoning.
   (5)   The active operation shall be surrounded by fencing that contains all
windblown litter, is at least six feet in height, and is secured by a gate to
prevent unauthorized entry.
   (6)   The facility shall recycle the rubble or land-clearing debris so that
no less than 30% of the total amount of material received in any 12-month
period is recycled.
   (7)   Space shall be adequate so that trucks using the facility are not
stopped or parked on a road right-of-way.
   (8)   Except in a W3 district, hours shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. Monday through Friday.
   (10)   The sound level at any lot line may not exceed an average of 55 dBA
or a peak of 60 dBA.
   (11)   The facility shall maintain a 100-foot buffer between the active
operation and existing streams and wetlands.
   (12)   The height of the landfill may not exceed 30 feet above the natural
grade of the surrounding land, and the finished slope shall be four to one or
less.
   (13)   The facility shall be operated in a way that manages odor, and
excessive odor may not be detectable within 100 feet from any property line.
   (14)   The facility shall maintain records onsite specifying the date, type,
and amount of material received, its place of origin (Anne Arundel County or
out-of-County), and the amount of material recycled in accordance with
subsection (6), such records to be available for inspection by the County.
   (15)   Semiannual reports detailing the information contained in the records
kept under subsection (14) shall be completed on a form provided by and
submitted to the Department of Inspections and Permits.
   (16)   A permanent legible sign approved by the Office of Planning and
Zoning measuring at least four by eight feet and indicating that the property
has been approved for a rubble landfill shall be posted and maintained along
each abutting road and at each entrance to the facility.
   (17)   County inspectors shall be allowed entry onto the site during normal
business hours to ensure compliance with the terms of any special exception and
the requirements of this section.
   (18)   The site shall be cleaned of litter and scattered refuse daily.
   (19)   The facility shall conform to the current Solid Waste Management Plan
adopted by the County, including any amendments or revisions to the Plan.
   (20)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
   (21)   Combustion ash, including bottom ash and fly ash, may not be used as
cover material or for any other fill.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06; Bill No. 64-07;
Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-131. Landscaping and tree contracting.
Landscaping and tree contracting facilities shall comply with all of the
following requirements.
   (1)    The facility shall be located on a lot of at least two acres.
   (2)   All vehicular access to the site shall be directly from a collector or
higher classification road.
   (3)   Buildings and outdoor areas to be used for parking, loading or storage
of vehicles, equipment, tools, and supplies shall be delineated on a site
development plan and located at least 50 feet from all property lines and
public roads, and maximum coverage for outdoor storage may not exceed 20% of
the total lot area.
   (4)   The location and design of the operation shall be such that the use
will not be a nuisance to neighboring properties due to noise, dust, and fumes.
   (5)   Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
   (6)   Accessory outdoor storage and parking areas shall be screened from
neighboring properties in accordance with the Landscape Manual.
   (7)   Minor repairs to vehicles or equipment are permitted, provided such
activities take place inside a building. Body work, engine rebuilding, engine
reconditioning, painting, and similar activities are not permitted.
(Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 72-
24)
§ 18-11-132. Landscaping and tree contracting with accessory recycling of logs
into firewood.
Landscaping and tree contracting with accessory recycling of logs into firewood
shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least five acres.
   (2)   Buildings and outdoor areas to be used for parking, loading or storage
of vehicles, equipment, tools, and supplies related to landscaping and tree
contracting shall be delineated on a site development plan and located at least
50 feet from all lot lines and public roads.
   (3)   The processing areas, parking and loading areas, and areas for storage
of mechanical equipment related to the recycling of logs into firewood shall be
delineated on a site development plan and located at least 200 feet from lot
lines.
   (4)   Firewood shall be stored in windrows not more than 10 feet high and 20
feet wide, in static piles not more than 20 feet high, or in bulk storage bags
and shall be located at least 50 feet from lot lines.
   (5)   Outdoor storage, including storage of unprocessed logs and processed
firewood, may not occupy more than 20% of the total lot area, not to exceed
five acres.
   (6)   Hours of operation for the recycling of logs into firewood shall be
limited to either 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. or 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on any one
day, Monday through Friday.
   (7)   The sound level at any residentially zoned or residentially developed
property line may not exceed an average of 55 dba and a peak of 60 dba based on
readings taken during operations.
   (8)   The storage and processing of logs that are not incidental to the
landscaping and tree contracting business is prohibited.
   (9)   The facility shall meet the requirements of §
18-11-131(2), (4), (5), (6), and (7).
(Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-133. Mobile home parks.
A mobile home park shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The park shall be located on a site of at least 10 acres.
   (2)   The site shall be served by public water and sewer or be scheduled for
sewer service within the 10-year water and wastewater master plan.
   (3)   Each mobile home shall be located on a site of at least 4,000 square
feet with a minimum width of 40 feet and be located at least 10 feet from all
lot lines.
   (4)   Density may not exceed that which is allowed in the district in which
the park is located, except that the density may not in any event exceed seven
mobile homes per acre.
   (5)   At least 15% of the total area of the park shall be devoted to open
area.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-134. Natural wood waste recycling facilities.
Natural wood waste recycling facilities shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least five acres.
   (2)   All vehicular access to the site shall be from a collector road, an
arterial road, a freeway, or a local road that serves only industrially zoned
or commercially zoned property between the facility entrance and the first
intersecting collector road, arterial road, or freeway in all directions.
   (3)   Composting shall be on an impervious surface.
   (4)   Storage of compost shall be on a surface that is adequately drained or
under cover.
   (5)   Processing and loading areas and all areas for storage of material
shall be surrounded by fencing that contains all windblown litter, is at least
six feet in height, and is secured by a gate to prevent unauthorized entry.
   (6)   The processing areas, parking and loading areas, and areas for storage
of mechanical equipment shall be located at least 300 feet from any
residentially zoned or residentially developed property.
   (7)   Processed natural wood waste shall be stored in windrows not more than
10 feet high and 20 feet wide or static piles not more than 20 feet high.
   (8)   Unprocessed natural wood waste stockpiled onsite may not occupy more
than 25% of the site.
   (9)   Space on the site shall be adequate so that trucks using the facility
are not stopped or parked on a road right-of-way.
   (10)   Except in a W3 district, hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on Saturday.
   (11)   The sound level at any residentially zoned or residentially developed
lot line may not exceed an average of 55 dBA or a peak of 60 dBA.
   (12)   The facility shall maintain a 100-foot buffer between parking,
loading, storage, processing, and building areas and existing streams and
wetlands.
   (13)   Material processed onsite and transported offsite as recycled
material may be no less than 70% of the total amount of material received in
any 12-month period.
   (14)   The facility shall be operated in a way that manages odor, and
excessive odor may not be detectable within 100 feet from the lot line.
   (15)   The facility shall maintain onsite records specifying the date, type,
and amount of material received, its place of origin (Anne Arundel County or
out-of-County), and the amount of material transported offsite in accordance
with subsection (13), such records to be available for inspection by the
County.
   (16)   Semiannual reports detailing the information contained in the reports
kept under subsection (15) shall be completed on a form provided by and
submitted to the Department of Inspections and Permits.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 77-23;
Bill No. 63-24; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-135. Nursing homes.
A nursing home shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   In an RLD district, the facility shall be located on a lot of at least
10 acres. In other districts, the facility shall be located on a lot of at
least five acres plus one acre for each group of 25 beds, or fraction of 25
beds, in excess of 100.
   (2)   All structures shall be located at least 100 feet from all lot lines
in RLD districts and 50 feet from all lot lines in other districts.
   (3)   A structure used in whole or part for contagious, mental, or drug or
alcohol addiction cases shall be located at least 200 feet from all lot lines.
   (4)   Any source of potential nuisance, including a laundry operation, power
plant, restaurant, cafeteria, kitchen, ambulance or emergency patient entrance,
unloading area for supplies and food, garbage loading area, incinerator, and
animal laboratory, shall be located at least 200 feet from any residentially
zoned property and at least 50 feet from any road intersection.
   (5)   Each access drive shall be located at least 40 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
   (6)   The facility may exceed the height limitation allowed in the zoning
district in which it is located if all setback requirements are increased by
one foot for each foot of excess height.
   (7)   In an RLD district, structures and onsite parking may cover no more
than 30% of the lot.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-136. Ore storage.
An ore storage facility may not be located within 300 feet of a freeway or a
residentially zoned property.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-137. Pawnshops.
A pawnshop shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The use shall be located at least 1,000 feet from the nearest lot line
of any school, library, park, religious facility, or video lottery facility.
   (2)   The facility’s customer entrance and any onsite parking areas shall be
located at least 100 feet from any residential structure.
   (3)   Hours of operation shall be established by the Administrative Hearing
Officer as part of the special exception approval.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 82-09; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15;
Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 52-20; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21;
Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-138. Petroleum products, storage for retail sale.
A facility for the storage of petroleum products for retail sale shall comply
with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least one-half acre.
   (2)   The product shall be stored in the same form as received and may not
be altered, except that two or more products may be blended.
   (3)   Maximum storage of product, whether above or below ground, may not
exceed 250,000 gallons for the first one-half acre. Above-ground storage may be
increased by an additional 125,000 gallons for each additional one-half acre.
In any event, no more than 1,000,000 gallons may be stored on the lot and no
single tank may exceed a capacity of 250,000 gallons.
   (4)   Each storage tank shall be located at least 50 feet from all lot
lines, at least 200 feet from abutting residentially zoned property, and at
least 200 feet from an existing dwelling.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-139. Petroleum products, storage onsite in excess of 1,000,000 gallons
for use by W3 district uses or public utilities.
A facility for the storage of petroleum products in excess of 1,000,000 gallons
for use by a W3 district use or a public utility shall comply with all of the
following requirements.
   (1)   The product shall be sold in the same form as received and may not be
altered, except that two or more products may be blended.
   (2)   The facility shall be located on a lot or contiguous lots that total
at least 15 acres.
   (3)   All vehicular access to the site shall be from a collector road, an
arterial road, a freeway, or a local road that serves only industrially zoned
or commercially zoned property between the facility entrance and the first
intersecting collector road, arterial road, or freeway in all directions.
   (4)   Each storage tank shall be located at least 2,000 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-140. Piers and launching ramps, community.
A community pier or launching ramp shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 30,000 square feet
that is owned by a homeowner’s association or controlled by an assisted living
facility.
   (2)   Adverse effects on water quality and fish, plant, and wildlife habitat
shall be minimized.
   (3)   Nonwater-dependent structures or operations associated with water-
dependent projects or activities shall be located outside the buffer to the
extent possible.
   (4)   Disturbance to the buffer shall be the minimum necessary to provide a
single point of access to the facility.
   (5)   Food, fuel, or other goods and services may not be offered for sale,
and adequate and clean sanitary facilities shall be provided.
   (6)   Boarding ladders shall be located along the sides of a pier and along
each bulkhead where the water depth at the bulkhead exceeds four feet in depth
at mean high water. Ladders along piers shall be 100 feet apart on each side of
the pier and staggered so that the ladders alternate sides every 50 feet.
Ladders along bulkheads shall be placed no more than 50 feet apart.
   (7)   United States Coast Guard approved personal flotation devices shall be
located along each pier or bulkhead at intervals not exceeding 100 feet.
   (8)   When a community pier with slips is provided as part of a new
residential riparian subdivision, private piers in the subdivision are
prohibited.
   (9)   The number of slips allowed with a community pier shall be the lesser
of the following:
      (i)   one slip for each 50 feet of shoreline in a subdivision or assisted
living facility located in an intense or limited development area, and one slip
for each 300 feet of shoreline in a subdivision located in a resource
conservation area; or
      (ii)   a density of slips to platted lots or dwellings in the critical
area in accordance with the following chart:
 
Platted Lots or Dwelling Units in the Critical Slips
Area
Up to 15                                       1 for each lot
16 to 40                                       15 or 75%, whichever is greater
41 to 100                                      30 or 50%, whichever is greater
101 to 300                                     50 or 25%, whichever is greater
More than 300                                  75 or 15%, whichever is greater
 
   (10)   In the event the parcel or lot has riparian rights and the proposed
development is located on a portion of the parcel or lot that is out of the
critical area, these rights may be utilized in accordance with permitted use
criteria established for the critical area classification through the use of a
community facility established in accordance with §
18-10-149, based on the actual length of shoreline or potential density that
would have been permitted within the critical area portion of the parcel or
lot.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 93-12;
Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21;
Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24; Bill No. 16-25; Bill No. 63-25)
§ 18-11-141. Planned unit developments.
The requirements for a planned unit development are located in
Title 12.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-142. Plasma centers.
A plasma center shall comply with all the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility may not be located within 1,000 feet of a dwelling or
school, or within one mile of another State-licensed medical clinic, a plasma
center, a licensed dispensary of cannabis, or a transitional housing facility.
   (2)   The facility shall conspicuously post “no loitering” signs in all
parking and sidewalk areas.
(Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-
23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-143. Public utility uses.
A public utility use shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The architectural scale, design, and landscaping treatment of the use
shall be compatible with other development in the area and shall be fully or
partially enclosed as may be necessary to provide compatibility.
   (2)   The use shall be necessary for public convenience at the designated
location.
   (3)   Utility corridors shall be used to the extent practical.
   (4)   The alignment shall follow the topography to minimize any effects to
the terrain.
   (5)   There shall be selective vegetative clearance for the right-of-way for
soil erosion control.
   (6)   Structures, such as antennas and lightning masts, may exceed the
maximum height limitations of the zoning district in which the use is located
if the excess height is the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the
structure and minimum setbacks are increased by one foot for each excess foot
in height.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23;
Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-144. Race tracks for horses.
A race track for horses shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 100 acres.
   (2)   Vehicular access shall be located on an arterial or collector road
within one-quarter mile of a freeway or principal arterial road and may not be
located on a freeway or a local road.
   (3)   Each vehicular entrance and exit shall be located at least 50 feet
from all lot lines.
   (4)   The facility may not draw traffic through local roads in surrounding
residential areas.
   (5)   Parking and principal uses, including the grandstand, clubhouse, and
the track, shall be located at least 60 feet from all lot lines.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23;
Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-145. Race tracks other than horse race tracks.
A race track for a use other than horses shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 100 acres for
automobile, stock car, or drag racing, at least 50 acres for miniature race car
racing, and at least five acres for go-cart racing.
   (2)   Vehicular access shall be located on an arterial or a collector road
within one-quarter mile of a freeway or principal arterial road and may not be
located on a freeway or a local road.
   (3)   The facility may not draw vehicular traffic through local roads in
surrounding residential areas.
   (4)   Each use shall be located at least 200 feet from any residentially
zoned property.
   (5)   Racing of automobiles is prohibited within one mile of a residentially
zoned property.
   (6)   Adequate onsite reservoir space at the vehicular entrance and
sufficient vehicular entrances and exits shall be provided to prevent traffic
congestion.
   (7)   Separate vehicular entrances and exits shall be provided at least 100
feet apart and at least 50 feet from any street intersection.
   (8)   Each structure shall be located at least 100 feet from all lot lines.
   (9)   Parking may not be located in a required setback and shall be located
at least 500 feet from any lot line for automobile, stock car, drag, or
miniature car racing and 100 feet from any lot line for go-cart racing.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23;
Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-146. Radio, television, or industrial testing towers.
A testing tower for a radio, television, or industrial testing towers facility
shall be set back from any road right-of-way by no less than the height of the
tower.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23;
Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-147. Recyclables recovery facilities.
A recyclables recovery facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   Vehicular access shall be from a collector road, an arterial road, a
freeway, or a local road that serves only industrially zoned or commercially
zoned property between the facility entrance and the first intersecting
collector road, arterial road, or freeway in all directions.
   (2)   Collection, separation, and processing of recyclables shall be done
within a structure at the facility.
   (3)   Space on the site shall be adequate so that trucks using the facility
are not stopped or parked on a road right-of-way.
   (4)   The sound level at any residentially zoned or residentially developed
property line may not exceed an average of 55 dBA and a peak of 60 dBA.
   (5)   The facility shall maintain onsite records specifying the date, type,
and amount of material received, its place of origin (Anne Arundel County or
out-of-County), and the amount of material transported offsite, such records to
be available for inspection by the County.
   (6)   Semiannual reports detailing the information contained in the records
kept under subsection (6) shall be completed on a form provided by and to be
submitted to the Department of Inspections and Permits.
   (7)   The site shall be cleaned of litter and scattered refuse daily.
   (8)   The crushing and recycling of concrete is prohibited in W2 districts.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16;
Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23;
Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-148. Religious facilities with 300 or more onsite parking spaces.
A religious facility with 300 or more onsite parking spaces shall comply with
all of the following requirements.
   (1)   No more than 25% of the lot may be covered by structures, including
accessory structures, and onsite parking.
   (2)   Each structure shall be located at least 100 feet from any lot line.
   (3)   Activities shall be located in a manner to shield surrounding
residential property from the effects of noise, hazards, or other offensive
conditions.
   (4)   Vehicular access shall be located on an arterial road or higher
classification.
   (5)   Sufficient access to the use shall be provided and the facility may
not draw vehicular traffic through local roads in surrounding residential
areas.
   (6)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06; Bill No. 73-11;
Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20;
Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-149. Rendering plants.
A rendering plant shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least four acres.
   (2)   Each use except parking shall be located at least 300 feet from a
freeway and 1,000 feet from any residentially zoned property.
   (3)   All vehicular access to the site shall be from a collector road, an
arterial road, a freeway, or local road that serves only industrially zoned or
commercially zoned property between the facility entrance and the first
intersecting collector road, arterial road, or freeway in all directions.
   (4)   The facility shall be operated in a way that manages the odor, and
excessive odor may not be detectable within 100 feet from any lot line.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18;
Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-150. Rifle, pistol, skeet, and archery ranges, indoor.
An indoor rifle, pistol, skeet, and archery range shall comply with all of the
following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least one acre.
   (2)   The facility may not draw vehicular traffic to or through local roads
in surrounding residential areas.
   (3)   The facility may not be located within 100 feet of any residentially
zoned property.
   (4)   Vehicular access to the facility shall be at least 50 feet from any
road intersection.
   (5)   The sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18;
Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 82-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23;
Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-151. Rifle, pistol, skeet, and archery ranges, outdoor.
An outdoor rifle, pistol, skeet, and archery range shall comply with all of the
following requirements.
   (1)   For each rifle or pistol range:
      (i)   the area between the firing point and target pit shall be baffled
overhead and either baffled or fenced on each side to prevent a fired
projectile from escaping the range area;
      (ii)   each backstop shall be constructed of dirt and surfaced with at
least three feet of debris-free dirt;
      (iii)   the backstop shall be of a height so that a bullet fired from the
lowest firing position cannot escape between the last baffle and the backstop;
and
      (iv)   the passageway from the firing line to each target pit shall be
completely enclosed or consist of a trench of sufficient depth to shield a user
from exposure to a bullet.
   (2)   For a skeet or archery range, the area between the stake and target
shall be baffled or fenced on each side to prevent the projectile from escaping
the range area.
   (3)   The sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
   (4)   Written approval from the Police Department shall be obtained.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18;
Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-152. Rubble processing facilities.
A rubble processing facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 10 acres.
   (2)   All vehicular access to the site shall be from a collector road, an
arterial road, a freeway or a local road that serves only industrially zoned or
commercially zoned property between the facility entrance and the first
intersecting collector road, arterial road, or freeway in all directions.
   (3)   Unloading and processing of rubble shall be done within a building at
the facility.
   (4)   The active operation shall be surrounded by fencing that contains all
windblown litter, is at least six feet in height, and is secured by a gate to
prevent unauthorized entry.
   (5)   The facility shall recycle the rubble so that no less than 30% of the
total amount of material received in any 12-month period is recycled.
   (6)   Space shall be adequate so that trucks using the facility are not
stopped or parked on a road right-of-way.
   (7)   The sound level at any residentially zoned or residentially developed
property line may not exceed an average of 55 dBA and a peak of 60 dBA.
   (8)   Rubble processed onsite and transported offsite shall be no less than
70% of the total amount of material received in any 12-month period.
   (9)   The facility shall maintain records onsite specifying the date, type,
and amount of material received and its place of origin (Anne Arundel County or
out-of-County), the amount of material recycled in accordance with subsection
(5), and the amount of material transported offsite in accordance with
subsection (8), such records to be available for inspection by the County.
   (10)   Semiannual reports detailing the information contained in the records
kept under subsection (9) shall be completed on a form provided by and
submitted to the Department of Inspections and Permits.
   (11)   The site shall be cleaned of litter and scattered refuse daily.
   (12)   The facility shall conform to the current Solid Waste Management Plan
adopted by the County, including any amendments or revisions to the Plan.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18;
Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-153. Schools, private academic and public charter, with 125 or more
onsite parking spaces.
A private academic school or a public charter school with 125 or more onsite
parking spaces shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least three acres.
   (2)   No more than 25% of the lot may be covered by onsite parking and
structures, including accessory structures.
   (3)   Each structure shall be located at least 100 feet from all lot lines.
   (4)   Vehicular access to the property shall be located on an arterial road
or a road of a higher classification.
   (5)   Sufficient access to the use shall be provided to avoid congestion of
roads in adjacent residential areas.
   (6)   Activities shall be located in a manner to shield surrounding
residential properties from the effects of noise, hazards, or other offensive
conditions.
   (7)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 54-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06; Bill No. 73-11;
Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20;
Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-154. Self-service storage facilities.
A self-service storage facility shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least two acres.
   (2)   Storage and a residence for a caretaker or resident manager shall be
the only activities conducted at the facility.
   (3)   Access shall be provided as follows:
      (i)   Each one-way interior driveway shall have a travel lane at least 15
feet wide.
      (ii)   Each two-way interior driveway shall have two travel lanes, each
at least 12 feet wide.
      (iii)   Traffic direction and parking shall be designated by directional
signs or pavement painting.
   (4)   Outside storage is not permitted.
   (5)   In a C2 district, a self-service storage facility shall be within an
enclosed controlled central structure with no external access to individual
storage units.
(Bill No. 21-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 97-
19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-155. Small wind energy systems.
   (a)   Requirements. A small wind energy system or meteorological tower shall
comply with all of the following requirements.
      (1)   The small wind energy system or meteorological tower shall be
located on a lot less than three acres.
      (2)   The wind turbine or meteorological tower shall be located at a
distance of at least 1.1 times the height of the tower from any property line,
non-participating structure, public road or right-of-way, or communication
lines or structures, and provide for a minimum setback of 20 feet from any lot
line for guy cables or tower supports.
      (3)   Roof-mounted turbines are permitted. All components of a roof-
mounted turbine shall meet required setbacks for the principal structure. Roof-
mounted turbines may not be mounted on an attached or multi-family dwelling.
      (4)   The height of a wind turbine or meteorological tower may not exceed
a height of 120 feet. The height of a roof-mounted turbine may not project more
than 35 feet from the roof surface. Total height
for a small wind energy system mounted on a wind tower is the vertical distance
from the ground level to the tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at
its highest point. For a small wind energy system mounted on a building, total
height is the vertical distance from the top of the roof or parapet, to the tip
of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its highest point.
      (5)   The wind turbine shall have a minimum blade ground clearance of 15
feet.
      (6)   The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not allow step
bolts or ladder accessibility for a minimum height of 12 feet.
      (7)   The wind turbine or meteorological tower and its mounting structure
shall be painted a non-reflective, non-obtrusive color that conforms to the
environment and architecture of the community.
      (8)   The wind turbine or meteorological tower shall not be artificially
lighted, except to the extent required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
      (9)   The small wind energy system or meteorological tower shall comply
with all applicable construction codes and electrical codes and be installed in
accordance with manufacturer plans and certifications.
      (10)   The wind turbine shall not generate noise in excess of the levels
permitted for the zone under Code of Maryland Regulations 26.02.03.02B,
26.02.03.02C, and 26.02.03.02D.
      (11)   The capacity of a small wind energy system may not exceed 25 kw on
a property located in an RLD, R1, R2, or R5 zone and 100 kw in all other zones.
Energy produced by the small wind energy system shall be for the sole use of
the property owner, however, energy output from the system may be delivered to
a power grid to offset the cost of energy on site.
      (12)   Wind turbines must be approved under a small wind certification
program recognized by the Maryland Energy Administration.
      (13)   All signs are prohibited except for manufacturer or installer
identification signs and warning signs or placards.
      (14)   Meteorological towers shall be permitted under the conditions of
this section for a period not to exceed one year.
      (15)   A property owner may apply for special exceptions for a temporary
meteorological tower and a small wind energy system in the same application;
however, the Administrative Hearing Officer may decide on each request in the
application individually and impose conditions deemed appropriate for each use.
If an applicant is granted a special exception for a meteorological tower but
denied a special exception for a small wind energy system, the applicant shall
be permitted to re-apply for a special exception within 12 months of the date
of denial of the small wind energy system provided the application includes six
months of meteorological data gathered from the applicants meteorological
tower.
      (16)   The small wind energy system or meteorological tower may not
adversely effect an historic site, archaeological resource, or cemetery listed
on the County inventory. The placement of a wind turbine within sight of an
historic resource listed on the inventory shall mitigate any adverse visual
impact of the turbine in a manner determined by the Office of Planning and
Zoning. If a wind turbine is to be attached to the roof of an historic
structure listed on the inventory, the method of attachment must be approved by
the Office of Planning and Zoning. Approval of a rooftop wind turbine shall
require installation on a secondary facade, minimal impact to historic
materials, and be a reversible modification. Wind turbines may not be mounted
on rooftops of highly significant properties, including those listed on the
National Register of Historic Places.
      (17)   A small wind energy system or meteorological tower located within
the BWI Marshall Airport four-mile district shall comply with all height and
permitting requirements of the Maryland Aviation Administration.
   (b)   Removal of defective system. Any small wind energy system or
meteorological tower that is cited by administrative order of the Department of
Inspections and Permits shall be repaired by the property owner to meet
federal, State and local code requirements, or be removed, within six months of
the date of the administrative order. If the property owner fails to repair or
remove the system as required and the system remains non-operational for more
than six months, the County may pursue an action for rescission of the special
exception use under this article and removal of the system at the property
owner's expense.
   (c)   Variances. A variance may not be granted for the requirements
specified in subsection (a).
(Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 21-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-
16; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No.
56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-156. Solar energy generating facility – community.
A solar energy generating facility – community shall comply with all of the
following requirements.
   (1)   The area to be used for the solar facility may not exceed 25% of the
net area of the site, or 20 acres, whichever is less.
   (2)   No development on the site may be located in environmentally sensitive
areas or habitat for forest interior dwelling species.
   (3)   The developer shall comply with the County Landscape Manual, and the
solar facility, including all equipment and solar panels, shall be enclosed by
a fence no less than seven feet in height. In the event of a conflict between
the Landscape Manual and §
17-6-504 of the Code, the provisions of §
17-6-504 of the Code shall control.
   (4)   Any solar facility where the fenced area would exceed 15 acres shall
provide a wildlife corridor conforming with the provisions of the current Anne
Arundel County Green Infrastructure Master Plan.
   (5)   The developer of a solar facility located on a scenic or historic road
shall provide a viewshed analysis. The solar facility may not have an adverse
impact on the scenic or historic viewshed. In this subsection, “adverse impact”
means any development that would directly or indirectly alter the road’s
environmental or historic setting, its visual and physical characteristics, or
would diminish the integrity of the scenic or historic road.
   (6)   The developer of the solar facility shall avoid disturbing prime
farmland, as defined in 7 CFR 657, and shall provide an analysis to demonstrate
how the developer is avoiding disturbance of prime farmland.
   (7)   The developer shall comply with the provisions of the County Forest
Conservation Act,
Article 17, Title 6, Subtitle 3 of this Code, regardless of any State waiver or
reduction of State forest conservation requirements for solar energy systems.
Mitigation for tree removal shall be at the ratio of 3-to-1.
   (8)   (i)   A solar facility may not be located within an agricultural
preservation area, a priority preservation area, or a rural legacy area, or,
except as provided in subparagraph (ii), if the facility is located in a rural
agricultural zoning district, within 10 miles of another solar energy
generating facility – community or solar energy generating facility – utility
scale.
      (ii)   The prohibition on locating a solar energy generating facility
within 10 miles of another solar energy generating facility does not apply to a
solar energy generating facility that is a roof- top mounted only facility.
   (9)   A solar facility may not be located on any portion of a site
encumbered with a conservation, historic preservation, or agricultural
easement.
   (10)   A solar facility may not be located on or within the viewshed of a
property listed on the County Inventory of Historic Resources.
   (11)   Except as required for safety or by applicable Federal, State, or
local authority, no visible light shall emanate from the solar facility from
dusk to dawn.
   (12)   Lot coverage may not exceed 80% of the area allowed under subsection
(1). Lot coverage shall be calculated as the total surface area of all solar
panels plus all impervious horizontal surfaces of any supporting or associated
equipment, including support structures. Surface area of a solar panel shall be
calculated based on the drip line around the perimeter of a panel at minimum
tilt. Impervious surface shall be calculated as the area of the foundation or
base of any component of the solar facility, including individual solar panels.
   (13)   A decommissioning plan shall be submitted to the Office of Planning
and Zoning for approval. The plan shall include a requirement for a grading
permit or standard grading plan and that all on-site equipment associated with
the solar facility shall be removed within 12 months of cessation of
operations. Decommissioning security in accordance with §
17-6-702 of this Code and equal to 125% of the decommissioning costs shall be
posted prior to commencement of the use.
   (14)   The County shall review the amount of the security every five years
and may require additional security or reduce the amount of the posted security
if it determines, at its sole discretion, that the posted security no longer
equals 125 % of the decommissioning costs.
   (15)   A solar facility is presumed to cease operations if no power is
generated by the system for a period of 12 consecutive months. The owner of the
solar facility shall have 12 months after cessation of operations to dismantle
and remove the solar facility. If the owner fails to dismantle or remove the
solar facility as required, the County may complete the removal at the owner’s
expense, and shall retain all or any part of the decommissioning security which
shall become the property of the County. Any additional expense incurred by the
County, or any expenses incurred for the removal of a rooftop-mounted solar
facility, shall be collected pursuant to §
1-8-101 of the Code.
   (16)   Facilities proposed for location on sanitary landfills or reclamation
areas are exempt from the requirements of subsections (1), (2), (6), (8), and
(12).
   (17)   Facilities proposed for location on properties owned or leased by the
County are exempt from the requirements of subsections (1) and (12).
   (18)   Rooftop-mounted only facilities are not subject to the requirements
of subsections (3), (7), (12), (13), and (14).
   (19)   A variance may not be granted for the requirements specified in this
section.
   (20)   A special exception is not required for a facility that requires a
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity from the State Public Service
Commission, but the conditions in this section may be the basis of any
recommendation to the Public Service Commission in accordance with § 7-207 of
the Public Utilities Article of the State Code.
(Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 8-22;
Bill No. 53-23; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-157. Solar energy generating facility – utility scale.
A solar energy generating facility – utility scale shall comply with the
requirements of §
18-11-156 for a solar energy generating facility – community, except for
subsection (1), and the following requirements:
   (1)   The area used for the facility may not exceed 25% of the net area of
the site.
   (2)   A variance may not be granted for the requirements specified in this
section.
(Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 53-
23; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-158. Solid waste transfer stations.
A solid waste transfer station shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least eight acres.
   (2)   All vehicular access to the site shall be from a collector road, an
arterial road, a freeway or a local road that serves only industrially zoned or
commercially zoned property between the facility entrance and the first
intersecting collector road, arterial road, or freeway in all directions.
   (3)   Collection, storage, and stockpiling of solid waste shall be done
within a building at the facility.
   (4)   The active operation shall be surrounded by fencing that contains all
windblown litter, is at least six feet in height, and is secured by a gate to
prevent unauthorized entry.
   (5)   Space shall be adequate so that trucks using the facility are not
stopped or parked on a road right-of-way.
   (6)   Except in a W3 district, hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
   (7)   The sound level at any residentially zoned or residentially developed
property line does not exceed an average of 55 dBA and a peak of 60 dBA.
   (8)   The facility shall transfer 100% of the total amount of solid waste
received in any 12-month period.
   (9)   The facility shall be operated in a way that manages odor, and
excessive odor may not be detectable within 100 feet from any lot line.
   (10)   The facility shall maintain records onsite specifying the date, type,
and amount of material received, its place of origin (Anne Arundel County or
out-of-County), and the amount of material transported offsite in accordance
with subsection (8), such records to be available for inspection by the County.
   (11)   Semiannual reports detailing the information contained in the records
kept under subsection (10) shall be completed on a form provided by and
submitted to the Department of Inspections and Permits.
   (12)   The site shall be cleaned of litter and scattered refuse daily.
   (13)   The facility shall conform to the current Solid Waste Management Plan
adopted by the County, including any amendments or revisions to the Plan.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 21-15; Bill No. 96-15;
Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20;
Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-159. Stadiums, commercial.
A commercial stadium shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 50 acres.
   (2)   The principal vehicular access for the facility shall be located on an
arterial or collector road within one-quarter mile of a freeway or arterial
road and may not be located on a freeway or local road.
   (3)   The facility may not draw vehicular traffic through local roads in
surrounding residential areas.
   (4)   The facility shall be located at least 200 feet from any residentially
zoned property.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 21-15; Bill No. 96-15;
Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20;
Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-160. Storage, bulk for agricultural products.
A facility for bulk storage for agricultural products shall comply with all of
the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be restricted to the storage, dispensing, and
mixing of products received at the site and may not include processing of a
commercial nature.
   (2)   The facility shall have frontage on or private access to a principal
arterial road.
   (3)   A structure for storage purposes shall be located at least 200 feet
from any residential structure and 100 feet from all lot lines.
   (4)   The height of a grain elevator or silo-type structure may not exceed a
maximum height of 150 feet and the height may not exceed the setback from the
closest lot line.
   (5)   A facility located in an RA district shall be located on a road other
than a scenic or historic rural road.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 4-06; Bill No. 21-06; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 73-11;
Bill No. 21-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 89-18;
Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-161. Storage of watercraft, covered and wet.
A covered facility for the wet storage of seaworthy watercraft shall comply
with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be designed to be compatible with existing adjacent
land uses and existing adjacent zoning districts.
   (2)   The design of the facility shall afford minimal detrimental impact on
adjacent residential areas with respect to structure location and height,
access, lighting, signs, landscaping, location of water facilities, location of
storage areas, and noise.
   (3)   The facility shall be located at least 25 feet from any side lot line.
   (4)   The Office of Planning and Zoning shall designate the location of the
facility in accordance with the criteria set forth in §
18-2-403.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 21-15; Bill No. 96-15;
Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20;
Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-162. Storage of watercraft, covered and dry.
A covered facility for the dry storage of seaworthy watercraft shall comply
with all of the following requirements.
   (1)   The combined base area of all covered dry storage structures may not
exceed:
      (i)   10,000 square feet for a one-acre lot;
      (ii)   for a lot larger than one acre, 10,000 square feet plus 1,000
square feet for each acre by which the lot exceeds one acre; and
   (2)   The facility shall be located at least 25 feet from each side lot
line.
   (3)   The Office of Planning and Zoning shall designate the location of the
facility in accordance with the criteria set forth in §
18-2-403.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 21-15; Bill No. 96-15;
Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20;
Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-163. Structures, permanent, accessory to active recreational uses.
Permanent structures accessory to active recreational uses shall comply with
all of the following requirements.
   (1)   No more than 25 % of the forested area on a lot may be cleared for the
uses.
   (2)   The site shall be reforested at a ratio of one and one-half acres
planted for every acre cleared.
   (3)   The uses shall be set back at least 150 feet from any dwelling and 100
feet from all lot lines.
   (4)   The uses shall be set back at least 200 feet from any stream, river,
or waterway.
   (5)   The uses shall be subject to an approved soil conservation and water
quality plan.
   (6)   Outdoor light fixtures, other than those required for safety purposes,
may not be on after 9:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and after 10:00 p.m.
Friday and Saturday.
   (7)   Outdoor lighting shall have minimal offsite impact by way of the
distance of the fixtures from roads or neighboring properties, or additional
shielding or other features.
   (8)   Vehicular access to the property shall be located on a collector road
or a road of a higher classification.
(Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 21-15; Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-
18; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 97-19; Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No.
56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-164. Storage of watercraft, multilevel watercraft rack.
A multilevel watercraft storage rack structure shall comply with all of the
following requirements.
   (1)   The facility shall be located on a lot of at least 1.5 acres above
mean high water.
   (2)   The height of the structure may not exceed the maximum height allowed
in the district in which it is located.
   (3)   The facility shall be designed to be compatible with existing adjacent
land uses and existing adjacent zoning districts.
   (4)   The design of the facility shall have minimal detrimental impact on
adjacent residential areas with respect to structure location and height,
access, lighting, signs, landscaping, location of water facilities, location of
storage areas, and noise.
   (5)   A facility shall be set back at least 25 feet from each side lot line.
   (6)   The coverage of the facility may not exceed the combined total floor
area of all covered dry storage structures.
   (7)   The Office of Planning and Zoning shall designate the location of the
facility in accordance with the criteria set forth in §
18-2-403.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 21-15;
Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 97-19;
Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
§ 18-11-165. Truck and trailer rental facilities in conjunction with automobile
gasoline stations.
The trailer or truck storage areas at a truck and trailer rental facility in
conjunction with automobile gasoline stations shall be graded and drained to
prevent surface water accumulation and shall be paved with a durable and
dustproof surface.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 73-11; Bill No. 15-12; Bill No. 21-15;
Bill No. 96-15; Bill No. 96-16; Bill No. 74-18; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 97-19;
Bill No. 69-20; Bill No. 21-21; Bill No. 56-23; Bill No. 72-24)
TITLE 12. SPECIAL USES
Section
Subtitle 1. Government Reuse Facilities
   
18-12-101.   Definitions.
   
18-12-102.   Scope.
   
18-12-103.   Permitted and auxiliary uses; compliance with reuse plan.
   
18-12-104.   Bulk regulations.
   
18-12-105.   Signage.
   
18-12-106.   Parking.
Subtitle 2. PUD – Planned Unit Developments
   
18-12-201.   Scope; applicability.
   
18-12-202.   Uses.
   
18-12-203.   Bulk regulations.
Subtitle 3. Regional Commercial Complexes
   
18-12-301.   Permitted uses; applicability.
Subtitle 4. School Bus Storage in Residential Districts
   
18-12-401.   Scope.
Subtitle 5. Suburban Community Centers
   
18-12-501.   Scope; applicability.
Subtitle 6. Short-Term Residential Rentals
   
18-12-601.   Definitions.
   
18-12-602.   Short-term residential rentals.
Subtitle 7. Moderately Priced Dwelling Units
   
18-12-701.   Moderately priced dwelling units.
SUBTITLE 1. GOVERNMENT REUSE FACILITIES
§ 18-12-101. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   "Government reuse facility" means all or part of a facility that:
         (i)   was previously owned by the federal government;
         (ii)   is redeveloped as an integrated development with a variety of
industrial and commercial uses;
         (iii)   is located on a site that is transferred to the County or its
assignee under the Federal Base Realignment and Closure Act or under a related
conveyance of ancillary parcels recognized by ordinance of the County Council
as adjacent to and functionally part of a site transferred under the Federal
Base Realignment and Closure Act; and
         (iv)   is developed in accordance with the recommendations in a reuse
plan approved by the federal government that is supported and affirmed by
resolution or ordinance of the County Council.
      (2)   "Lot" includes an area of land recognized as an approved lot by
ordinance of the County Council based upon a determination by the Planning and
Zoning Officer that recognition of the lot reasonably reflects the use of the
area of land before its conveyance to the County or assignee.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-12-102. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to a government reuse facility. The provisions of this
subtitle supersede the requirements of
Subtitle 6 of Title 4.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-12-103. Permitted and auxiliary uses; compliance with reuse plan.
   (a)   Permitted uses. The permitted uses allowed in a government reuse
facility are listed in the chart in this section using the following key: P =
permitted use. Uses and structures customarily accessory to the listed uses
also are allowed. Residential units are prohibited.
Permitted Uses
Permitted Uses
Child care centers for the exclusive use of persons employed at the facility  P
Commercial telecommunication facilities if the conditions of Title 10 are met P
Computer goods, sales and services                                            P
Helipads for the exclusive use of commercial tenants at the facility          P
Hotel or motel with up to 100 rooms                                           P
Manufacturing, fabrication, and assembly uses                                 P
Multiple use principal structures if the uses are limited to those allowed in P
this section
Offices, professional and general                                             P
Outdoor recreational facilities for the exclusive use of persons employed at  P
the facility and visitors
Parking structures and parking lots                                           P
Public utility essential services                                             P
Public utilities                                                              P
Publishing, printing, photographic, photocopying, and blueprint               P
establishments
Radio and television studios and broadcasting establishments                  P
Research and development establishments and testing laboratories, including   P
prototype manufacturing
Schools, public charter, and schools, private: academic, arts, business,
technical, or trade for the exclusive use of businesses located at the        P
facility
Solar energy generating facility – accessory                                P
Water taxi landings                                                           P
Wet storage of watercraft located in an existing basin or similar water area  P
for the exclusive use of commercial tenants at the facility
 
   (b)   Auxiliary uses. The following uses are allowed as auxiliary uses
located in principal or accessory structures with not more than 5% of the total
floor area of the principal and accessory structures being occupied by
auxiliary uses and limited to the following:
Auxiliary Uses
Auxiliary Uses
Alcoholic beverage uses for consumption on the premises in accordance with  P
the conditions of Title 10
Banks                                                                       P
Barbershops                                                                 P
Cafeterias, lunchrooms, restaurants, and snack bars for the purpose of      P
serving the uses at the facility
Catering facilities                                                         P
Hair and nail salons                                                        P
Health clubs, spas, and gymnasiums in a hotel, motel, or corporate facility
for use in conjunction with the activities allowed at the hotel, motel, or  P
corporate facility
Newsstands                                                                  P
Retail or wholesale display rooms for the sale of products associated with  P
the principal use
Solar energy generating facility – accessory                              P
Travel agencies                                                             P
 
   (c)   Auxiliary uses in single or multiple use structures. Auxiliary uses
may be located in single or multiple use structures if the uses are limited to
the uses listed in subsection (b) and the total square footage of the uses is
no greater than 15% of the total floor area, including all sections, phases,
and areas platted for future development.
   (d)   Compliance with reuse plan. The overall development plan for a
government reuse facility shall comply with the reuse plan, including all
traffic standards and guidelines, and be sent to an advisory committee
appointed by the County Executive for review and comment.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 54-05; Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 89-18)
§ 18-12-104. Bulk regulations.
   The following bulk regulations are applicable to a government reuse
facility:
Minimum site area                                       25 acres
Minimum lot area for principal and accessory structures
other than public utilities, water taxi landings, and   20,000 square feet
outdoor recreational facilities
Maximum lot coverage                                    80% of net lot area
Minimum setbacks from each lot line:
   Principal structures                              15 feet
   Parking lots or structures                        10 feet
   Accessory structures                              15 feet
Maximum height limitations for structures               60 feet
 
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-12-105. Signage.
   Signage shall be approved by the Office of Planning and Zoning in accordance
with the following:
      (1)   A signage program shall be submitted to an advisory committee
appointed by the County Executive for review and comment and to the Office of
Planning and Zoning and, if approved by the Office of Planning and Zoning, the
program shall supersede the standards described in
Title 3.
      (2)   The signage program shall:
         (i)   contribute to the efficient utilization of the development;
         (ii)   minimize visual clutter;
         (iii)   make use of directional signs in the parking areas and
pedestrian circulation system;
         (iv)   be in harmony with the architecture, landscaping, and other
design elements of the development;
         (v)   be compatible with existing or potential development in the
neighboring communities if the signage is along the periphery of the site or
visible from public roads; and
         (vi)   address the location, size, height, number, color, and material
of all proposed signs and state whether the proposed signs will be illuminated.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-12-106.  Parking.
   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the following:
      (1)   A parking program shall be submitted to an advisory committee
appointed by the County Executive for review and comment and to the Office of
Planning and Zoning and, if approved by the Office of Planning and Zoning, the
program shall supersede the standards described in
Title 3.
      (2)   Onsite parking shall:
         (i)   be separated from walkways by landscaped screening, low-profile
walls, berms, or decorative fencing;
         (ii)   be well illuminated;
         (iii)   be free of pedestrian barriers;
         (iv)   be designed to minimize the number of curb cuts to roads and
encourage the direct movement of pedestrians between adjacent areas of onsite
parking;
         (v)   have well illuminated access ways for pedestrians; and
         (vi)   be limited to one parking space for each 320 square feet of
floor area.
      (3)   The Office of Planning and Zoning may require that parking spaces
be designated for those who rideshare.
      (4)   The Office of Planning and Zoning may require or permit limited on-
street parking to promote street-level access to buildings and amenities.
      (5)   Vehicular and pedestrian access to shared parking shall be provided
separately from roads.
      (6)   The vehicular circulation system shall provide:
         (i)   for the safe and convenient movement of vehicles and
pedestrians; and
         (ii)   adequate space for the loading and unloading of persons, goods,
and materials.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-07)
SUBTITLE 2. PUD – PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
§ 18-12-201. Scope; applicability.
   This subtitle applies to a planned unit development, referred to in this
article as a PUD. Other consistent provisions of this article also apply.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-12-202. Uses.
   (a)   For less than 500 units. A PUD of less than 500 dwelling units may
have adult independent dwelling units, duplex or semi-detached dwellings,
multifamily dwellings, single-family detached dwellings, townhouse dwellings,
public utility essential services, and public utility uses in accordance with §
18-11-141. In addition to the above dwelling units, a PUD in a C2 or C3 zoning
district may have the permitted, conditional, special exception, and business
complex auxiliary uses for C2 and C3 commercial districts in accordance with §
18-5-102.
   (b)   For 500 to 1,000 units. A PUD that has between 500 and 1,000 dwelling
units may have the uses (1) permitted in subsection (a) and (2) listed in the
chart in this subsection if the uses are limited to 10 square feet for each
dwelling unit and are located on a collector or arterial road.
 
Uses
Assisted living facilities                                                SE
Child care centers                                                        SE
Nursing homes                                                             P
Piers, community, and water-oriented recreational facilities, structures, SE
and uses
Religious facilities                                                      P
Schools, public charter, and schools, private: academic, arts, business,  P
technical, or trade
 
   (c)   For 1,001 to 5,000 units. A PUD that has between 1,001 and 5,000
dwelling units may have the uses (1) permitted in subsections (a) and (b) and
(2) listed in the chart in this section if the uses are limited to 30 square
feet for each dwelling unit.
Uses
Uses
Adult day care                                                            P
Automobile gasoline stations                                              SE
Bakery or donut shops                                                     P
Banks                                                                     P
Barbershops                                                               P
Bicycle, motor scooter, moped sales and service without outside storage   P
Business complexes                                                        P
Carpet and vinyl flooring stores                                          P
Carwashes                                                                 SE
Catering establishments                                                   P
Child care centers                                                        P
Convenience stores, gift shops, and newsstands                            P
Cultural centers and exhibits                                             P
Delicatessens and snack bars                                              P
Dog grooming and day care facilities                                      P
Dry cleaning operations                                                   P
Furniture, appliance, and carpet stores and showrooms                     P
Greenhouses and garden centers                                            P
Grocery stores                                                            P
Hair and nail salons                                                      P
Hardware stores                                                           P
Health clubs, spas, and gymnasiums                                        P
Home centers and building supply stores                                   P
Interior decorating establishments                                        P
Locksmiths                                                                P
Meat, seafood, and poultry markets                                        P
Medical or dental stores and laboratories                                 P
Musical instruments sales, services, and instruction                      P
Nursing homes                                                             P
Offices                                                                   P
Opticians and optometrical establishments                                 P
Package goods stores                                                      P
Pharmacies                                                                P
Photography studios                                                       P
Printing and publishing establishments                                    P
Produce markets                                                           P
Religious facilities                                                      P
Rental establishments                                                     P
Restaurants                                                               P
Retail specialty stores or shops                                          P
Schools, public charter, and schools, private: academic, arts, business,  P
technical, or trade
Showrooms and sales of specialty building products, including kitchen     P
cabinets, tile, and lighting
Small engine repair if all work is done inside a building and there is no P
outside storage
Swimming pool and spa sales, indoor                                       P
Tailor shops                                                              P
Tanning salons                                                            P
Theaters, live performances                                               P
Travel agencies                                                           P
Upholstering shops, including sail making shops                           P
Veterinary clinics if overnight stays are limited to those necessary for  P
medical treatment, without outside runs or pens
Video sales and rental establishments                                     P
Volunteer fire stations                                                   P
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 54-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 55-16)
§ 18-12-203. Bulk regulations.
   (a)   Generally. Bulk regulations relating to lot size, setbacks for
principal and accessory structures, spacing between structures, and height
limitations shall be proposed by the developer in a submittal of specific
development and design standards and, if approved by special exception, shall
govern the development of the PUD.
   (b)   Setbacks if PUD abuts residential. When a structure in a PUD is
located within 50 feet of the boundary line of a residential district, the
setback for the structure shall be the more restrictive of the setback
requirements for the abutting residential zoning district or for the zoning
district in which the structure is located.
   (c)   Density. The density of development in a PUD may not exceed the
density allowed by the zoning district in which the development is located. A
PUD in a C2 or C3 zoning district may not exceed 15 dwelling units per acre.
   (d)   Retail use. A single retail use may not exceed 65,000 square feet.
   (e)   Additional requirements for PUDs in C2 and C3 zoning districts. A PUD
in a C2 or C3 zoning district may be permitted as a special exception only in
the BWI/Ft. Meade Growth Area as shown on the official map adopted by the
County Council in Bill No. 55-16 and entitled "BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area". A
variance to allow a PUD in a C2 or C3 zoning district not shown on the official
map is not permitted. When residential and commercial uses are contained in
separate structures, at least 25% of the land area shall consist of commercial
uses, including structures, parking, access, and open areas used for stormwater
management and landscaping. When residential and commercial uses are contained
in the same structure, at least 25% of the floor area of the structure shall
consist of commercial uses.
   (f)   Bulk regulations. The following bulk regulations are applicable to a
PUD:
 
                             Minumum dwelling Maximum coverage Minimum open
Zoning district Minimum site unit composition by structures in area in
                area         of total units   residential      residential
                                              areas            areas
RA, RLD, R1     20 acres     40% are single-  30%              40%
                             family dwellings
R2              20 acres     30% are single-  30%              40%
                             family dwellings
R5              20 acres     20% are single-  30%              40%
                             family dwellings
                             10% are single-
R10, R15        10 acres     family dwellings 30%              45%
                             or townhouses
                             10% are single-
R22             10 acres     family dwellings 25%              50%
                             or townhouses
 
   (g)   Bulk regulations in commercial districts. The following bulk
regulations are applicable to a PUD in a C2 or C3 commercial district:
 
                             Minimum dwelling                  Minimum open
Zoning district Minimum site unit composition Maximum coverage area in
                area         of total units   by structures    residential
                                                               areas
                                              30% for
                                              residential
                                              structures; 85%
                                              for commercial
C2, C3          10 acres     10% are single-  structures based 45%
                             family dwellings on area
                                              delineated as
                                              commercial on
                                              site development
                                              plan
 
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 55-16; Bill No. 72-24)
   Editor's note – A small-scale representation of the official map adopted by
Bill No. 55-16 is included as an appendix to this article.
SUBTITLE 3. REGIONAL COMMERCIAL COMPLEXES
§ 18-12-301. Permitted uses; applicability.
   (a)   This section applies to a development in existence on September 7,
2004, that was created under Bill No. 62-98 as amended by Bill No. 80-98, which
development, including expansions and modifications, is a permitted use.
   (b)   A regional commercial complex may include the uses set forth in §
18-5-102 for C2 and C3 Districts and the uses set forth in §
18-6-103 for a W1 District. Other consistent provisions of this article also
apply.
   (c)   The maximum residential density within a regional commercial complex
shall be 22 dwelling units per acre. Dwelling units within a regional
commercial complex, up to the total maximum residential density allowed for the
entire regional commercial complex, may be located on or distributed among any
lot, or portion thereof, within a regional commercial complex.
   (d)   Bulk regulations relating to lot size, coverage, setbacks for
principal and accessory structures, spacing between structures, and height
limitations shall be proposed by the developer in a submittal of specific
development and design standards and, if approved by the Planning and Zoning
Officer, shall govern the development in the regional commercial complex and
shall supersede the bulk regulations in the underlying zoning district.
   (e)   Unless further reduced or otherwise adjusted under §
18-3-105 or §
18-3-106, parking for uses within a regional commercial complex shall be
provided in accordance with the parking requirements for each use as set forth
at §
18-3-104 at 75% of such requirement, and the parking requirement for video
lottery facilities shall be 1 space for every 4 gaming positions at a video
lottery terminal. Parking requirements for uses on any lot, or portion thereof,
may be satisfied by parking provided on any lot, or portion thereof, within the
regional commercial complex.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 82-09; Bill No. 24-25)
SUBTITLE 4. SCHOOL BUS STORAGE IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 18-12-401. Scope.
   Existing school bus storage as the principal use of a residential lot or on
the same lot as a single family detached dwelling is governed by Bill No. 21-
01.
(Bill No. 4-05)
SUBTITLE 5. SUBURBAN COMMUNITY CENTERS
§ 18-12-501. Scope; applicability.
   A suburban community center in existence on September 7, 2004 is governed by
Bill No. 36-96. Other consistent provisions of this article also apply.
(Bill No. 4-05)
SUBTITLE 6. SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTALS
§ 18-12-601. Definitions.
   In this subtitle, the following words have the meaning indicated:
      (1)   "Host" has the meaning set forth in §
11-13A-101 of this Code.
      (2)   "Short-term residential rental" has the meaning set forth in §
11-13A-101, except that the term does not include a hotel, a bed and breakfast
home, a bed and breakfast inn, or a rooming house.
(Bill No. 89-19)
§ 18-12-602. Short-term residential rentals.
   A short-term residential rental shall comply with all of the following
requirements.
      (1)   The host shall be registered as required by §
11-13A-102 of this Code.
      (2)   The short-term residential rental may not create a use that is
prohibited in the zoning district in which the dwelling unit is located.
(Bill No. 89-19)
SUBTITLE 7. MODERATELY PRICED DWELLING UNITS
§ 18-12-701. Moderately priced dwelling units.
   A development that includes moderately priced dwelling units under
Title 12 of Article 17 of this Code shall qualify for a density bonus by the
Planning and Zoning Officer as follows:
      (1)   Subject to subsection (2):
         (i)   for developments that include up to 100% allowable density, no
additional density;
         (ii)   for developments that include more than 100% of allowable
density up to 115% of the allowable density, 25% of the additional units must
be moderately priced dwelling units; and
         (iii)   for developments achieving greater than 115% of the allowable
density, 25% of the additional units between 100% and 115% of allowable density
must be moderately priced dwelling units and 40% of the additional units over
115% of allowable density must be moderately priced dwelling units.
      (2)   (i)   In R1 and R2 zoning districts, density shall not exceed 125%
of allowable density.
         (ii)   In R5, R10, R15, and R22 zoning districts, density shall not
exceed 150% of allowable density.
(Bill No. 72-24)
TITLE 13. CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
18-13-101.   Scope; overlay.
   
18-13-102.   Conflict with other law.
   
18-13-103.   Maps.
   
18-13-104.   Buffers, expanded buffers, and buffer modification areas.
   
18-13-105.   Reasonable accommodations for physical disability.
Subtitle 2. Uses
   
18-13-201.   Existing uses.
   
18-13-202.   Waste collection facilities and landfills generally prohibited.
   
18-13-203.   Agricultural activity in the buffer.
   
18-13-204.   IDA uses.
   
18-13-205.   LDA uses.
   
18-13-206.   RCA uses.
   
18-13-207.   Small wind energy systems.
Subtitle 3. Applications for Buffer Modification Map Amendments
   
18-13-301.   Applications for buffer modification map amendments.
   
18-13-302.   Public notice.
   
18-13-303.   Public comment period.
   
18-13-304.   Decision by Planning and Zoning Officer.
Subtitle 4. Growth Allocation
   
18-13-401.   Creation.
   
18-13-402.   Sites eligible for growth allocation.
   
18-13-403.   Public notice.
   
18-13-404.   Application review.
   
18-13-405.   Rescission of growth allocation.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 18-13-101. Scope; overlay.
   This title is an overlay that applies to all land located in the critical
area and the requirements of this title are in addition to other requirements
of this Code.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-13-102. Conflict with other law.
   If any provision in this title conflicts with other County or State law, the
stricter provisions prevail.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 18-13-103. Maps.
   The critical area is shown on the digital map entitled “Anne Arundel County
Critical Area Layer” adopted by the County Council in Bill No. 63-21. The Anne
Arundel County Critical Area Layer Map is incorporated in this article by
reference as if fully set forth and a copy shall be permanently kept and
maintained by the Office of Planning and Zoning. The critical area is divided
into the following areas: intensely developed area (IDA), limited development
area (LDA), and resource conservation area (RCA).
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 63-21)
§ 18-13-104. Buffers, expanded buffers, and buffer modification areas.
   (a)   Buffer. There shall be a minimum 100-foot buffer landward from the
mean high-water line of tidal waters, tributary streams, and tidal wetlands.
Specific development criteria apply as set forth in Article 17 of this Code and
COMAR.
   (b)   Expanded buffer. Except as provided in subsection (c), the 100-foot
buffer shall be expanded beyond 100 feet to include slopes of 15% or greater,
nontidal wetlands, nontidal wetlands of special State concern, and hydric soils
or highly erodible soils. The buffer shall be expanded as follows:
      (1)   If there are contiguous slopes of 15% or greater, the buffer shall
be expanded by the greater of four feet for every 1% of slope or to the top of
the slope and shall include all land within 50 feet of the top of the slopes.
      (2)   If there are nontidal wetlands, nontidal wetlands of special State
concern, hydric soils or highly erodible soils, the buffer shall be expanded in
accordance with COMAR, Title 27.
   (c)   Buffer modification areas. There shall be a buffer modification area
established on a map maintained by the Office of Planning and Zoning with
respect to all or part of a lot created before December 1, 1985 on which the
existing pattern of development prevents the 100-foot buffer from performing
its protective functions. In buffer modification areas, the buffer is not
expanded, and specific development criteria apply as set forth in Article 17 of
this Code and COMAR.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 76-13)
§ 18-13-105. Reasonable accommodations for physical disability.
   Any request for reasonable accommodations as a result of a physical
disability must satisfy the standards for disability as defined in the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101, et seq.
(Bill No. 93-12)
SUBTITLE 2. USES
§ 18-13-201. Existing uses.
   Uses on land in the critical area that were in existence on December 1, 1985
may continue, but intensification or expansion shall be in accordance with this
Code and any use that ceases to exist for one year or more shall be subject to
the provisions of this Code.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-13-202. Waste collection facilities and landfills generally prohibited.
   Creation or expansion of a waste collection or disposal facility or sanitary
landfill is prohibited in the critical area unless environmentally acceptable
alternatives do not exist outside the critical area and the creation or
expansion is needed to correct existing water quality or wastewater management
problems.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-13-203. Agricultural activity in the buffer.
   Agricultural activities are allowed in the 100-foot buffer if best
management practices are used, including a 25-foot vegetative filter strip
established from the mean high-water line of tidal waters or tributary streams
or from the landward edge of tidal wetlands, whichever is further inland.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-13-204. IDA uses.
   (a)   Generally. The uses allowed in the IDA are those uses allowed in the
underlying zoning district in accordance with the requirements of the district
in which the use is located, except that the following uses are allowed only if
the use results in a net improvement in water quality to the adjacent body of
water:
      (1)   non-maritime heavy industrial facilities;
      (2)   permanent sludge handling, storage, or disposal facilities other
than those associated with wastewater treatment facilities; and
      (3)   transportation facilities to serve allowed uses or a regional
or interstate transportation facility that must cross tidal waters.
   (b)   Accessory uses. Restaurants and banquet halls are permitted on a pier
as accessory to a commercial use in Maritime and Commercial Districts, only in
accordance with the Natural Resources Article, § 8-1808.4(c), of the State
Code, provided the principal and accessory uses are allowed in the underlying
zoning districts in accordance with the requirements of the district.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-13-205. LDA uses.
   The uses allowed in the LDA are those uses allowed in the underlying zoning
district in accordance with the requirements of the district in which the use
is located, except that the maximum density allowed is the more restrictive of
four dwelling units per acre or the density allowed in the zoning district in
which the use is located.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-13-206. RCA uses.
   The following uses are the only uses allowed in the RCA and, to be allowed,
the use must be allowed in and meet all requirements of the underlying zoning
district and, for a residential use, the density allowed is one dwelling unit
per 20 acres:
      (1)   accessory structures that are not used or constructed to be used
for human habitation;
      (2)   agritourism so long as the lot coverage for the use is limited to
the lesser of 15% of the total square footage of the property or 20,000 square
feet;
      (3)   bed and breakfast homes located in structures existing as of
December 1, 1985;
      (4)   bed and breakfast inns located in structures existing as of
December 1, 1985;
      (5)   camps, private, for resource utilization or outdoor experiences
excluding recreational vehicles;
      (6)   cemeteries associated with religious facilities existing as of
December 1, 1985 if lot coverage is limited to the lesser of 15% of the lot or
20,000 square feet;
      (7)   Christmas tree sales in an area that does not exceed one-half acre;
      (8)   clay and borrow pits or sand and gravel operations in existence on
June 16, 2003;
      (9)   commercial greenhouses operated in connection with a farm;
      (10)   commercial telecommunication facilities;
      (11)   community parks, playgrounds, and other public recreational uses
consistent with the preservation of natural habitats and limited to passive
recreational uses;
      (12)   conservation uses, practices, and structures for the maintenance
of the natural environment;
      (13)   dairies;
      (14)   dwellings, single-family detached;
      (15)   exhibits showing historical shoreline activities or development;
      (16)   farm alcohol production facility;
      (17)   farm or agricultural heritage site special event located in
structures existing as of December 1, 1985, so long as the lot coverage for the
use is limited to the lesser of 15% of the total square footage of the property
or 20,000 square feet;
      (18)   farm or agricultural heritage site stay located in structures
existing as of December 1, 1985, so long as the lot coverage for the use is
limited to the lesser of 15% of the total square footage of the property or
20,000 square feet;
      (19)   farm tenant houses;
      (20)   farming;
      (21)   forestry;
      (22)   golf courses, excluding clubhouses, sales and maintenance
buildings, and parking areas, if both nutrient management and integrated pest
management are practiced onsite and the golf course otherwise complies with the
Critical Area Commission’s publication “Golf Courses in the RCA, August 3,
2005”;
      (23)   group homes;
      (24)   home occupations, except that child care shall be limited to a
maximum of eight children;
      (25)   hospice facilities;
      (26)   kennels on a lot of at least six acres;
      (27)   marinas in existence as of December 1, 1985;
      (28)   nurseries with landscaping and plant sales, provided the nursery
is the principal use and the lot coverage associated with all other commercial
uses is limited to the lesser of 15% of the lot or 20,000 square feet;
      (29)   outside storage that is accessory to uses allowed in the RCA if
the storage does not exceed the lesser of 10% of the lot or 500 square feet,
except that bulk storage of agricultural products is allowed as accessory to a
farm and unenclosed storage of manure or odor-producing or dust-producing
substances or uses is allowed as accessory to a farm on a lot of at least 10
acres;
      (30)   piers, community, and water-oriented recreational facilities,
structures, and uses;
      (31)   piers, private;
      (32)   piers, recreational;
      (33)   public utility uses and public utility essential services;
      (34)   religious facilities and accessory uses on a lot of at least two
acres if lot coverage is limited to the lesser of 15% of the lot or 20,000
square feet;
      (35)   research institutions, private, if lot coverage is limited to the
lesser of 15% of the lot or 20,000 square feet;
      (36)   rifle, skeet, or archery ranges, excluding clubhouses, sales and
maintenance buildings, and parking;
      (37)   roadside stands with temporary seasonal structures that sell
produce only and that do not exceed 500 square feet;
      (38)   septic and stormwater management devices associated with permitted
uses within the RCA;
      (39)   service organizations and nonprofit charitable and philanthropic
organizations or institutions if lot coverage is limited to the lesser of 15%
of the lot or 20,000 square feet;
      (40)   small cell systems;
      (41)   small wind energy systems or meteorological towers subject to the
requirements of §
18-13-207;
      (42)   solar energy generating facility – accessory;
      (43)   stables, commercial or community, and riding clubs, excluding
clubhouses, sales and maintenance buildings, and parking areas, subject to an
approved soil conservation and water quality plan;
      (44)   swimming pools, private;
      (45)   temporary nonprofit events, including fairs, carnivals, and
bazaars, if the event does not require permanent structures and lasts no more
than 30 days and if no more than one event is held in a year;
      (46)   veterinary clinics operated in connection with a farm;
      (47)   waterman’s home commercial uses, excluding processing and packing;
      (48)   wildlife and game preserves, excluding hunting, shooting,
clubhouses, sales and maintenance buildings, and parking, subject to an
approved soil conservation plan; and
      (49)   yacht clubs existing as of December 1, 1985.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 39-10; Bill No. 13-11; Bill No. 14-11; Bill No. 93-12;
Bill No. 68-13; Bill No. 76-13; Bill No. 89-18; Bill No. 76-19; Bill No. 68-20;
Bill No. 106-21; Bill No. 92-22; Bill No. 57-24)
§ 18-13-207. Small wind energy systems.
   (a)   Location. A small wind energy system or meteorological tower may not
be located in areas designated as forest interior dwelling species (FIDS)
habitats; habitat protection areas for rare, threatened and endangered species,
species in need of conservation, or colonial water birds; or in natural
heritage areas unless the applicant has obtained from the Maryland Department
of Natural Resources Wildlife and Heritage Service a letter stating its
recommendations for protection and conservation of the habitats. Applicants
shall comply with all Department of Natural Resources recommendations for the
preservation of habitats affected by the system.
   (b)   Requirements. If a small wind energy system or meteorological tower is
approved for location in the 100-foot buffer or expanded buffer, the system
shall comply with all of the following requirements.
      (1)   Clearing of forest, developed woodlands, and natural vegetation
shall be limited to only the amount necessary for installation of the wind
turbine.
      (2)   Mitigation shall be required at a ratio of 3:1 for the footprint of
any new lot coverage associated with the wind turbine.
      (3)   Mitigation shall be required at a ratio of 3:1 for the limit of
disturbance of any clearing of forests, developed woodlands and natural
vegetation.
      (4)   Required mitigation shall be located on-site within the 100-foot
buffer to the extent possible and shall be planted to provide a diverse natural
habitat.
      (5)   A buffer management plan showing an offsite location for canopy
tree replacement or a proposal for alternative site stocking that substitutes
understory trees for required canopy trees may be approved by the Office of
Planning and Zoning if the applicant demonstrates that all mitigation cannot be
located on the property.
      (6)   If a small wind energy system or meteorological tower is removed,
the buffer shall be replanted with native vegetation.
   (c)   Variances. A variance may not be granted for the mitigation
requirements specified in subsection (b).
(Bill No. 39-10)
SUBTITLE 3. APPLICATIONS FOR BUFFER MODIFICATION MAP AMENDMENTS
§ 18-13-301. Applications for buffer modification map amendments.
   (a)   Eligible properties. An application for amendment to the buffer
modification area maps may be made for lots that contained impervious surfaces
as of December 1, 1985 or for undeveloped lots located between developed lots.
   (b)   Who may file. An application shall be filed by a person having a
financial, contractual, or proprietary interest in the affected property.
   (c)   Contents. An application shall include:
      (1)   the tax map, block, lot, and parcel numbers and subdivision name
for the affected property;
      (2)   the current critical area classification;
      (3)   a statement of current and proposed uses of the property and all
environmental conditions and features;
      (4)   a statement of the current uses and location of existing structures
on all properties adjacent to the property for which a buffer modification is
requested;
      (5)   a site development plan at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet
identifying or containing the following:
         (i)   a vicinity map;
         (ii)   all impervious surface, including structures, walks, patios,
and pools on the property;
         (iii)   plants, trees, and foliage on the property, including details
of the species and diameter of trees and a general description of other
planting areas;
         (iv)   the minimum front yard setback requirements for the zoning
district and the setback of existing structures from the property line;
         (v)   location of the shoreline and distance to all structures on the
site; and
         (vi)   identification of any habitat protection area, slopes of 15% or
greater, expanded buffer, and forest interior dwelling birds on the property
and adjacent properties;
      (6)   a statement of the justification for the proposed buffer
modification, including an explanation of why the buffer on the property to be
affected is nonfunctional; and
      (7)   evidence of the existence of the structure or impervious surface
within the buffer as of December 1, 1985.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-13-302. Public notice.
   (a)   Signs required. Within seven days after the filing of an application
for an amendment to the buffer modification map, one or more signs shall be
posted on the property to give notice of the application and the developer
shall file a certification with clear photographic evidence to verify
compliance with this subsection. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall
furnish the signs to the developer, and the developer is responsible for
posting and maintaining the signs.
   (b)   Location of signs. Signs shall be located not more than 10 feet from
each boundary of the property that abuts a public road or navigable water,
except that, if required by flora covering the property or topographic
conditions of the land, a sign may be posted farther than 10 feet from the
boundary to enhance its visibility. If the property does not abut a public
road, one or more signs shall be posted in locations that can be readily seen
by the public. The bottom of each sign shall be erected three feet above the
ground.
   (c)   Notice to community associations and others. Within seven days after
the filing of an application for an amendment to the buffer modification map,
the Office of Planning and Zoning shall provide the information contained on
the signs to the Office of the County Executive. The Office of the County
Executive shall send a notice containing that information to each community
association, person, and organization on its list that is located in the
Councilmanic District of the property proposed for an amendment to the buffer
modification map. The notice shall state that additional information may be
obtained from the Office of Planning and Zoning.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-13-303. Public comment period.
   The Planning and Zoning Officer shall set a date by which written comments
from the general public are due to the Office of Planning and Zoning, and the
date shall be no less than 14 days after the posting of the signs. The Planning
and Zoning Officer may not issue a decision on the application until after the
public comment period has expired.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-13-304. Decision by Planning and Zoning Officer.
   (a)   Findings. The Planning and Zoning Officer shall approve the
application if the Planning and Zoning Officer finds that:
      (1)   the application is for a lot created on or before December 1, 1985;
and
      (2)   there was an error or omission in the original maps and the
existing pattern of residential, industrial, commercial, or recreational
development in the critical area prevents the buffer from fulfilling the
following functions:
         (i)   providing for removal or reduction of sediments, nutrients, and
potentially harmful or toxic substances in runoff entering the bay and its
tributaries;
         (ii)   minimizing the adverse effects of human activities on wetlands,
shorelines, stream banks, tidal waters, and aquatic resources;
         (iii)   maintaining an area of transitional habitat between aquatic
and upland communities;
         (iv)   maintaining the natural environment of streams; and
         (v)   protecting riparian wildlife habitat.
   (b)   Form of decision and notice. The Planning and Zoning Officer shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for a change in the
buffer modification area maps and shall mail a copy of the decision to the
applicant, all persons who submitted written comments, and to the Critical Area
Commission for final review and approval.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 93-12)
SUBTITLE 4. GROWTH ALLOCATION
§ 18-13-401. Creation.
   (a)   Creation. There is a growth allocation process in the critical area
that allows land classified as RCA or LDA to be reclassified to LDA or IDA. All
growth allocation requests and reviews shall be in compliance with the
requirements of COMAR, Title 27.
   (b)   IDA; minimum area. IDA shall be located in an area of at least 20
acres, except as provided in subsection (c).
   (c)   Same; exceptions. IDA may be located in an area of less than 20 acres
if the IDA designation would:
      (1)   allow for the redevelopment of existing commercial use in
compliance with current stormwater management requirements;
      (2)   allow for land use consistent with the County’s General Development
Plan; and
      (3)   support the established character of the community, provide for
suitable infill development, and provide for the preservation of existing
community assets.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 71-22)
§ 18-13-402.  Sites eligible for growth allocation.
   (a)   Required characteristics. Requests for growth allocation are limited
to existing or proposed nonresidential uses or zoning districts.
   (b)   Requirements for re-designation from RCA to LDA. New development shall
only be designated on sites zoned commercial or industrial with existing or
planned service on the Water and Sewer Master Plan and bounded by LDA or IDA.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 71-22)
§ 18-13-403. Public notice.
   (a)   Signs required. Within seven days after the filing of an application
for growth allocation, one or more signs shall be posted on the property to
give notice of the application and the developer shall file a certification
with clear photographic evidence to verify compliance with this subsection. The
Office of Planning and Zoning shall furnish the signs to the developer, and the
developer is responsible for posting and maintaining the signs.
   (b)   Location of signs. Signs shall be located not more than 10 feet from
each boundary of the property that abuts a public road or navigable water,
except that, if required by flora covering the property or topographic
conditions of the land, a sign may be posted farther than 10 feet from the
boundary to enhance its visibility. If the property does not abut a public
road, one or more signs shall be posted in locations that can be readily seen
by the public. The bottom of each sign shall be erected three feet above the
ground.
   (c)   Notice to community associations and others. Within seven days after
the filing of an application for growth allocation, the Office of Planning and
Zoning shall provide the information contained on the signs to the Office of
the County Executive. The Office of the County Executive shall send a notice
containing that information to each community association, person, and
organization on its list that is located in the Councilmanic District of the
property proposed for growth allocation. The notice shall state that additional
information may be obtained from the Office of Planning and Zoning.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 18-13-404. Application review.
   (a)   Time limit for Office of Planning and Zoning review. All completed
applications shall be reviewed by the Office of Planning and Zoning for
recommendation to the Planning Advisory Board within 60 days of the last day of
the month of acceptance of the application.
   (b)   Planning Advisory Board review. The Planning Advisory Board shall
review and consider applications for growth allocation along with
recommendations of the Office of Planning and Zoning at a meeting held no later
than 60 days after receipt of the application from the Office of Planning and
Zoning.
   (c)   Planning Advisory Board recommendation. The Planning Advisory Board
shall make recommendations on applications for growth allocation to the County
Executive for proposed legislation for critical area mapping changes.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 18-13-405. Rescission of growth allocation.
   Approval of a growth allocation is rescinded by operation of law if:
      (1)   action to commence subdivision is not begun within one year of the
date of approval by the County Council or Critical Area Commission, whichever
is later, and the subdivision is not recorded within three years of the date of
approval by the County Council or Critical Area Commission, whichever is later;
or
      (2)   when subdivision is not required, action to commence the
development has not begun within one year of the date of approval by the County
Council or Critical Area Commission, whichever is later, and the required
permits are not completed within three years of the date of approval by the
County Council or Critical Area Commission, whichever is later.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 71-22)
TITLE 14. OTHER OVERLAYS
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
18-14-101.   Overlay zones; conflict with other law.
Subtitle 2. Bog Protection
   
18-14-201.   Maps and map modifications.
   
18-14-202.   Bog classifications.
Subtitle 3. Commercial Revitalization Areas
   
18-14-301.   Scope.
   
18-14-302.   General provisions.
   
18-14-303.   Uses.
Subtitle 4. Parole Town Center
   
18-14-401.   General criteria.
Subtitle 5. BWI Mixed Use Overlay
   
18-14-501.   BWI Mixed Use Overlay Area Map.
   
18-14-502.   Uses.
   
18-14-503.   Other development provisions.
Subtitle 6. Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area
   
18-14-601.   Definitions; purpose.
   
18-14-602.   Applicability; conflict with other law.
   
18-14-603.   Uses.
   
18-14-604.   Bulk regulations.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 18-14-101. Overlay zones; conflict with other law.
   
Subtitles 2,
3, and
4 are overlay zones and the requirements of these subtitles are in addition to
other requirements of this Code. If any provision in this title conflicts with
other County law, the provisions of this title prevail, except that §
18-13-102 shall apply if a property subject to one or more of the overlays in
this title is located in the critical area.
(Bill No. 4-05)
SUBTITLE 2. BOG PROTECTION
§ 18-14-201. Maps and map modifications.
   (a)   Bog Protection Area Guidance Map. The bog protection areas are shown
on the Bog Protection Area Guidance Map adopted by Bill No. 60-02 and include
the following:
      (1)   Main Creek Bog;
      (2)   Fresh Pond Bog, also known as Angel's Bog;
      (3)   North Gray's Creek Bog complex;
      (4)   South Gray's Creek bog;
      (5)   Eagle Hill Bog;
      (6)   Shady Pond Bog;
      (7)   Black Hole Creek Bog;
      (8)   Cockey Creek Bog;
      (9)   Dill Road Bog;
      (10)   Cypress Creek Bog;
      (11)   Cypress Creek Atlantic White Cedar Forest;
      (12)   Gumbottom Bog;
      (13)   Deep Ditch Bog;
      (14)   Sullivan's Cove Atlantic White Cedar Forest; and
      (15)   Hines Pond Bog.
   (b)   Map modifications. If a field verification proves to the satisfaction
of the Planning and Zoning Officer that the boundary of a classification shown
on the Bog Protection Area Guidance Map is inaccurate, the Planning and Zoning
Officer may modify the map to reflect the correct boundary no sooner than 30
days after a notice is sent to each property owner listed in the County's tax
records whose boundary is affected by the inaccuracy.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-14-202. Bog classifications.
   A bog protection area is divided into the following classifications:
      (1)   bog;
      (2)   contributing streams;
      (3)   100-foot upland buffer;
      (4)   limited activity area; and
      (5)   contributing drainage area.
(Bill No. 4-05)
SUBTITLE 3. COMMERCIAL REVITALIZATION AREAS
§ 18-14-301. Scope.
   This subtitle applies to commercial revitalization areas as shown on a map
adopted by the County Council.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 10-17; Bill No. 86-18; Bill No. 13-20;
Bill No. 14-20)
   Editor's note – Small-scale representations of the official maps adopted by
Bill No. 10-17, Bill No. 86-18, Bill No. 13-20 and Bill No. 14-20 are included
as an appendix to this article.
§ 18-14-302. General provisions.
   (a)     Use. A property located in a commercial revitalization area may
contain a single use or be a business complex or a subdivision.
   (b)   Noncomplying existing improvements. For improved lots less than one
acre in a commercial revitalization area for which existing improvements do not
comply with this Code:
      (1)   the Planning and Zoning Officer may approve redevelopment that does
not satisfy the bulk regulations and parking requirements under this title and
Title 17, provided the proposed redevelopment brings the improvements into
greater overall compliance with this Code and the proposed improvements meet or
exceed the level of compliance of the existing use.
      (2)   the Planning and Zoning Officer shall base the decision to approve
or deny the proposed redevelopment on the findings and other matters set forth
in §
17-2-108(a)(2) through (a)(4) of this Code; and
      (3)   as a part of a site development plan application for redevelopment,
an applicant shall include a description of how the proposed redevelopment
increases compliance of the existing use or meets or exceeds the standards set
forth in this Code.
(Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 10-17)
§ 18-14-303. Uses.
   (a)   In a C4 District. The uses allowed for a property located in a
commercial revitalization area with underlying zoning of C4 are the permitted,
conditional, and special exception uses set forth in §
18-5-102 for C3 and C4 Districts.
   (b)   In a C3 District. The uses allowed for a property located in a
commercial revitalization area with underlying zoning of C3 are the permitted,
conditional, and special exception uses set forth in §
18-5-102 for a C3 District, except that outside storage accessory to other uses
shall be limited to 10% of the square footage of the structure to which it
relates and the following additional uses are allowed as permitted uses:
      (1)   animal hospitals and veterinary clinics;
      (2)   brewery, craft;
      (3)   carpet cleaning establishments;
      (3)   carpet cleaning establishments;
      (4)   coffee roasters;
      (5)   linen supply establishments;
      (6)   sign shops, including painting and fabrication;
      (7)   swimming pool and spa sales, with outdoor display;
      (8)   taxidermists; and
      (9)   vending businesses.
   (c)   Residential use provisions. Multifamily, multiplex, stacked townhouse,
and townhouse dwelling units are allowed on a property in a commercial
revitalization area in any underlying zoning district as follows:
      (1)   Density may not exceed 22 dwelling units for each acre of area.
      (2)   The number of dwelling units allowed shall be applied in the
aggregate, rather than separately to individual lots.
      (3)   An area equal to 10% of the floor area of the residential
structures shall be set aside for use by the residents of the development as an
outdoor recreational area, such as a pocket park, plaza, or courtyard that may
include amenities such as benches, gazebos, and shade trees; an indoor
recreational facility, such as a community room, gymnasium, or swimming pool;
or a combination of an outdoor recreational area and indoor recreational
facility; and the provisions of §
17-6-111 do not apply.
      (4)   At least 25% of the land area shall consist of commercial uses,
including structures, parking, access, and open areas used for stormwater
management and landscaping, when residential and commercial uses are contained
in separate structures.
      (5)   The height of a multifamily dwelling may not exceed 75 feet.
      (6)   Dwelling units shall be located at least 25 feet from an existing
commercial telecommunication facility.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 54-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 19-06; Bill No. 10-17;
Bill No. 29-24; Bill No. 72-24)
SUBTITLE 4. PAROLE TOWN CENTER
§ 18-14-401. General criteria.
   (a)   Plan. Within the Parole Town Center, subareas are shown in the Parole
Town Center Master Plan adopted by the County Council and are divided into the
Core, Parole North District, Church Creek District, Hudson Street Transition,
Housley Road Village, Gateway Business Mix, and Defense Highway Corridor.
   (b)   Uses. Uses allowed by existing zoning classifications are allowed in
the Parole Town Center. In addition, the uses set forth in Subtitle 9 of
Title 7 of Article 17 of this Code are allowed to the extent permitted by that
subtitle.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 64-23)
SUBTITLE 5. BWI MIXED USE OVERLAY
§ 18-14-501. BWI Mixed Use Overlay Area Map.
   This section applies to those properties within the BWI Mixed Use Overlay
Area as shown on the official map adopted by the County Council in Bill No. 30-
25 entitled the BWI Mixed Use Overlay Area.
(Bill No. 116-15; Bill No. 30-25)
§ 18-14-502. Uses.
   The uses allowed on a property in the BWI Mixed Use Overlay Area are the
permitted, conditional, and special exception uses allowed in the underlying
zoning district in accordance with the requirements of the district in which
the use is located. The following additional uses are allowed as permitted uses
within the BWI Mixed Use Overlay Area:
      (1)   alcoholic beverage uses as accessory to other uses, and subject to
the provisions of §
18-10-104;
      (2)    banks;
      (3)   dwellings, multifamily;
      (4)   dwellings, townhouses and stacked townhouses;
      (5)    hotels and motels;
      (6)    offices, professional and general;
      (7)   package goods stores, subject to the provisions of §
18-10-148;
      (8)   pharmacies;
      (9)    restaurants; and
      (10)   retail specialty stores or shops for retail sales.
(Bill No. 116-15; Bill No. 30-25)
§ 18-14-503. Other development provisions.
   (a)   For multifamily, stacked townhouses, and townhouse developments in the
BWI Mixed Use Overlay Area, the following bulk regulations shall apply:
Maximum coverage by structures and      75%
parking
Minimum lot size                        None
Maximum density for townhouse and       22 dwelling units per acre
stacked townhouse dwellings
Maximum density for multifamily         22 dwelling units per acre
dwellings
Maximum height for a townhouse or       50 feet
stacked townhouse principal structure
                                        50 feet, or up to 70 feet if all
Maximum height for a multifamily        setbacks are increased by one foot for
principal structure                     each two feet of height in excess of 50
                                        feet
Maximum height for accessory structures 20 feet or the height of the principal
                                        structure, whichever is less
Minimum setbacks for a townhouse or stacked townhouse structures
   Front lot line                    5 feet, but if parking is located in
                                        the front, 18 feet
   Side lot line for end units       5 feet
   Rear lot line                     10 feet
Distance between townhouse or stacked townhouse structures
   Front to front between structure  40 feet
facades
   Back to back between structure    40 feet
facades
   Adjacent end units                15 feet
Maximum units per townhouse structure   16 units if back to back; otherwise, 8
                                        units
Minimum width of individual townhouse   14 feet
unit
Minimum setbacks for a multifamily principal structure
   Front lot line                    20 feet
   Side lot line                     25 feet
   Corner side lot line              30 feet
   Rear lot line                     30 feet
Minimum distance between multifamily structures located on the same lot
(closest projecting edge)
   Facades with windows              30 feet, increased by 25% of the amount
                                        by which the height exceeds 45 feet
   Facades without windows           25 feet, increased by 25% of the amount
                                        by which the height exceeds 45 feet
Minimum setbacks for accessory structures
   Side and rear lot lines           7 feet
   Corner side lot line              15 feet
 
   (b)   For all other uses in the BWI Mixed Use Overlay Area, the bulk
regulations for the underlying zoning district shall apply.
(Bill No. 116-15; Bill No. 72-24; Bill No. 30-25)
SUBTITLE 6. GLEN BURNIE SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY OVERLAY AREA
§ 18-14-601. Definitions; purpose.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this subtitle, the following words have
the meanings indicated.
      (1)   "Community enhancement" means a contribution or feature that
exceeds the requirements of the County Code and is provided by a developer, in
whole or in part, to improve the community's aesthetic character or quality of
life and may include pocket parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, bicycle
or pedestrian trail improvements, bus shelter or other transit improvements,
public meeting space, or public art, or contributions to capital improvements
to a public park or community facility that serves the surrounding community.
      (2)   "Redevelopment" means rehabilitation of an existing structure or
new construction on a lot or lots when one or more of the lots:
         (i)   is zoned R10, R15, R22, TC, Commercial, or Industrial, or is
located, in whole or in part, within a transit-oriented overlay development
policy area identified in the General Development Plan;
         (ii)   has or had preexisting structures, uses, or paved parking; and
         (iii)   has primary vehicular access from an arterial road or from a
local or higher classification road that directly accesses an arterial road.
   (b)   Purposes. The purposes of the Glen Burnie Sustainable Community
Overlay Area are to:
      (1)   facilitate redevelopment of improved properties that are
underutilized, obsolete, or deteriorated;
      (2)   allow flexibility of design, building types, and densities to
integrate the redevelopment into the surrounding community;
      (3)   provide a wide range of redevelopment alternatives;
      (4)   allow creative uses or mixes of uses;
      (5)   achieve quality land use proposals through flexible and timely
development approvals;
      (6)   address pedestrian connections and circulation;
      (7)   encourage community enhancements;
      (8)   encourage high-quality site and building design; and
      (9)   encourage the assemblage of lots when appropriate.
(Bill No. 64-20; Bill No. 94-21)
§ 18-14-602. Applicability; conflict with other law.
   (a)   Applicability. This subtitle applies to the redevelopment of property
that is located in the Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area, as shown
on the map adopted by the County Council in Bill No. 64-20, if the developer
elects to redevelop under Article 17, Title 7, Subtitle 3 and this subtitle.
   (b)   Conflict with other law. If any provision of this subtitle conflicts
with other provisions in
Article 18, the provisions of this subtitle prevail.
(Bill No. 64-20; Bill No. 65-21)
§ 18-14-603. Uses.
   (a)   Uses allowed. The uses allowed in redevelopment of a property in the
Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area are the permitted and
conditional uses allowed in the R15, R22, C2, C3, C4, and W1 zoning districts.
Within the Glen Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area:
      (1)   when a use is allowed as both a permitted use and a conditional use
in one or more zoning districts, the use shall be allowed as a permitted use
and the requirements of Title 10 do not apply; and
      (2)   when a use is allowed as a conditional use only in one or more
zoning districts, the use shall meet the conditional use requirements of Title
10, except a requirement that addresses bulk regulations, such as lot size,
site area, coverage, width at the front building restriction line, setbacks
from lot lines, height, density, floor area ratio, or required percentages of
uses, does not apply.
   (b)   Additional uses. In addition to the uses allowed under subsection (a),
the Planning and Zoning Officer may approve additional uses if the use is
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in terms of character, scale, and
massing.
(Bill No. 64-20; Bill No. 99-20)
§ 18-14-604. Bulk regulations.
   (a)   Bulk regulations specific to the Glen Burnie Sustainable Community
Overlay Area. The following bulk regulations apply to redevelopment in the Glen
Burnie Sustainable Community Overlay Area:
 
Maximum height for multifamily and 60 feet, or up to 84 feet with one or more
townhouse dwellings                community enhancements
Maximum height for non-residential 72 feet, or up to 96 feet with one or more
structures                         community enhancements
Maximum floor area ratio           2.0, or up to 3.0 with one or more community
                                   enhancements
 
   (b)   Inapplicability of other bulk regulations. All other bulk regulations
required by the County Code do not apply in the Glen Burnie Sustainable
Community Overlay Area.
(Bill No. 64-20)
TITLE 15. NONCONFORMING USES
Section
   
18-15-101.   Registration of nonconforming uses.
   
18-15-102.   Nonconforming uses generally.
   
18-15-103.   Special exceptions.
   
18-15-104.   Termination of nonconforming uses.
§ 18-15-101. Registration of nonconforming uses.
   (a)   Application. A person who wishes to register a nonconforming use shall
file an application on a form provided by the Office of Planning and Zoning,
except that a nonconforming dwelling may not be registered.
   (b)   Posting. For a period of 14 days after filing an application to
register a nonconforming use, the applicant shall post one or more signs on the
property. Signs shall be furnished by the Office of Planning and Zoning and
posted and maintained by the applicant.
   (c)   Rebuttable presumption. There is a rebuttable presumption that a use
in existence continuously for a period of 10 years is a nonconforming use.
   (d)   Decision. After receipt of an application, the Office of Planning and
Zoning shall determine whether the use may be registered as a nonconforming use
and classify the use based on the zoning district in which the use is allowed.
If the use is specified in more than one zoning district, the Office of
Planning and Zoning shall classify the use based on what it considers to be the
most appropriate district. The Office shall notify the applicant in writing of
its determinations.
   (e)   Limitations.
      (1)   No enforcement action under Title 17 to abate a use of property in
violation of this article shall be initiated 20 years or more after the date
the use commenced, if:
         (i)   the use is operated by the owner of the property and has been in
existence continuously since first commenced; and
         (ii)   the property on which the use is located has been owned by the
same owner since the use commenced.
      (2)   A use to which subsection (e)(1) applies shall be registered and
classified by the Office of Planning and Zoning as a "twenty-year registered
use."
      (3)   A use to which subsection (e)(1) applies shall terminate when the
use ceases operation for 12 consecutive months or when the scope of the use is
so significantly reduced during the 12 month period as to change its nature or
character, or upon a transfer of ownership from the owner described in
subsection (e)(1)(ii), unless that transfer of ownership is to a child of the
owner who continues to operate the use without cessation.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 38-14; Bill No. 7-15)
§ 18-15-102. Nonconforming uses generally.
   (a)   Change in use. A nonconforming use may be changed to another use
allowed by this article if the Planning and Zoning Officer determines the new
use to be of the same or a less intensive nature or character. A new use shall
be considered to be of the same or less intensive nature or character only if
the following are the same or less than the existing use: the number and kind
of vehicular trips; the nature of any outside storage, loading, and parking;
hours of operation; and impact on natural features.
   (b)   Intensification. An intensification of a nonconforming use is allowed
so long as the nature and character of the use are unchanged and substantially
the same facilities are used. Nonconforming uses within the critical area are
subject to §
18-13-201.
   (c)   Reconstruction, repair, or relocation. A nonconforming use or a
structure in which the use is located may be reconstructed, repaired, or
relocated.
      (1)   Except to the extent permitted by subsection (d) and §
18-15-103, the reconstruction or relocation may not increase the nonconforming
status of the property or result in a greater nonconformance than previously
enjoyed.
      (2)   Reconstruction, repair, or relocation may not occur on a lot other
than the one on which the nonconforming use was originally located.
      (3)   Nonconforming structures that have been damaged but not destroyed
by fire or natural catastrophe may be reconstructed, repaired, or relocated
within 20 years of the damage in accordance with subsections (c)(1) and (2).
   (d)   Nonconforming single-family dwellings. The Office of Planning and
Zoning may allow:
      (1)   the expansion of a nonconforming use single-family dwelling if the
expansion is set back at least seven feet from each side lot line and 25 feet
from the front and rear lot lines and if the expansion does not cause the
structure to exceed a height of 35 feet;
      (2)   notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, the registration
and use of a nonconforming dwelling reconstructed, repaired, or relocated
pursuant to subsection (c) as a nonconforming dwelling unit use if the
structure was previously used as a dwelling unit prior to being damaged by fire
or natural catastrophe; or
      (3)   structures accessory to the nonconforming use dwelling if the
accessory structure is located in a side or rear yard, set back at least seven
feet from side and rear lot lines, and does not exceed a height of 25 feet or
the height of the principal structure, whichever is less.
   (e)   Nonconforming mobile homes. An existing mobile home with a valid
mobile home permit on a lot that is subsequently subdivided is not required to
apply as a nonconforming use provided the permit was issued before the
application for subdivision. The mobile home may continue as a legal,
nonconforming use without registration provided the mobile home is not expanded
and no structures accessory to the mobile home are added to the lot. If a lot
occupied by a mobile home is improved with a dwelling, the mobile home must be
removed upon occupancy of the dwelling unless the dwelling is otherwise
permitted under this Code.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 69-14; Bill No. 116-
21)
§ 18-15-103. Special exceptions.
   (a)   Expansion or combination of floor area. Subject to the requirements of
this section and §
18-16-304, the Administrative Hearing Officer may grant a special exception for
expansion of a nonconforming use or a special exception for combining floor
area when more than one structure on the same property is used for the
nonconforming use, subject to compliance with the following:
      (1)   a proposed expansion of floor area, land area, or water area may
not exceed 30% of the area authorized under the nonconforming status of the
property, except that each type of area is to be considered separately and no
area may be substituted for another area;
      (2)   existing and proposed facilities shall meet the lot area,
screening, land-to-water ratio, height, parking, lot coverage, and, to the
extent feasible, setbacks for the use specified in the zoning district in which
the use is allowed;
      (3)   construction shall be designed to be as inoffensive as practicable
in appearance and location to other properties in the area and, whenever
practical, similarity in design to other buildings in the area and appropriate
landscaping shall be provided; and
      (4)   construction shall be undertaken in accordance with the
requirements of this section and of the Administrative Hearing Officer
concurrently so that each change or improvement is completed at or near the
same time.
   (b)   Marina storage rack building. The Administrative Hearing Officer,
subject to the requirements in Title 11, may grant a special exception for a
multilevel watercraft storage rack building in a marina with nonconforming
travel lift facilities and dry storage of watercraft.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-15-104. Termination of nonconforming uses.
   (a)   Generally. A nonconforming use terminates when the use ceases
operation for 12 consecutive months or when the scope of the use is so
significantly reduced during the 12-month period as to change its nature or
character. The Planning and Zoning Officer shall calculate the cessation of the
use, and, provided the cessation was not caused by the property owner, may
exclude in the calculation any cessation up to:
      (1)   two years in which the use ceased because of government action, or
destruction due to fire or natural catastrophe; or
      (2)   twenty years in which the use of a nonconforming use structure
ceased because of damage, but not destruction, caused by fire or natural
catastrophe.
   (b)   Extension of nonconforming use. The Planning and Zoning Officer may
extend the 12-month period set forth in subsection (a) to a maximum of 18
months upon a written application for extension received before the termination
date. The application shall demonstrate unusual or exceptional circumstances
beyond the control of the property owner that prevented continuance of the
nonconforming use. The Planning and Zoning Officer’s decision on the
application shall be in writing and shall specify the reason for the decision.
   (c)   Conformance with article after termination. After a nonconforming use
is terminated, any further use of the site shall be in conformance with this
article.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 50-17; Bill No. 116-21)
TITLE 16. ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
Section
Subtitle 1. In General
   
18-16-101.   General provisions.
   
18-16-102.   Temporary Hearing Officer.
   
18-16-103.   Ex parte communications prohibited.
Subtitle 2. Application Process and Pre-hearing Procedures
   
18-16-201.   Applications.
   
18-16-202.   Scheduling of hearing.
   
18-16-203.   Notices and signs.
Subtitle 3. Hearing and Decision
   
18-16-301.   Hearing.
   
18-16-302.   Critical area reclassifications.
   
18-16-303.   Rezonings.
   
18-16-304.   Special exceptions.
   
18-16-305.   Variances.
   
18-16-306.   Decision on application.
Subtitle 4. Post-Decision Procedures and Events
   
18-16-401.   Revision by Administrative Hearing Officer to correct errors of
form.
   
18-16-402.   Appeal to the Board of Appeals.
   
18-16-403.   Limitation on subsequent applications.
   
18-16-404.   Rescission, suspension, or modification of a variance or special
exception.
   
18-16-405.   Time period after which variances and special exceptions are void.
   
18-16-406.   Abandonment of special exception.
SUBTITLE 1. IN GENERAL
§ 18-16-101. General provisions.
   (a)   Definition. In this title, "application" means a request to change or
remove a critical area classification, to change a zoning district, for a
special exception or variance, or for a modification of a special exception.
   (b)   Time. The computation of time under this title is governed by §
1-1-103 of this Code.
   (c)   Discovery. Depositions and other discovery in connection with
proceedings under this title are prohibited.
   (d)   Effect of approval. The granting of an application under this title
does not operate as a waiver of any law or regulation relating to the
development of the property or constitute a commitment on the part of the
County to provide fire suppression facilities, roads, schools, sewers, storm
drainage systems, or water service.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-16-102. Temporary Hearing Officer.
   If the Administrative Hearing Officer has a conflict of interest, the
Administrative Hearing Officer shall withdraw and the County Executive shall
appoint a temporary Administrative Hearing Officer to hear the case. The
temporary Administrative Hearing Officer is entitled to the per diem
compensation provided for in the budget of the Office of Administrative
Hearings. A temporary Administrative Hearing Officer shall also hear cases if
the Administrative Hearing Officer is absent, sick, or unable to act for any
other reason.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-16-103. Ex parte communications prohibited.
   A person may not communicate ex parte or confer privately with the
Administrative Hearing Officer concerning a pending or proposed application.
Information sought by a member of the public or a party to a hearing before the
Administrative Hearing Officer shall be directed to the Office of Planning and
Zoning.
(Bill No. 4-05)
SUBTITLE 2. APPLICATION PROCESS AND PRE-HEARING PROCEDURES
§ 18-16-201. Applications.
   (a)   Generally. A person having a financial, contractual, or proprietary
interest in property to be affected may file an application, accompanied by an
administrative site plan, with the Office of Planning and Zoning on a form
supplied by the Office. A separate application is required for each request.
Each application shall contain a list of the names and addresses of all
property owners who own land:
      (1)   located within 300 feet of the affected property;
      (2)   that confronts or adjoins the affected property; and
      (3)   except for property owned by government entities or public service
companies, that confronts or adjoins land identified in subsection (a)(2).
   (b)   Failure to conform. The Office of Planning and Zoning may not accept
an application for filing if it fails to conform with the requirements of this
title.
   (c)   Pre-filing meeting required. Before filing an application for a
variance, special exception, or to change a zoning district, to change or
remove a critical area classification, or for a variance in the critical area
or a bog protection area, an applicant shall meet with the Office of Planning
and Zoning to review a pre-file concept plan or an administrative site plan.
For single lot properties the owner shall prepare a simple site plan as a basis
for determining what can be done under the provisions of this Code to avoid the
need for a variance.
   (d)   Contents of a pre-file plan. A pre-file plan shall include:
      (1)   the outline of the property and topography with steep slopes and
buffers delineated with scale and north arrow which requirement may be
satisfied by a County GIS with tax map boundary overlay;
      (2)   zoning boundaries;
      (3)   critical area and bog protection areas;
      (4)   existing and proposed structures and uses;
      (5)   setbacks and parking;
      (6)   access and interior road circulation;
      (7)   conceptual utilities and drainage structures;
      (8)   forested areas and mean high water lines;
      (9)   all natural features and required buffers; and
      (10)   a vicinity map.
   (e)   Contents of administrative site plan. An administrative site plan
shall include:
      (1)   the outline of the property with scale and north arrow;
      (2)   zoning boundaries and, where the boundary abuts a public right-of-
way, the boundary shall be shown to the center line of the right-of-way;
      (3)   critical area and bog protection areas;
      (4)   existing and proposed structures and uses;
      (5)   setbacks, parking, and landscaping in accordance with requirements
of the Landscape Manual;
      (6)   access and interior road circulation;
      (7)   utilities and drainage structures;
      (8)   easements of record;
      (9)   forested areas and mean high water lines;
      (10)   natural features;
      (11)   for sites in the critical area, field run topography at two-foot
intervals if the site has slopes of 15% or more;
      (12)   for sites not in the critical area, field run topography at two-
foot intervals if the site has slopes of 25% or more;
      (13)   a vicinity map;
      (14)   for any development impacting environmentally sensitive areas, and
all new single- family dwellings, all information contained in the current
County preliminary plan checklist or other relevant information specified by
the Planning and Zoning Officer; and
      (15)   for any development impacting environmentally sensitive areas or
disturbing 5,000 square feet or more, and all new single-family dwellings, a
stormwater management plan that satisfies requirements of the County Procedures
Manual.
   (f)   Modification of application. After the Office of Planning and Zoning
accepts an application for filing, the application may be modified or amended
until 10 days before the date of the hearing for a more restrictive use only.
   (g)   Withdrawal of application. An application that is withdrawn after the
hearing is advertised shall be considered as having been denied on the date of
the withdrawal.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 75-10; Bill No. 93-12;
Bill No. 19-18)
§ 18-16-202. Scheduling of hearing.
   (a)   In general. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall submit a list of
applications to the Administrative Hearing Officer weekly for the scheduling of
hearings. Not less than 20 days before the date for each hearing, the Office
shall transmit to the Administrative Hearing Officer its entire file for each
application. Not less than seven days before the date of each hearing, the
Office shall transmit to the Administrative Hearing Officer the written
position of the Office of Planning and Zoning on each application. The
Administrative Hearing Officer shall maintain a docket of each case to be
heard, and the docket shall include each case or file number, the name of the
case, and the date of the hearing.
   (b)   Hearing date. Not more than 30 days after receipt of the list of
applications, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall schedule a hearing and
notify the applicant. The time, date, and place of the hearing shall be fixed
with due regard for the interest and convenience of the public and the parties,
except that hearings for rezonings shall begin no earlier than 6:00 p.m.
   (c)   Postponements. After a hearing has been scheduled, the hearing may not
be postponed unless a written motion is filed that demonstrates compelling
circumstances for a postponement. If the Administrative Hearing Officer grants
a postponement, the sign provisions of §
18-16-203 shall be complied with anew and the Administrative Hearing Officer
shall require the person who requested the postponement to pay all costs caused
by the postponement.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 53-17)
§ 18-16-203. Notices and signs.
   (a)   To certain property owners. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall
send, by first class mail postage prepaid, to each property owner identified in
the application pursuant to §
18-16-201(a), a notice containing information about the case and the date,
time, and location of the hearing. The notice shall state that further
information may be obtained from the Office of Planning and Zoning. The
Administrative Hearing Officer shall also send the notice to any person who has
served a written notice on the Administrative Hearing Officer of an intention
to appear at the hearing. At least two weeks before the scheduled hearing date,
the Administrative Hearing Officer shall post the hearing notice on the
County's website.
   (b)   To Critical Area Commission. For an application for a reclassification
of property in the critical area, the applicant shall send copies of the
application and of the Administrative Hearing Officer's notice to the Critical
Area Commission at least 30 days before the hearing.
   (c)   To community associations and others. The Office of the County
Executive shall maintain a list of all community associations in the County and
of all other persons and organizations who request to receive the mailing
described in this subtitle. At least two weeks before the scheduled hearing
date, the Office of the County Executive shall provide a copy of the
Administrative Hearing Officer's notice of hearing to each community
association, person, and organization on the list that is located in the
Councilmanic District of the property to be affected and any abutting
Councilmanic District if the property abuts another Councilmanic District. This
notice may be given by e-mail. The Office of the County Executive shall
certify, in writing, to the Administrative Hearing Officer that the notice has
been provided, and the certification constitutes prima facie evidence that the
information has been provided. The Administrative Hearing Officer may not
conduct the hearing without the certification.
   (d)   Signs.
      (1)   For a period of not less than 30 days before the date of a hearing
on an application for a rezoning or critical area reclassification or for a
period of not less than 14 days before the date of a hearing on an application
for a special exception or variance, one or more signs shall be posted on the
subject property to give notice of the application. The Office of Planning and
Zoning shall furnish the signs to the applicant, and the applicant is
responsible for posting and maintaining the signs.
      (2)   Signs shall be located not more than 10 feet from each boundary of
the property that abuts a public road or navigable water, except that, if
required by flora covering the property or topographic conditions of the land,
a sign may be posted farther than 10 feet from the boundary to enhance its
visibility. If the property does not abut a public road, one or more signs
shall be posted in locations that can be readily seen by the public. The bottom
of each sign shall be erected three feet above the ground.
   (e)   Notice – rezoning. For an application for rezoning to a mixed use
district in accordance with §
18-16-303(g), the Administrative Hearing Officer shall send notice containing
information about the case and the date, time, and location of the hearing to
the councilmember for the Councilmanic District of the property to be affected
and, if the property abuts another Councilmanic District, the councilmember for
any abutting Councilmanic District. This notice may be given by e-mail.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 67-08; Bill No. 65-13; Bill No. 19-18; Bill No. 75-24)
SUBTITLE 3. HEARING AND DECISION
§ 18-16-301. Hearing.
   (a)   Conducted in public. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall conduct
a public hearing on an application, which shall be recorded. The hearing may be
continued from time to time, with the time and place of the next hearing date
announced publicly.
   (b)   Rulings and witnesses. The hearing shall be conducted in an impartial
and orderly manner. The applicant, the County, and any other person deemed
qualified by the Administrative Hearing Officer may introduce evidence and
testify. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall rule on procedural matters
and objections made during the course of a hearing. Each witness shall testify
under oath.
   (c)   Burden of proof. The applicant has the burden of proof, including the
burden of going forward with the production of evidence and the burden of
persuasion, on all questions of fact. The burden of persuasion is by a
preponderance of the evidence.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-16-302. Critical area reclassifications.
   (a)   Nature of application. An application for a critical area
reclassification may be for a more or less restrictive classification and may
cover more than one lot if portions of each lot are proposed to be designated
in the same classification or one or more classifications.
   (b)   Requirements for approval. Critical area reclassifications shall be
granted or denied in accordance with compatibility with the underlying zoning
district, but may not be granted unless the Administrative Hearing Officer
makes the following affirmative findings:
      (1)   There was a mistake in the approved critical area map based on land
uses or natural features in existence on December 1, 1985, provided that a
property located within 2,000 feet of public water or sewer may not be
considered to have public water or sewer for purposes of reclassification and
may not be considered to be a mapping mistake;
      (2)   The proposed critical area classification conforms to the State and
County critical area mapping criteria;
      (3)   The proposed critical area classification conforms to the
environmental goals and standards of the General Development Plan;
      (4)   There is compatibility between the uses of the property as
reclassified and surrounding land uses, so as to promote the health, safety,
and welfare of present and future residents of the County and effective
environmental land use management; and
      (5)   The applicant provided to the Critical Area Commission a copy of
the Administrative Hearing Officer's notice and a copy of the application at
least 30 days before the date of the hearing.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 67-08)
§ 18-16-303. Rezonings.
   (a)   Generally. An application for a rezoning may be for a more or less
restrictive classification and may cover more than one lot if portions of the
lots are proposed to be classified in the same district or in one or more
districts.
   (b)   Requirements for approval. A rezoning may not be granted unless the
Administrative Hearing Officer makes the following affirmative findings:
      (1)   There was a mistake in the zoning map or the character of the
neighborhood has changed to such an extent that the zoning map should be
changed;
      (2)   The new zoning classification conforms to the General Development
Plan in relation to land use, number of dwelling units or type and intensity of
nonresidential buildings, and location;
      (3)   There is compatibility between the uses of the property as
reclassified and the surrounding land uses, so as to promote the health,
safety, and welfare of present and future residents of the County; and
      (4)   For a property located in the critical area:
         (i)   the uses allowed in the proposed zoning classification are
compatible with the critical area land use designation and development
standards for the property; and
         (ii)   the Critical Area Commission staff has recommended approval of
the rezoning if the basis for the rezoning is that the character of the
neighborhood has changed to such an extent that the zoning map should be
changed.
   (c)   Restrictions.
      (1)   A lot located in an Odenton Town Center Zoning District may be
rezoned only to another Odenton Town Center Zoning District, and a lot that is
not located in the Odenton Town Center may not be rezoned to an Odenton Town
Center Zoning District.
      (2)   A lot not designated as a mixed use planned land use in the General
Development Plan or a region plan may not be administratively rezoned to a
mixed use district. If the General Development Plan or a region plan adopted
between January 1, 2025, and December 31, 2026, recommends a sector plan or
study for a lot designated as a mixed use planned land use, the lot may not be
administratively rezoned to a mixed use district unless the sector plan or
study is completed and recommends a rezoning to a mixed use district. If a
region plan adopted between May 6, 2024, and December 31, 2024, does not
recommend a sector plan or study for a lot designated as a mixed use planned
land use, a sector plan or study shall be required before an administrative
rezoning may be considered, and the lot may not be administratively rezoned to
a mixed use district unless the sector plan or study is completed and
recommends a rezoning to a mixed use district.
   (d)   Governmental use. The use of property by or on behalf of a unit of
government not subject to zoning laws in a manner that otherwise would be
contrary to zoning laws is not evidence of a mistake in zoning or a change in
the character of a neighborhood.
   (e)   Road construction or closing. The construction or closing of a road
may constitute evidence of a change in the character of a neighborhood.
   (f)   Suburban community center. Neither the approval of a special exception
for a suburban community center nor the development of a center may be evidence
of or constitute a mistake in the zoning map or a change in the character of
the neighborhood.
   (g)   Mixed use designation prior to a certain date. If a lot was not zoned
as a mixed use district in a comprehensive zoning ordinance adopted between May
6, 2024, and December 31, 2026, and was designated as mixed use planned land
use in a region plan adopted between May 6, 2024, and December 31, 2026, the
lot may be administratively rezoned to a mixed use district if the requirements
of subsection (c)(2) are met. The designation of mixed use planned land use in
the General Development Plan or a region plan and a recommendation of rezoning
to a mixed use district in a required sector plan or study shall satisfy the
requirement of subsection (b)(1).
   (h)   Mixed use application prior to a certain date. An application for
administrative rezoning to a mixed use district filed before June 12, 2025
shall be governed by the law as it existed prior to June 12, 2025.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 84-23; Bill No. 75-24; Bill No. 18-25)
§ 18-16-304. Special exceptions.
   (a)   Requirements. A special exception use may be granted only if the
Administrative Hearing Officer makes each of the following affirmative
findings:
      (1)   The use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or
welfare;
      (2)   The location, nature, and height of each building, wall, and fence,
the nature and extent of landscaping on the site, and the location, size,
nature, and intensity of each phase of the use and its access roads will be
compatible with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in
which it is located;
      (3)   Operations related to the use will be no more objectionable with
regard to noise, fumes, vibration, or light to nearby properties than
operations in other uses allowed under this article;
      (4)   The use at the location proposed will not have any adverse effects
above and beyond those inherently associated with the use irrespective of its
location within the zoning district;
      (5)   The proposed use will not conflict with an existing or programmed
public facility, public service, school, or road;
      (6)   The proposed use has the written recommendations and comments of
the Health Department and the Office of Planning and Zoning;
      (7)   The proposed use is consistent with the County General Development
Plan;
      (8)   The applicant has presented sufficient evidence of public need for
the use;
      (9)   The applicant has presented sufficient evidence that the use will
meet and be able to maintain adherence to the criteria for the specific use;
      (10)   The application will conform to the critical area criteria for
sites located in the critical area; and
      (11)   The administrative site plan demonstrates the applicant's ability
to comply with the requirements of the Landscape Manual.
   (b)   Phasing of development. If phasing of development is proposed for a
use allowed by special exception and the Planning and Zoning Officer has
approved a plan for phasing of development, the Administrative Hearing Officer
may allow phasing pursuant to the approved plan as a condition of special
exception approval.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 60-10; Bill No. 18-18)
§ 18-16-305. Variances.
   (a)   Requirements for zoning variances. The Administrative Hearing Officer
may vary or modify the provisions of this article when it is alleged that
practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships prevent conformance with the
strict letter of this article, provided the spirit of law is observed, public
safety secured, and substantial justice done. A variance may be granted only if
the Administrative Hearing Officer makes the following affirmative findings:
      (1)   Because of certain unique physical conditions, such as
irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size and shape or exceptional
topographical conditions peculiar to and inherent in the particular lot, there
is no reasonable possibility of developing the lot in strict conformance with
this article; or
      (2)   Because of exceptional circumstances other than financial
considerations, the grant of a variance is necessary to avoid practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardship and to enable the applicant to develop the
lot.
   (b)   Requirements for critical or bog protection area variances. For a
property located in the critical area or a bog protection area, a variance to
the requirements of the County's critical area program or the bog protection
program may be granted if the Administrative Hearing Officer makes the
following affirmative findings:
      (1)   Because of certain unique physical conditions, such as exceptional
topographical conditions peculiar to and inherent in the particular lot or
irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size and shape, strict
implementation of the County's critical area program or bog protection program
would result in an unwarranted hardship, as that term is defined in the Natural
Resources Article, § 8-1808, of the State Code, to the applicant;
      (2)   (i)   A literal interpretation of COMAR, Title 27, Criteria for
Local Critical Area Program Development or the County's critical area program
and related ordinances will deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by
other properties in similar areas as permitted in accordance with the
provisions of the critical area program within the critical area of the County;
or
         (ii)   The County's bog protection program will deprive the applicant
of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in similar areas within the bog
protection area of the County;
      (3)   The granting of a variance will not confer on an applicant any
special privilege that would be denied by COMAR, Title 27, the County's
critical area program to other lands or structures within the County critical
area, or the County's bog protection program to other lands or structures
within a bog protection area;
      (4)   The variance request is not based on conditions or circumstances
that are the result of actions by the applicant, including the commencement of
development before an application for a variance was filed, and does not arise
from any condition relating to land or building use on any neighboring
property;
      (5)   The granting of a variance will not adversely affect water quality
or adversely impact fish, wildlife, or plant habitat within the County's
critical area or a bog protection area and will be in harmony with the general
spirit and intent of the County's critical area program or bog protection
program;
      (6)   The applicant for a variance to allow development in the 100-foot
upland buffer has maximized the distance between the bog and each structure,
taking into account natural features and the replacement of utilities, and has
met the requirements of §
17-9-208 of this Code;
      (7)   The applicant, by competent and substantial evidence, has overcome
the presumption contained in the Natural Resources Article, § 8-1808, of the
State Code; and
      (8)   The applicant has evaluated and implemented site planning
alternatives in accordance with §
18-16-201(c).
   (c)   Requirements for all variances. A variance may not be granted unless
it is found that:
      (1)   the variance is the minimum variance necessary to afford relief;
and
      (2)   the granting of the variance will not:
         (i)   alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in
which the lot is located;
         (ii)   substantially impair the appropriate use or development of
adjacent property;
         (iii)   reduce forest cover in the limited development and resource
conservation areas of the critical area;
         (iv)   be contrary to acceptable clearing and replanting practices
required for development in the critical area or a bog protection area; nor
         (v)   be detrimental to the public welfare.
   (d)   Conditions for granting a variance in the critical area.
      (1)   For a property with an outstanding violation, the granting of a
variance under this subsection shall be conditioned on the applicant completing
the following within 90 days of the date of decision, as applicable:
         (i)   obtaining an approved mitigation or restoration plan;
         (ii)   completing the abatement measures in accordance with the County
critical area program; and
         (iii)   paying any civil fines assessed and finally adjudicated.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (d)(1), the Office of
Planning and Zoning may extend the time for abatement to the next planting
season because of adverse planting conditions. An applicant may also be granted
a 180 day extension to satisfy the conditions of a variance upon timely
application to the Planning and Zoning Officer and good cause shown.
   (e)   Lapse. Any critical area variance granted shall lapse by operation of
law if the conditions are not satisfied within 90 days or as extended.
   (f)   Prohibition. A variance may not be granted to density within the
resource conservation area (RCA).
   (g)   Odenton Town Center. A variance may not be granted to the provisions
of the Odenton Town Center Master Plan.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 69-07; Bill No. 90-09; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 76-13;
Bill No. 20-16; Bill No. 5-20; Bill No. 64-23; Bill No. 84-23)
§ 18-16-306. Decision on application.
   (a)   Generally. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall grant or deny an
application in accordance with law. The Administrative Hearing Officer's
decision shall be based solely on the evidence presented at the hearing and
observations made during any site visit.
   (b)   Restrictions, conditions, and limitations. The Administrative Hearing
Officer may impose additional restrictions, conditions, or limitations on an
application other than an application to change a zoning district as may be
considered appropriate to preserve, improve, or protect the general character
and design of the land or improvements or of the surrounding or adjacent land
and improvements. The Administrative Hearing Officer may approve or disapprove
the design of buildings, construction, landscaping, or other improvements,
alterations, or changes to ensure conformity with the intent and purpose of
this article.
   (c)   Timing, contents, and copies of decision. Within 30 days after the
termination of the proceedings, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall
prepare and file a written memorandum setting forth findings of fact and the
basis for the decision on the application. The Administrative Hearing Officer
shall provide a copy to the applicant, counsel of record, and, on request, each
interested person.
(Bill No. 4-05)
SUBTITLE 4. POST-DECISION PROCEDURES AND EVENTS
§ 18-16-401. Revision by Administrative Hearing Officer to correct errors of
form.
   Within 30 days after the filing of the written memorandum, the
Administrative Hearing Officer may revise the memorandum to correct clerical or
other errors of form that do not change the substance of the memorandum. The
revised memorandum shall be provided to those persons who were provided with
copies of the original memorandum. The revision does not extend the time for
appeal.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-16-402. Appeal to the Board of Appeals.
   A person aggrieved by a decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer who
was a party to the proceedings may appeal to the Board of Appeals within 30
days after the date upon which the memorandum was filed, except that a person
who meets the threshold standing requirements under federal law has standing to
appeal a decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer granting or denying a
critical area variance for development in the buffer to the Board of Appeals.
On the filing of an appeal, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall promptly
transmit the application, sign-in sheet, exhibits, and the memorandum to the
office of the Board of Appeals and notify those persons who were provided with
copies of the memorandum of the date of transmittal.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 93-12; Bill No. 76-13)
§ 18-16-403. Limitation on subsequent applications.
   The same property may not be considered for substantially the same
application or for a less restrictive use until 18 months after the date of
denial by the Administrative Hearing Officer, the Board of Appeals, or a court,
whichever is latest. An application for a variance to perfect a violation of
critical area criteria that has been denied may not be the subject of a
subsequent application.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 93-12)
§ 18-16-404. Rescission, suspension, or modification of a variance or special
exception.
   (a)   Grounds. On motion of the County or an aggrieved party, or on the
Administrative Hearing Officer's own initiative, approval of an application for
a rezoning, variance or special exception shall be rescinded, suspended, or
modified if the Administrative Hearing Officer determines, after a hearing,
that:
      (1)   the approval or grant was based on a fraudulent misrepresentation
of material information in the application, testimony, administrative site
plan, or other supporting documents; or
      (2)   the use of the property deviates from the approved administrative
site plan, an allowed use under the rezoning, or any conditions imposed.
   (b)   Effect of rescission. If a rezoning, variance or special exception is
rescinded, the use of the property shall comply with the zoning uses and
regulations permitted for the property prior to the grant of rezoning, variance
or special exception.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 16-08; Bill No. 60-10)
§ 18-16-405. Time period after which variances and special exceptions are void.
   (a)   Expiration by operation of law. A variance or special exception that
is not extended or tolled expires by operation of law unless the applicant
within 18 months of the granting of the variance or special exception (1)
obtains a building permit or (2) files an application for subdivision.
Thereafter, the variance or special exception shall not expire so long as (1)
construction proceeds in accordance with the permit or (2) a record plat is
recorded among the land records pursuant to the application for subdivision,
the applicant obtains a building permit within one year after recordation of
the plat, and construction proceeds in accordance with the permit.
   (b)   Extension for phasing or other good cause. In deciding an application
for a special exception use, the Administrative Hearing Officer may extend the
time periods set forth in subsection (a) for the use and any variance granted
in connection with it when the application includes a phasing plan or sets
forth facts that demonstrate other good cause why the time periods set forth in
subsection (a) reasonably cannot be met.
   (c)   Extension by variance. An applicant may file an application for a
variance to extend the time periods set forth in subsection (a).
   (d)   Tolling. The pendency of litigation may toll the time periods set
forth in subsection (a) to the extent provided by law.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05)
§ 18-16-406. Abandonment of special exception.
   Except for uses that are seasonal and continue each year, the cessation of a
special exception use for 12 months constitutes an abandonment and, upon
abandonment, the special exception terminates.
(Bill No. 4-05)
TITLE 17. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Section
Subtitle 1. Junkyards; Solid Waste; Vehicles
   
18-17-101.   Junkyards; solid waste.
   
18-17-102.   Inoperable and unregistered vehicles.
   
18-17-103.   Oversized vehicles on residentially zoned or developed lots.
   
18-17-104.   Portable storage containers in residential districts.
Subtitle 2. Zoning Violations
   
18-17-201.   Zoning violations; enforcement.
   
18-17-202.   Administrative orders; informal letters.
   
18-17-203.   Civil fines and citations.
   
18-17-204.   Civil actions.
   
18-17-205.   Private cause of action.
SUBTITLE 1. JUNKYARDS; SOLID WASTE; VEHICLES
§ 18-17-101. Junkyards; solid waste.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to nonconforming uses registered in
accordance with
Title 15.
   (b)   Prohibition. Except as provided otherwise by this article, land may
not be used partially or principally as a junkyard or for the disposal of solid
waste.
(Bill No. 4-05)
§ 18-17-102. Inoperable and unregistered vehicles.
   (a)   Definition. For purposes of this section, the term "vehicle" means a
motor vehicle, trailer, or boat.
   (b)   Scope. This section does not apply to the storage of vehicles as
accessory to a marina or a service and sales facility or to the storage of
unregistered vehicles within a roofed structure entirely enclosed on all sides.
   (c)   Prohibition. Except as provided otherwise by this article, land may
not be used for the parking, storage, collection, accumulation, or abandonment
of any inoperable, wrecked, partially dismantled, or destroyed vehicle or of
any vehicle that does not display all information required by law, including a
current registration plate and validation sticker.
   (d)   Exemption. No more than one vehicle on a lot may be exempted from the
prohibition of section (c) if the property owner can demonstrate that the
vehicle is:
      (1)   recently purchased, pending inspection, for a single period not to
exceed 60 consecutive days;
      (2)   being advertised for sale, for a period not to exceed 60
consecutive days;
      (3)   actively being repaired to a permitted condition and that it will
be registered within a 90-day period or within an extension of the period
granted by the Planning and Zoning Officer after the filing of a written
application showing good cause; or
      (4)   being held pending settlement of insurance, estate, or similar
legal claims.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 65-17)
§ 18-17-103. Oversized vehicles on residentially zoned or developed lots.
   (a)   Scope. This section does not apply to recreational vehicles. For
purposes of this section, the term “recreational vehicle” means a motor vehicle
designed and constructed primarily to provide temporary living quarters for
recreation, camping, or travel.
   (b)   Prohibition. Except as provided in subsection (c), a vehicle with a
manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds may not
be parked on a residentially zoned or developed lot except for the purpose of
providing temporary service.
   (c)   Exceptions.
      (1)   A vehicle of any gross vehicle rating may be parked on a
residentially zoned or developed lot if the owner demonstrates that the vehicle
is customarily used in connection with an existing lawful use.
      (2)   The owner of a lot or parcel located in an RA or RLD Zoning
District with an agricultural use assessment from the State Department of
Assessments and Taxation or an approved soil conservation and water quality
plan from the Soil Conservation District may park or store a vehicle of any
gross vehicle weight on the lot or parcel provided the vehicle is used as part
of an active farming operation.
(Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 62-23)
§ 18-17-104. Portable storage containers in residential districts.
   Shipping or cargo containers, trailers, truck compartments, and similar
portable storage containers are prohibited in residential districts for a
period of more than 60 days unless used in connection with construction
authorized by an active building permit issued by the Department of Inspections
and Permits.
(Bill No. 4-05)
SUBTITLE 2. ZONING VIOLATIONS
§ 18-17-201. Zoning violations; enforcement.
   (a)   What constitutes a zoning violation. It is a zoning violation for an
owner, occupant, person in charge, or any other person to use or to permit
another person to use property in violation of this article or to perform work
for another person in violation of this article. Each day that a violation
continues is a separate zoning violation.
   (b)   Who may file a complaint. Any person may file with the Office of
Planning and Zoning a written complaint of a zoning violation.
   (c)   Duty to enforce. The Office of Planning and Zoning has the duty to
investigate and respond to complaints of zoning violations and may take
enforcement action against a person who commits a zoning violation.
   (d)   Cumulative remedies. The remedies available to the County under this
title are cumulative and not alternative, and the decision to pursue one remedy
does not preclude pursuit of any other remedy.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 65-17)
§ 18-17-202. Administrative orders; informal letters.
   (a)   Administrative orders.
      (1)   The Office of Planning and Zoning may serve an administrative order
on a person who has committed a zoning violation. The order shall direct the
person to cure the violation described in the order within a specified time
period. The order also shall advise the person of the right to appeal to the
Board of Appeals within 15 days after service of the order, that failure to
appeal results in an inability to contest the violation, and that violation of
the order may result in civil or criminal penalties.
      (2)   (i)   The order shall be served by delivery to the person; leaving
a copy of the order with a person of suitable age and discretion at the
person’s dwelling or place of business; or certified mail, restricted delivery,
return receipt requested. If reasonable efforts to serve the person by one of
these methods fail, service of the order may be accomplished by sending it by
first class mail to the person at the person’s last known address and by
posting a copy of the order on the land associated with the violation.
         (ii)   An order for an alleged violation on property with an
agricultural use assessment or an approved soil and water quality plan from the
Soil Conservation District shall be sent by certified mail, in addition to any
other method allowed by this section.
         (iii)    Any person aggrieved by the order may appeal to the Board of
Appeals within 15 days after service.
   (b)   Informal letters. Instead of an administrative order, the Office of
Planning and Zoning may send an informal letter as notification that a zoning
violation may exist. An informal letter does not constitute a final decision
that a violation exists, and it is not appealable to the Board of Appeals.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 65-17; Bill No. 62-23)
§ 18-17-203. Civil fines and citations.
   (a)   How civil fine imposed; service. A civil fine may be imposed for a
zoning violation through the issuance and prosecution of a civil citation in
accordance with Land Use Article, §§ 11-201 through 11-209, of the State Code.
Civil citations shall be served in accordance with Maryland Rule 3-121.
   (b)   Amount of fine. The civil fines for a zoning violation that occurs on
property located in the critical area are $500 for the first violation and
$1,000 for any subsequent violation. For a zoning violation that occurs on any
other property other than for the posting of a temporary sign, the civil fines
are $125 for the first violation, $500 for the second violation, and $1,000 for
any subsequent violation. For the posting of a temporary sign, the civil fine
is $125 for each violation.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07)
§ 18-17-204. Civil actions.
   (a)   Injunctive or other relief. The County at any time may file an action
for injunctive or other appropriate relief for a zoning violation or for
violation of an administrative order.
   (b)   Civil penalties. In an action for injunctive or other appropriate
relief for a zoning violation or for violation of an administrative order, a
court also may impose a civil penalty of up to $500 for each day that the
zoning violation continued or that the administrative order was violated. A
person is not subject to civil penalties for violations of an administrative
order that occur during the pendency of an appeal of the order to the Board of
Appeals or during subsequent judicial review of the Board's decision.
   (c)   Correction of zoning violations. In an action for injunctive or other
appropriate relief for a zoning violation, a court may order that the County is
authorized to enter a property and correct a zoning violation. The cost of such
correction shall constitute a lien on the land and improvements, and shall
become due and payable upon sale or title transfer by deed of the property. The
Planning and Zoning Officer or the Director of Public Works, or their
designees, shall send notice of the County's intent to correct the zoning
violation, by certified or electronic mail, to the County Council member for
the Councilmanic District in which the property in violation is located at
least 10 days prior to the County taking action to correct the zoning
violation.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 115-15; Bill No. 65-17; Bill No. 32-18)
§ 18-17-205. Private cause of action.
   (a)   Notice.
      (1)   An aggrieved property owner may seek relief for abatement of a
zoning violation upon showing that the notice requirements of this subsection
have been satisfied, unless the Office of Planning and Zoning gives notice to
the aggrieved property owner within the time established under this subsection
that the Office of Planning and Zoning intends to pursue enforcement remedies.
      (2)   An aggrieved property owner shall give notice of the zoning
violation and of the aggrieved property owner's intent to bring an action under
this section by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of
record, any tenant, and the Office of Planning and Zoning.
      (3)   The notice shall specify:
         (i)   the nature of the alleged zoning violation;
         (ii)   the location of the property where the zoning violation is
allegedly occurring;
         (iii)   the location of the aggrieved property owner's property;
         (iv)   the specific relief sought; and   
         (v)   the name and telephone number of the person to contact for
additional information.
      (4)   If the Office of Planning and Zoning intends to pursue enforcement
remedies, it shall give notice of its intention to the aggrieved property owner
within 60 days of receipt of notice from the aggrieved property owner.
   (b)   Construction of section. This section may not be construed as granting
standing for an action challenging any zoning application or approval.
(Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 65-17)
TITLE 18. FEES
Section
   
18-18-101.   Fees
§ 18-18-101. Fees.
   The following fees shall be paid as provided in the following chart, except
that fees paid on an application governed by the law as it existed prior to May
12, 2005 shall be credited against the fees in the following chart if the
application is withdrawn and a new application is filed under this article:
Category                                                                    Fee
Buffer modification map amendment                                           $150
Growth allocation                                                           $1,000
Nonconforming use registration                                              $250
                                                                            $5,000
Rubble processing facility                                                  annual
                                                                            operating
                                                                            fee
                                                                            $150 per
                                                                            sign
Signs, offsite, directional                                                 $25 for a
                                                                            replacement
                                                                            sign
Signs and replacement signs for a critical area reclassification, a         $35 per
rezoning, a special exception, a variance, a non-conforming use, or a       sign
buffer modification map amendment
                                                                            $5,000
Solid waste transfer station                                                annual
                                                                            operating
                                                                            fee
Title 16 applications:
   Critical area reclassification                                        $1,200
   Rezoning                                                              $1,000
   Special exception (or modification) for a solid waste facility        $3,000
   Special exception (or modification) for any other use                 $1,200
   Variance for a single-family dwelling or an accessory structure for a $180
single-family dwelling
   Variance for any other use                                            $480
Zoning certificate of use                                                   $50
Zoning verification letter                                                  $50
 
(1985 Code, Art. 14, §4A-101) (Bill No. 4-05; Bill No. 78-05; Bill No. 69-07;
Bill No. 43-08; Bill No. 67-08)
APPENDIX A – MAPS
   Bed and Breakfast Zoning District Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6583.png]
 
 
(Bill No. 55-05)
   Airport Permanent Offsite Directional Signs, 2005
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6585.png]
 
(Bill No. 78-05)
   BWI/Fort Meade Growth Area Map
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6587.png]
 
(Bill No. 55-16)
 
 
   Commercial Revitalization Area Maps
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6567.png]
 
 
(Bill No. 10-17)
 
 
   Commercial Revitalization Area Maps
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6569.png]
 
(Bill No. 10-17)
 
   Commercial Revitalization Area Maps
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6571.png]
 
(Bill No. 10-17)
 
   Commercial Revitalization Area Maps
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6573.png]
 
(Bill No. 10-17)
 
 
   Commercial Revitalization Area Maps
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6575.png]
 
(Bill No. 10-17)
 
   Commercial Revitalization Area Maps
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6577.png]
 
(Bill No. 10-17)
 
   Commercial Revitalization Area Maps
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6579.png]
 
(Bill No. 10-17)
 
 
   Commercial Revitalization Area Maps
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6581.png]
 
(Bill No. 10-17)
   Commercial Revitalization Area Maps
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6711.jpg]
 
(Bill No. 86-18)
   Commercial Revitalization Area Maps
Area 10 - Glen Burnie/Harundale-Ritchie Highway
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6893.png]
(Bill No. 13-20)
   Commercial Revitalization Area Maps
Area 11 - Glen Burnie/Marley - Ritchie Highway & Mountain Road
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6895.png]
(Bill No. 14-20)
   Appendix – Maps
BRAC Mixed Use Development Area Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a989121e9b7cb4c9e6674a838f8e0c67ad145af3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7823.png]
(Bill No. 50-25)
APPENDIX A. RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL
   Title
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
3.   MEETINGS IN GENERAL
      
4.   CONDUCT OF MEETINGS
      
5.   BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
      
6.   MOTIONS
      
7.   INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BOND HEARINGS
      
REFERENCE TABLE
Section
Title 1. General Provisions
   
1-101.   Definitions.
   
1-102.   Robert's Rules of Order.
   
1-103.   Amendment of Rules.
   
1-104.   Suspension of Rules.
   
1-105.   Oath of office.
   
1-106.   Filling of a vacancy in the office of a member of the County Council
or in the office of the County Executive.
   
1-107.   Filling of a vacancy in the office of a member of the Board of
Education.
   
1-108.   Copy of Rules available.
Title 2. Officers and Employees
   
2-101.   Supervision of employees.
   
2-102.   Administrative Officer; Assistant Administrative Officer.
   
2-103.   Other clerical assistance.
   
2-104.   Legislative Counsel.
Title 3. Meetings in General
   
3-101.   Types.
   
3-102.   Times.
   
3-103.   Location.
   
3-104.   Notice.
   
3-105.   Participation by public.
   
3-106.   Participation by news media.
Title 4. Conduct of Meetings
   
4-101.   Agenda.
   
4-102.   Scheduling.
   
4-103.   Quorum.
   
4-104.   Order of business.
   
4-105.   Presiding officer.
   
4-106.   Participation by the public; order and decorum.
   
4-107.   Participation by the news media.
   
4-108.   Preliminary action.
   
4-109.   Recognition.
   
4-110.   Order during debate.
   
4-111.   Questions to speakers.
   
4-112.   Voting.
Title 5. Bills and Resolutions
   
5-101.   Introduction.
   
5-102.   Bills – Form.
   
5-103.   Bills – Publication.
   
5-104.   Bills – Consideration.
   
5-105.   Resolutions – Form.
   
5-106.   Resolutions – Consideration.
   
5-107.   Amendments to bills and resolutions.
Title 6. Motions
   
6-101.   Statement.
   
6-102.   Withdrawal.
   
6-103.   While question under debate.
   
6-104.   Preliminary motions.
   
6-105.   Motion for reconsideration.
   
6-106.   Dilatory motions.
Title 7. Industrial Revenue Bond Hearings
   
7-101.   Industrial revenue bond hearings.

COUNTY COUNCIL OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY, MARYLAND
Legislative Session 1986, Legislative Day No. 4
Resolution No. 16-86
Introduced by the Entire Council
By the County Council, February 18, 1986
RESOLUTION TO ADOPT THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL
WHEREAS, pursuant to Section
208(g) of the Charter, the County Council is required to adopt Rules of
Procedure; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to the recodification of the Anne Arundel County Code, 1985,
the County Council desires to reorganize, renumber, and make stylistic changes
to its Rules of Procedure as previously adopted to conform to the format of the
Anne Arundel County Code, 1985; now, therefore, be it
RESOLVED BY THE COUNTY COUNCIL OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY, MARYLAND,
That the Rules of Procedure of the County Council as set forth in
Appendix A of the Anne Arundel County Code, 1985, are adopted as the Rules of
Procedure of the County Council, and supersede the Rules of Procedure of the
County Council as set forth in Appendix G of the Anne Arundel County Code,
1967.
READ AND PASSED this 18th day of February, 1986.
By Order:
Judy C. Holmes
Administrative Officer
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT RESOLUTION NO. 16-86 IS TRUE AND CORRECT AND DULY ADOPTED
BY THE COUNTY COUNCIL OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY.
Virginia P. Clagett
Chair
TITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-101. Definitions.
   (a)   Legislative session. A legislative session is the convening of a
quorum of the members of the County Council for the purpose of taking
legislative action.
   (b)   Meeting. A meeting is a convening of members of the County Council for
the purpose of considering matters and taking action other than legislative
action.
(Res. No. 8-03)
§ 1-102. Robert's Rules Of Order.
   In all matters not provided for in these Rules, the latest published edition
of Robert's Rules of Order shall govern.
(Res. No. 8-03)
§ 1-103. Amendment of Rules.
   (a)   Amendment by resolution.
      (1)   These Rules may be amended by resolution.
      (2)   A resolution to amend these Rules requires a vote of five members
of the County Council.
   (b)   Submission of amendment. The County Council may not act on any
resolution to amend these Rules unless the resolution, together with the text
of the proposed amendment, is submitted to the County Council, in writing, at
least seven days before the action.
(Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 15-25)
§ 1-104. Suspension of Rules.
   (a)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, other law, and
subsection (b), these Rules may be suspended by a vote of five members of the
County Council. A separate suspension of the Rules is necessary for each
proposition.
   (b)   Limitation. These Rules may not be suspended for the purpose of
amending them.
(Res. No. 8-03)
§ 1-105. Oath of office.
   (a)   Generally. The following oath or affirmation shall be taken by each
Councilmember before entering on the duties of office:
"I, _____________, do swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of
the United States, and that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the
State of Maryland, and support the Constitution and laws thereof; and that I
will, to the best of my skill and judgment, diligently and faithfully, without
partiality or prejudice, execute the Office of Councilmember of Anne Arundel
County according to the Constitution and laws of this State."
   (b)   Administration of oath. The oath or affirmation shall be taken in the
County Council chambers and shall be administered by the Clerk of the Circuit
Court for Anne Arundel County.
(Res. No. 8-03)
§ 1-106. Filling of a vacancy in the office of a member of the County Council
or in the office of the County Executive.
   The following procedure shall be used in filling a vacancy in the office of
a member of the County Council or the Office of the County Executive, whether
temporary or permanent:
      (1)   solicitation for applications to fill the vacancy shall be
advertised in one or more newspapers with general circulation in the County;
      (2)   the central committee of the political party, if any, with which
the former member had been affiliated may submit the name of an applicant to be
interviewed;
      (3)   applications shall be accepted by the Administrative Officer to the
County Council up to a date agreed upon by a majority of the Councilmembers;
      (4)   the County Council shall schedule a public hearing and interviews
with the applicants on a date agreed upon by a majority of the Councilmembers;
and
      (5)   (i)   following the interviews, a roll call vote to fill the
vacancy shall be taken, with each Councilmember recommending an applicant;
         (ii)   if no applicant for a vacancy in the office of the County
Executive receives a majority vote on the first ballot roll call, successive
ballots roll calls, consisting of those applicants who received at least one
vote on the previous ballot roll call, shall be taken until one applicant
receives a majority; or
         (iii)   if no applicant for a vacancy in the office of a member of the
County Council receives a majority vote on the first ballot roll call, up to 25
successive ballot roll calls, consisting of those applicants who received at
least one vote on the previous ballot roll call, shall be taken until one
applicant receives a majority; and
         (iv)   if no applicant for a vacancy on the County Council receives a
majority vote within 45 days of the vacancy, the Administrative Officer of the
County Council shall forward the names of the applicants receiving at least one
vote on the last ballot roll call to the State central committee of the
political party of the former member or, if no central committee exists for the
party of the former member, to the County Executive.
(Res. No. 9-00; Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 42-13; Res. No. 15-25)
§ 1-107. Filling of a vacancy in the office of a member of the Board of
Education.
   The following procedure shall be used in filling a vacancy in the office of
an elected member of the Board of Education:
   (1)   solicitation for applications to fill the vacancy shall be posted to
the County Council website;
   (2)   (i)   applications shall be accepted by the Administrative Officer to
the County Council up to a date agreed upon by a majority of the County
Council; and
      (ii)   a majority of the County Council may extend the period of time for
accepting applications;
   (3)   after the application period closes, applications submitted by all
qualified individuals shall be posted to the County Council website;
   (4)   the County Council shall hold at least one public hearing that
includes interviews of the applicants before selecting an individual to fill
the vacancy;
   (5)   following the interviews and any deliberations by the County Council,
a roll call vote to fill the vacancy shall be taken, with each Councilmember
recommending an applicant; and
      (i)   if no applicant receives a majority vote on the first ballot roll
call, successive ballot roll calls, consisting of those applicants who received
at least one vote on the previous ballot roll call, shall be taken until one
applicant receives a majority of the votes; and
      (ii)   the final selection by the County Council of a qualified
individual to fill the vacancy in the office of an elected member of the Board
of Education shall be approved by resolution of the County Council.
(Res. No. 15-25)
§ 1-108. Copy of Rules available.
   A copy of these Rules shall be accessible to the public.
(Res. No. 15-25)
TITLE 2. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 2-101. Supervision of employees.
   (a)   Generally. Although it is anticipated that the officers and employees
of the County Council will function largely independent, responsibility for
overall coordination, direction, and supervision of the appointed officers and
employees of the County Council is vested in the Chair or, in the Chair’s
absence, the Vice Chair. This provision may not be construed to prevent or
prohibit a councilmember from communicating directly with an appointed officer
or employee of the County Council for assistance with any Council related
matter.
   (b)   Annual review.
      (1)   (i)   The Administrative Officer to the County Council and the
Legislative Counsel shall be subject to an annual evaluation prepared by the
Chair of the County Council and one member of the County Council from a
different political party.
         (ii)   The Deputy/Assistant Administrative Officer to the County
Council shall be subject to an annual evaluation prepared by the Administrative
Officer, the Chair of the County Council and one member of the County Council
from a different political party.
         (iii)   Annual reviews shall be based on input from each member of the
County Council, and each member of the County Council may review and comment on
the evaluation before it is finalized.
      (2)   The Administrative Officer to the County Council shall be
responsible for evaluating County Council staff that report to the
Administrative Officer of the County Council, but not the Legislative Counsel
or Legislative Aides.
   (c)   Removal. The Administrative Officer to the County Council, Deputy
Administrative Officer to the County Council, and the Legislative Counsel may
be removed based on a vote of a majority of the County Council.
(Res. No. 15-25)
§ 2-102. Administrative Officer; Assistant Administrative Officer.
   (a)   Generally. There are an Administrative Officer to the County Council
and an Assistant Administrative Officer to the County Council.
   (b)   Duties. The duties of the Administrative Officer and the Assistant
Administrative Officer are to:
      (1)   keep minutes of legislative sessions and public hearings of the
County Council;
      (2)   maintain the journal of the County Council; and
      (3)   provide any administrative service required to assist the
legislative process.
(Res. No. 8-03)
§ 2-103. Other clerical assistance.
   Subject to the budget, additional clerical assistance shall be provided to
the County Council as needed.
(Res. 42-13)
§ 2-104. Legislative Counsel.
   (a)   Generally. There is a Legislative Counsel to the County Council.
   (b)   Duties. The duties of the Legislative Counsel are to:
      (1)   assist members of the County Council with research and drafting
legislation;
      (2)   attend all legislative sessions and meetings of the County Council;
      (3)   assist the Chair of the County Council and act as Parliamentarian
at legislative sessions and public hearings of the County Council; and
      (4)   provide legal services required to assist the legislative process
that are not inconsistent with the responsibilities of the County Attorney.
(Res. No. 8-03; Res. 42-13)
TITLE 3. MEETINGS IN GENERAL
§ 3-101. Types.
   (a)   Regular meetings. The County Council shall hold regular legislative
sessions and public hearings as may be required by law for the orderly conduct
of business.
   (b)   Other meetings. The County Council shall meet for non-legislative
purposes, such as conducting additional public hearings, legislative work
sessions, and other meetings on such matters as may properly come before the
County Council on any date agreed upon by a majority of the members.
(Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 15-25)
§ 3-102. Times.
   (a)   Pursuant to Charter. Legislative sessions of the County Council shall
be convened in accordance with §
208 of the Charter.
   (b)   Regular meetings.
      (1)   The first legislative session day of the County Council shall
normally convene at 7:00 p.m. on the first Monday of the month.
      (2)   The second monthly legislative session day shall normally convene
at 7:00 p.m. on the third Monday of the month.
      (3)   The County Council may convene a legislative session in August in
conformance with §
208 of the Charter by taking a roll call vote at a legislative session and by
placing the meeting on the County Council schedule.
   (c)   Other meetings. Additional meetings and special hearings of the County
Council may be called in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.
   (d)   Cancellation and rescheduling. If in advance of any scheduled meeting
the Chair determines that a quorum will not be present, the Chair may cancel
and reschedule the meeting as soon as practicable.
   (e)   Closed meeting. At the direction of a majority of the Council, a
meeting may be closed to the public only for reasons allowed in the Maryland
Open Meetings Act. Any closed meeting, except a meeting that is closed to
discuss a personnel issue, may be attended by any Councilmember, Legislative
Assistant to a Councilmember, Legislative Counsel, and other professional staff
member unless the Council expressly further restricts attendance. The record of
a closed meeting includes the attendance of all persons present as required by
the State open meetings law. Unless authorized by State law, any testimony
taken, or evidence received in a closed meeting shall be kept confidential and
may not be released to the public for inspection. If a person attends a closed
meeting remotely, then a verbal acknowledgment of such confidentiality and non-
disclosure of each remote attendee will be recorded on a form provided by the
Administrative Officer.
(Res. No. 105-86; Res. No. 38-89; Res. No. 78-96; Res. 42-13; Res. No. 5-25)
§ 3-103. Location.
   Each meeting of the County Council shall be held at the County seat.
However, the Chair or three members of the County Council may decide that
duplicate or additional public hearings on important legislative matters and
the budget be held at other appropriate locations in the County.
(Res. No. 38-89)
§ 3-104. Notice.
   (a)   Legal notice required. When a meeting has been called that requires
legal notice, the Administrative Officer to the County Council shall give the
appropriate legal notice and shall provide information to the news media and
the public as to the known items of agenda, purpose, and matters pending before
the County Council.
   (b)   Other meetings. When a meeting has been called that does not require
legal notice the Administrative Officer shall provide information to the news
media and the public as to the known items of agenda and purpose of the
meeting.
   (c)   Notice to Councilmembers. The Administrative Officer shall keep each
County Councilmember informed as to County Council agendas, meetings, and other
legislative matters.
(Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 5-25)
§ 3-105. Participation by public.
   (a)   Generally. Reasonable seating facilities shall be provided for the
public at each legislative session or open meeting of the County Council, and
the public is encouraged and invited to attend. At each legislative session and
public hearing a reasonable amount of time shall be provided for members of the
public to address the County Council on pertinent matters of public business
not otherwise provided for. Special hearings on pending legislation or the
budget are convened for the express purpose of obtaining public participation
and comment. The public shall maintain order and decorum in keeping with the
dignity of the governmental process, and shall refrain from interfering with
the process. Discussions of the County Council may be recorded, provided the
recording device does not generate excessive noise, use excessive artificial
light, interfere with County recording devices or disturb County Council
members or individuals in attendance.
   (b)   Addressing the Council. Each member of the public who wishes to speak
at invitation to the audience or on agenda items may testify before the County
Council provided they sign up to speak before the meeting at the designated
area for speaker registration and, after being recognized by the presiding
officer, shall come forth and state the following information:
      (1)   name;
      (2)   home address;
      (3)   person or organization represented, or that the individual is
speaking as a private citizen; and
      (4)   subject matter and the remarks.
   (c)   Relevance. The presiding officer may temporarily suspend any testimony
that is not relevant to the subject of the hearing and advise the speaker to
that effect. The presiding officer may stop taking further testimony from and
vacate any remaining time allocated to a speaker who, after being so advised,
continues to offer irrelevant testimony.
   (d)   Time limitation. Each member of the public who speaks to the County
Council shall be limited to the amount of time specified by the Chair.
   (e)   Copy of Rules available. A copy of these Rules and a copy of the
County Code shall be accessible to the public in the County Council office.
(Res. No. 6-86; Res. No. 38-89; Res. No. 28-93; Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 42-13;
Res. No. 5-25)
§ 3-106. Participation by news media.
   Reasonable seating facilities shall be provided for representatives of the
news media at each open meeting of the County Council, and the representatives
are encouraged and invited to attend. Radio and television coverage may be
provided at open meetings of the County Council. At the discretion of the Chair
or on request of a majority of the members of the County Council present, a
meeting may be briefly recessed for the purpose of taking photographs or
discussions with representatives of the news media. Representatives of the news
media shall maintain order and decorum in keeping with the dignity of the
governmental process and shall refrain from interfering with the process.
(Res. No. 38-89; Res. No. 58-99; Res. No. 5-25)
TITLE 4. CONDUCT OF MEETINGS
§ 4-101. Agenda.
   (a)   Preparation of agenda. The Administrative Officer shall prepare a
written agenda for each legislative session of the County Council. The agenda
shall include the following:
      (1)   the number and title of each bill to be introduced;
      (2)   the name of the County Councilmember introducing each bill;
      (3)   the number and title of each bill eligible to be called for final
reading and vote;
      (4)   the number and title of each resolution to be introduced;
      (5)   the name of the County Councilmember introducing each resolution;
      (6)   the number and title of each resolution eligible to be called for
final reading and vote;
      (7)   such other business as may come before the County Council; and
      (8)   an invitation to members of the audience to speak briefly on any
matter not on the agenda.
   (b)   Opening and closing of agenda. The agenda shall remain open until the
meeting is called to order. At the call of "Announcement of Items not Appearing
on Agenda", each County Councilmember shall have the right to place on the
agenda any bill or resolution to be introduced or any item of business. Once
the meeting has been called to order, the agenda is closed and may not be
reopened for additions, except by suspension of these Rules.
(Res. No. 28-93; Res. No. 59-98; Res. No. 8-03)
§ 4-102. Scheduling.
   Normally, each hearing will be held in conjunction with regularly scheduled
meetings and legislative sessions of the County Council, but they may be
scheduled at other times by the Chair in accordance with the Charter and these
Rules.
§ 4-103. Quorum.
   A quorum is required for a legislative session, a public hearing, and where
required by law or these rules. A quorum is not required for a legislative work
session or other meeting.
(Res. No. 8-03)
§ 4-104. Order of business.
   (a)   Generally. Except as provided in subsection (b), the order of business
at each legislative session of the County Council shall be as follows:
      (1)   invocation;
      (2)   Pledge of Allegiance;
      (3)   ethics statement;
      (4)   invitation to audience;
      (5)   announcement of each item not appearing on the written agenda;
      (6)   preliminary motion in accordance with Rule
6-104;
      (7)   approval of minutes;
      (8)   introduction of bills;
      (9)   introduction of resolutions;
      (10)   public hearing on scheduled bills and resolutions, the public
hearing on each bill or resolution being followed by the final reading and vote
on that bill or resolution;
      (11)   (i)   introduction of amendments to bills or resolutions;
         (ii)   discussion of amendments by Councilmembers; and
         (iii)   roll call vote on amendments; and
      (12)   other business.
   (b)   Exception. A message from the Executive Branch may be received at any
time except when a question is being put or the roll is being called.
(Res. No. 6-86; Res. No. 38-89; Res. No. 78-96; Res. No. 59-98; Res. No. 13-00;
Res. No. 17-00; Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 32-16)
§ 4-105. Presiding officer.
   (a)   Generally. The Chair of the County Council is the presiding officer of
the County Council.
   (b)   Alternates. In the absence of the Chair of the County Council, the
Vice Chair shall preside. In the absence of both the Chair and the Vice Chair,
the Administrative Officer shall call the County Council to order and shall
receive nominations and conduct an election for Chair Pro Tempore, who shall
act as the presiding officer.
   (c)   Duties. The presiding officer may speak on points of order in
preference to other members. The presiding officer shall decide each point of
order, and the decision shall be final unless on an appeal it is reversed on a
yea and nay vote by a majority of the members present. The presiding officer
shall be called last whenever the roll of the County Council is called. The
presiding officer shall vote on each question except on an appeal from a
decision on a question of order by the presiding officer.
(Res. No. 2-94; Res. No. 8-03)
§ 4-106. Participation by the public; order and decorum.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   The public is encouraged and invited to attend each legislative
session or meeting where reasonable seating facilities shall be provided.
      (2)   At each legislative session and public hearing, a reasonable amount
of time shall be provided for members of the public to address the County
Council on pertinent matters of public business not otherwise provided for.
      (3)   The County Council may convene special hearings on pending
legislation or the budget for the purpose of obtaining public participation and
comment.
      (4)   The public shall:
         (i)   maintain order and decorum in keeping with the dignity of the
governmental process; and
         (ii)   may not interfere with the process.
      (5)   Discussions of the County Council may be recorded, provided the
recording device does not generate excessive noise, use excessive artificial
light, interfere with County recording devices or disturb County Council
members or individuals in attendance.
   (b)   Addressing the Council.
      (1)   Each member of the public who wishes to speak at invitation to the
audience or on agenda items may testify before the County Council provided they
sign up to speak before the meeting at the designated area for speaker
registration or as required under § 4-112 and, after being recognized by the
presiding officer, shall come forth and state the following information:
         (i)   name;
         (ii)   home address;
         (iii)   person or organization represented, or that the individual is
speaking as a private citizen; and
         (iv)   subject matter and the remarks.
      (2)   Each member of the public who speaks to the County Council shall be
limited to the amount of time specified by the Chair.
   (c)   Relevance.
      (1)   The presiding officer may temporarily suspend any testimony that is
not relevant to the subject of the hearing and advise the speaker to that
effect.
      (2)   The presiding officer may stop taking further testimony from and
vacate any remaining time allocated to a speaker who, after being so advised,
continues to offer irrelevant testimony.
   (d)   Order and decorum.
      (1)   The presiding officer of the County Council shall preserve order
and decorum during each meeting or session of the County Council.
      (2)   The presiding officer shall have general supervision of the County
Council chambers or other meeting place and over each corridor adjacent to the
County Council chambers or other meeting place.
      (3)   Visual demonstrations such as waving of placards, signs, balloons
or banners are prohibited in the chamber, or during a meeting or session held
in another meeting place.
      (4)   The Chair shall call to order any person making personal,
defamatory or profane remarks or who willfully utters loud, threatening or
abusive language which disturbs the orderly conduct of a session of the County
Council.
      (5)   The Chair may seek removal of any individual who refuses to abide
by the provisions of this section.
      (6)   During any County Council meeting or session the presiding officer
may order the meeting place to be cleared.
(Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 42-13; Res. No. 15-25)
§ 4-107. Participation by the news media.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   Representatives of the news media are encouraged and invited to
attend each open meeting of the County Council where reasonable seating
facilities shall be provided for the representatives.
      (2)   Radio and television coverage may be provided at meetings of the
County Council.
   (b)   Order and decorum. Representatives of the news media shall maintain
order and decorum in keeping with the dignity of the governmental process and
may not interfere with the process.
(Res. No. 15-25)
§ 4-108. Preliminary action.
   On convening the hearing, the presiding officer shall give a brief
explanation of the purpose of the hearing and shall cause to be presented
information that is required before public discussion and comments begin.
(Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 15-25)
§ 4-109. Recognition.
   Each member of the County Council desiring to introduce a bill or
resolution, to present a petition or other matter, to make a report or a
motion, or to speak on a matter shall address the presiding officer. The member
may not proceed until recognized by the presiding officer. If two or more
members seek recognition at the same time, the presiding officer shall
determine who is entitled to the floor.
(Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 15-25)
§ 4-110. Order during debate.
   Only members of the County Council may participate in debate on a bill,
resolution, or motion or other matter pending before the County Council unless,
on request by a Councilmember, another individual is recognized to speak by the
presiding officer for the purpose of clarification or information. A person in
the hearing room may not interrupt the County Councilmember who has been
recognized by the presiding officer.
(Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 15-25)
§ 4-111. Questions to speakers.
   At any time during a legislative session or a meeting, a member of the
County Council, on recognition by the presiding officer, may briefly question a
speaker or reserve the right to question a speaker at a later time. The County
Auditor or the County Council’s Legislative Counsel, or a member of their
respective staffs, may be recognized by the presiding officer and permitted to
ask concise questions of the Administration for the purpose of clarification or
information. Members, speakers, and those recognized to speak shall not engage
in debate over these questions.
(Res. No. 26-97; Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 15-25)
§ 4-112. Voting.
   (a)   Roll call vote generally. All voting except for preliminary matters or
procedural motions shall be by a roll call vote.
   (b)   Procedure for roll call vote. In a roll call, the Administrative
Officer shall call the roll of the County Councilmembers by councilmanic
district in numerical order, beginning with a different district at each
Council meeting, with the presiding officer being called last.
   (c)   Voting on bills. A bill or an amendment to a bill may be voted upon
only at a legislative session.
   (d)   Explanation of vote. A member of the County Council shall have the
right to briefly explain that member’s vote just prior to the time that member
votes on a bill or resolution.
(Res. No. 2-94; Res. No. 59-98; Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 15-25)
TITLE 5. BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
§ 5-101. Introduction.
   (a)   Bills. A bill may be introduced by a member of the County Council only
at a legislative session of the County Council by filing a copy with the
Administrative Officer.
   (b)   Resolutions. A resolution may be introduced by a member at any open
meeting of the County Council.
   (c)   Form. The bill or resolution as introduced shall be printed in the
form set forth in Rule 5-102 or Rule 5-104.
   (d)   Recording. On introduction, the Administrative Officer shall record
the filed copy and maintain a file of each recorded copy.
   (e)   Copies. The Administrative Officer shall cause copies to be reproduced
and made available to the members of the County Council, the public, and the
news media, and shall post one copy on the County website.
(Res. No. 38-89; Res. No. 43-89; Res. No. 28-93; Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 42-13;
Res. No. 5-25; Res. No. 15-25)
§ 5-102. Bills – Form.
   (a)   Heading. The heading of a bill shall be as follows:
COUNTY COUNCIL OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY, MARYLAND
Legislative Session (year), Legislative Day No.
Bill No. (No. assigned by Administrative Officer)
Introduced by (member's last name)
By the County Council, (date)
The record of transactions and status of the bill
The expiration date of bill
A bill entitled
A BILL ENTITLED
   (b)   Title. The title of a bill shall be a succinct reference to the
general subject of the bill.
   (c)   Enacting clause. The enacting clause of a bill shall read as follows:
"Be it enacted by the County Council of Anne Arundel County, Maryland." The
enacting clause shall appear following the title.
   (d)   Section numbering. Each section of a bill shall be numbered in arabic
numerals (For example, "SECTION 1.").
   (e)   Line numbering. Each line of a bill shall be consecutively numbered
commencing with "1" beginning with the title on page 1 and at the top line of
each succeeding page.
(Res. No. 38-89; Res. No. 8-03)
§ 5-103. Bills – Publication.
   (a)   Notice to public. It is the policy of the County Council that every
effort be made to give timely notice to the public of any action pending before
the Council.
   (b)   Generally. 
      (1)   In accordance with the provisions of Article XI-A, § 3 of the State
Constitution, the title or a summary of all proposed bills enacting local laws
of the County shall be published once a week for two successive weeks prior to
enactment in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the County.
      (2)   The first publication shall appear at least 14 days prior to
enactment.
   (c)   Substantive amendment. If amended as to substance, a bill, except an
emergency bill or a bill that levies a tax or assessment to fund the annual
budget and appropriation ordinance, may not be passed until:
      (1)   the bill is printed as amended;
      (2)   a hearing is set on the amended bill; and
      (3)   the title or a summary of the proposed bill, as amended, is
advertised the week preceding the legislative session that the proposed bill,
as amended, will be considered.
   (d)   Republication. The title or a summary of a bill shall be republished
under the provisions of subsection (b)(1), giving notice of the newly scheduled
date, if:
      (1)   the public hearing on the bill is held open; or
      (2)   an amendment to the bill is reconsidered and the vote returns the
bill to the form that was first published.
(Res. No. 59-98; Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 42-13; Res. No. 15-25)
§ 5-104. Bills – Consideration.
   (a)   Readings. There shall be a first reading and a final reading of each
bill.
   (b)   First reading. On the first reading, a bill shall be read by number
and title only when introduced.
   (c)   Final reading. On final reading a bill shall, at the request of a
member of the County Council, be read once section by section for amendment
before vote on final passage.
   (d)   Amended bills. If amended, a bill shall, at the request of a member,
be read as amended before vote on final passage.
   (e)   Form of amended bills. Amendments to a bill shall be offered in
printed form.
   (f)   Withdrawal. A sponsor may withdraw a bill at any time before a final
vote is taken unless the bill has been amended or another member objects.
   (g)   Vote on final passage. Vote on final passage shall be by roll call.
   (h)   Enrolling. After passage of a bill, the Administrative Officer shall
promptly prepare an enrolled copy in printed form. On enrolling, the
Administrative Officer may correct obvious errors in section references and
numbers, references to existing law, capitalization, spelling, grammar,
headings, and similar matters.
   (i)   Certification. The Administrative Officer shall certify the enrolled
copy or a corrected copy as being the text as finally passed, and the certified
copy shall be conclusive evidence of the bill as enacted.
   (j)   Retention of certified copies. Certified copies shall be maintained by
the Administrative Officer in an official electronic file of acts of the County
Council.
(Res. No. 28-93; Res. No. 59-98; Res. No. 13-00; Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 42-13;
Res. No. 15-25)
§ 5-105. Resolutions – Form.
   (a)   Heading. The heading of a resolution shall be as follows:
COUNTY COUNCIL OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY, MARYLAND
Legislative Session (year), Legislative Day No.
Resolution No. (No. assigned by Administrative Officer)
Introduced by (member's last name)
By the County Council, (date)
SHORT DESCRIPTIVE TITLE
   (b)   Line numbering. Each line of a resolution shall be consecutively
numbered commencing with "1" beginning with the title on page 1 and at the top
line of each succeeding page.
(Res. No. 38-89)
§ 5-106. Resolutions – Consideration.
   (a)   Final adoption. On call of resolutions for final adoption, each
resolution eligible for adoption shall be called in numerical order. The
resolution shall be read by number and short descriptive title only, provided
that, at the request of a member of the County Council, it shall be read only
once for amendment before vote on final adoption.
   (b)   Amended resolutions. Amendments to a resolution shall be offered in
printed form. A resolution may be amended and adopted at the same meeting.
   (c)   Withdrawal. A sponsor may withdraw a resolution at any time before a
final vote is taken unless the resolution has been amended or another member
objects.
   (d)   Vote; enrolled copies. Vote on final adoption shall be on roll call.
An enrolled copy shall be prepared after final adoption in a manner similar to
that provided for bills under Rule
5-104.
   (e)   Time limit for consideration. Except as provided in paragraph (2), or
by suspension of the Rules, a resolution may not be considered or acted on less
than seven days after its date of introduction.
      (1)   This paragraph does not apply to a resolution appointing a
department head.
      (2)   A resolution of appointment, sympathy, congratulations, or similar
subject is not subject to paragraph (1).
   (f)   Time limit for resolutions not adopted. A resolution that has not been
adopted within 95 days after its introduction shall have failed.
(Res. No. 38-89; Res. No. 2-94; Res. No. 59-98; Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 42-13;
Res. No. 15-25)
§ 5-107. Amendments to bills and resolutions.
   (a)   Reading of amendment. Upon introduction of an amendment to a bill or
resolution, the text of the amendment or a brief summary of the amendment that
has been prepared by a sponsor shall be read in its entirety.
   (b)   Explanation for amendment. Each sponsor may briefly explain the
substance of the amendment and the reasons for its introduction immediately
after the text or summary of the amendment is read.
   (c)   Adoption. An amendment may be adopted if there is a motion to adopt
and a second. Any discussion of or a vote on the amendment shall take place
only after there has been a motion to adopt and a second to the motion.
(Res. No. 8-03)
TITLE 6. MOTIONS
§ 6-101. Statement.
   After a motion has been made and seconded the presiding officer shall state
it.
§ 6-102. Withdrawal.
   The maker of a motion may withdraw the motion at any time before a vote is
taken unless the member that seconded the motion objects.
(Res. No. 8-03)
§ 6-103. While question under debate.
   (a)   Limitations. When a question is under debate, a motion may not be
received other than a motion:
      (1)   to adjourn or to adjourn to a certain time;
      (2)   to lay on the table;
      (3)   to close debate;
      (4)   to postpone to a certain time (to hold a bill or resolution); and
      (5)   to amend.
   (b)   Debate on motions. The motions specified in subsection (a) are not
debatable except for a motion to amend.
   (c)   Adoption. A majority of members present is required for adoption of
the motion, except that the affirmative vote of five members is required for
adoption of a motion to close debate.
   (d)   Motion to close debate. After adoption of a motion to close debate,
each incidental question of order shall be decided without debate.
   (e)   Motions not in order. A motion to strike the enacting clause of a
bill, to amend a proposed amendment to a bill or resolution, or to postpone
indefinitely is not in order.
   (f)   Tabling bill or resolution. When a bill or resolution has been laid on
the table, the item may not again be taken up for consideration during the
remainder of that legislative session.
(Res. No. 38-89; Res. No. 8-03)
§ 6-104. Preliminary motions.
   (a)   Generally. A motion may be entertained on the conclusion of the
announcement of items not appearing on the written agenda that the reading of a
short description of approximately five lines of a bill, resolution, amendment
to a bill or resolution, or minutes shall constitute the reading of the whole
of the bill, resolution, amendment to a bill or resolution, or minutes
appearing on the agenda of that day.
   (b)   Adoption. An affirmative vote by a majority of those present is
necessary to adopt the motion.
   (c)   Amendments. Adoption of the motion does not prevent amendments being
entertained.
(Res. No. 8-03; Res. No. 15-25)
§ 6-105. Motion for reconsideration.
   (a)   Generally. When a question has once been decided, a motion for
reconsideration is in order if the bill, resolution, motion, or matter upon
which the vote was taken is still in the possession of the County Council or is
a reconsideration of a Charter amendment vote pursuant to subsection (b).
   (b)   Limitations. A motion for reconsideration is not in order unless made
on the same day on which the original vote was taken, or at the next
legislative session of the County Council, except that a motion to reconsider a
vote on a resolution to amend the Charter may be made at any time before the
certification date for the question required in § 7-103 of the Election Law
Article in the State Code.
   (c)   Person to make the motion. The motion for reconsideration shall be
made by a member who voted with the prevailing side on the original question.
In the case of a tie vote, either side of the question may make a motion for
reconsideration and it shall be reconsidered on the majority vote of all
members present and voting.
   (d)   Second motion prohibited. A second motion to reconsider may not be
entertained.
(Res. No. 41-16)
§ 6-106. Dilatory motions.
   The presiding officer of the County Council may not entertain a motion for a
dilatory purpose.
TITLE 7. INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BOND HEARINGS
§ 7-101. Industrial revenue bond hearings.
   (a)   Definition. In this section, "enabling legislation" means the Maryland
Economic Development Bond Act.
   (b)   Applicability. This section applies to each resolution relating to the
authorization of the issuance by the County of bonds, notes, or other
obligations under the enabling legislation.
   (c)   Public hearing. A public hearing shall be held for each resolution,
and members of the public shall be afforded an opportunity, subject to the
discretion of the presiding officer, to testify with respect to the resolution.
   (d)   Notice of hearing. Except as provided in subsection (e), an
advertisement containing the title of each resolution and the date of a
proposed public hearing to be held on the resolution shall be inserted in a
newspaper of general circulation in the County once at least 14 days before a
public hearing on the resolution. The date of the public hearing may be
postponed from the date specified in the advertisement without the need of
further advertisement of the resolution.
   (e)   Exception to notice provisions. An advertisement is not required if
the resolution relates to a project or transaction that has been the subject of
a previous resolution or an ordinance of the County Council relating to the
issuance of bonds, notes, or other obligations under the enabling legislation,
and the ordinance or resolution was advertised before the date of the public
hearing, unless the new resolution involves a change in the location or scope
of the facility or industrial project to be financed under the enabling
legislation.
   (f)   Required information. Each resolution shall contain a provision
providing that the approval of the resolution by the County Executive shall
constitute the agreement by the County Executive to provide the County Council
with a report to be delivered to the County Council after the issuance of any
bonds, notes, or other obligations under the enabling legislation summarizing
the following information:
      (1)   the name of the project;
      (2)   the name of the person contracting with the County under a loan
agreement, lease agreement, or other agreement relating to the bonds, notes, or
other obligations;
      (3)   the principal amount of bonds, notes, or other obligations issued
by the County;
      (4)   the name of each tenant of the facility or industrial project known
to exist as of the date of issuance of the bonds, notes, or other obligations;
      (5)   the purchaser of the bonds, notes, or other obligations, if
available, and the underwriter or agent who arranged for the sale of the bonds,
notes, or other obligations;
      (6)   the date of issuance of the bonds, notes, or other obligations;
      (7)   a description of the facility or industrial project financed by the
bonds, notes or other obligations;
      (8)   the interest rate provisions for the bonds, notes, or other
obligations; and
      (9)   the payment provisions and the maturity of the bonds, notes, or
other obligations.
   (g)   Failure to file report. The failure to file the report required by
subsection (f) does not affect:
      (1)   the validity of the bonds, notes, or other obligations issued under
the enabling legislation;
      (2)   the contracts or agreements or certificates executed on behalf of
the County with respect to the bonds, notes, or other obligations; or
      (3)   the validity of the authorization for the County to participate in
a transaction under the enabling legislation.
   (h)   Disclosure of interested parties. A resolution providing for the
authorization and issuance by the County of a series of revenue bonds shall
include a disclosure of interested parties.
   (i)   Disclosure form. On introduction of a resolution for an industrial
revenue bond, the following disclosure form shall be submitted to each member
of the County Council:
DISCLOSURE OF INTERESTED PARTIES
   I, ____________, the President of ____________, certify that the following
entity or entities are known to be involved in the ____________ Project in the
capacities indicated below:
   Borrower:
   Shareholders of Borrower:
   Principal Underwriters:
   Trustee:
   Alternate Paying Agent:
   Contractor:
   Architect:
   Title Insurance:
   Feasibility Consultant:
   Project Consultant:
   Lender:
   Builder, if any:
   Partners, General and Limited, if any:
   Seller:
   Realtor:
   Officers and Directors, if any:
   Personal Guarantors, if any:
   Existing Mortgage and Holder, if any:
   Tenants:
                     _______________________________
                     (Project)
                     By:____________________________
                      (Signature)
   (j)   Unavailable information. If an item of information is not available or
not applicable at the introduction of the resolution, this shall be stated on
the disclosure form and made a part of the public record.
(Res. No. 38-89; Res. No. 78-96; Res. No. 8-03)
REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location of State Law references and Resolutions contained
in the Rules of Procedure of the County Council.
 
State Law Cite          Location
Const. Art. XI-A        5-103
Election Law Art. 7-103 6-105
 
Resolution Number Disposition
Resolution Number Disposition
6-86              3-105,
                  4-104
16-86             Enacting Resolution
105-86            3-102
                  3-102,
                  3-103,
                  3-106,
                  3-105,
                  4-104,
38-89             5-101,
                  5-102,
                  5-105,
                  5-106,
                  6-103,
                  7-101
43-89             5-101
                  3-105,
28-93             4-101,
                  5-101,
                  5-104
                  4-105,
2-94              4-111,
                  5-106
                  3-102,
78-96             4-104,
                  7-101
26-97             4-110
                  4-101,
                  4-104,
59-98             4-111,
                  5-103,
                  5-104,
                  5-106
58-99             3-106
9-00              1-106
13-00             4-104,
                  5-104
17-00             4-104
                  1-101 to
                  1-106,
                  2-102,
                  2-104,
                  3-101,
                  3-104,
                  3-105,
                  4-101,
8-03              4-103 to
                  4-111,
                  5-101 to
                  5-104,
                  5-106,
                  5-107,
                  6-102 to
                  6-104,
                  7-101
                  1-106,
                  2-103,
                  2-104,
                  3-102,
42-13             3-105,
                  4-106,
                  5-101,
                  5-103,
                  5-104,
                  5-106
32-16             4-106
41-16             6-105
                  3-102,
5-25              3-104 to
                  3-106,
                  5-101
                  1-103,
                  1-106 to
                  1-108,
                  2-101,
                  3-101,
15-25             4-106 to
                  4-112,
                  5-101,
                  5-103,
                  5-104,
                  5-106,
                  6-104
                  
 
APPENDIX B. RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS
   Title
      
1.   IN GENERAL
      
2.   COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION
      
3.   PREHEARING PROCEDURE
      
4.   HEARINGS
      
5.   APPEALS
      
REFERENCE TABLE
Editor's note – Bill No. 150-80, § 7 approved the Rules of Practice and
Procedure of the Board of Appeals adopted by the Board June 12, 1980. Pursuant
to instructions of the County, the text of the rules has been set out as
Appendix B. Any amendments to the rules will be identified by a history note
following the amended rule. The absence of a history note indicates that the
rule is derived from Bill No. 150-80. The appendix was subsequently amended by
Bill No. 188-81, repealed and reenacted by Bill No. 53-86, § 1, and further
amended by Bill No. 12-88, Bill No. 22-90, Bill No. 43-92, Bill No. 99-93, Bill
No. 32-97, Bill No. 14-01, Bill No. 5-10, Bill No. 19-13, Bill No. 80-17, and
Bill No. 13-21.
Rule
Title 1. In General
   
1-101.   Scope.
   
1-102.   Officers.
   
1-103.   Meetings.
   
1-104.   Administrative matters.
   
1-105.   Computation of time.
Title 2. Commencement of Action
   
2-101.   Appeals.
   
2-102.   Docket and calendar.
   
2-103.   Fees.
   
2-104.   Notice of hearing.
   
2-105.   Appearance and practice.
Title 3. Prehearing Procedure
   
3-101.   Other pleadings.
   
3-102.   Withdrawal.
   
3-103.   Request for postponement.
   
3-104.   Prehearing procedure.
   
3-105.   Depositions and discovery.
Title 4. Hearings
   
4-101.   Conduct of hearings.
   
4-102.   Disqualification and discipline of Board members.
   
4-103.   Subpoenas.
   
4-104.   Evidence.
   
4-105.   Findings and conclusions.
   
4-106.   Virtual or remote hearings; meetings; calculation of time.
Title 5. Appeals
   
5-101.   Appeals from decisions of the Board.
TITLE 1. IN GENERAL
Rule 1-101. Scope.
   The rules of practice and procedure set forth in this appendix are generally
applicable to proceedings before the County Board of Appeals.
(Bill No. 53-86)
Rule 1-102. Officers.
   (a)   Generally. The County Board of Appeals shall elect one of its members
as Chair and one as Vice Chair at the pleasure of the Board. The Chair shall
preside at all meetings of the Board, and in the Chair's absence the Vice Chair
shall preside. In the absence of the Chair and the Vice Chair, a member
designated by the remaining members of the Board shall act as Chair and shall
preside with all the powers of the Chair.
   (b)   Staff members. All staff members shall report directly to the Chair of
the Board. The Chair shall assign to various staff members their functions and
duties.
(Bill No. 53-86)
Rule 1-103. Meetings.
   (a)   Frequency. Meetings of the County Board of Appeals shall be held at
the call of the Chair and at such other times as the Board may determine.
   (b)   Quorum. Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
conduct of business. Site visits pursuant to Rule
4-101(g) are not governed by this rule.
   (c)   Minutes. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote, failure to vote, or absence of each member on each question, all of which
shall be filed promptly in the office of the Board as a public record after
approval by all Board members.
   (d)   Participation in decision. Only those members who have actually heard
all the evidence and testimony in an appeal shall participate in the decision
unless all parties to the appeal shall agree otherwise, except that the Chair
of the hearing shall have the ability to permit a member to listen to the
Board’s Counsel recording for any missed hearing or any missed portion of a
hearing, as applicable, and participate in the decision. In no event shall a
member be permitted to participate in a decision if that member misses the
first hearing on any appeal.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 22-90; Bill No. 99-93; Bill No. 32-97; Bill No. 5-10;
Bill No. 80-17; Bill No. 13-21; Bill No. 28-25)
Rule 1-104. Administrative matters.
   (a)   Duties of the Clerk. The Clerk shall handle all correspondence of the
Board, send out all notices required by these rules, keep the dockets and
minutes of the Board’s proceedings, compile all required records, maintain the
necessary files and indexes, and perform such other duties as directed.
   (b)   Docket and minute database. The Clerk shall keep a docket and minute
database which shall be kept posted to date. The Clerk shall docket the case in
the name of the original applicant and include a short description of the
subject matter of the appeal and the number assigned to the appeal. In cases
involving real property, a brief description of the property shall also be
included.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 28-25)
Rule 1-105. Computation of time.
   (a)   Generally. Time must be computed as follows:
      (1)   Do not count the day of the event that begins a time period (e.g.
the day of a decision).
      (2)   Include the last day of a time period unless it falls on a
Saturday, Sunday, or County holiday, or day on which the County is not open
during its regular hours. In that case the time period ends on the next
business day.
      (3)   If the required time period is more than seven days, count
Saturdays, Sundays, and County holidays as days and days on which the County is
not open during its regular hours. If the time period is seven days or less, do
not count Saturdays, Sundays, or County holidays, or days on which the County
is not open during its regular hours.
   (b)   Computation of latest day. In determining the latest day for
performance of an act which is required by these rules, by order of the County
Board of Appeals, or otherwise, to be performed a prescribed number of days
before a certain day, act, or event, all days prior thereto, including
intervening Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, are counted in the number
of days so prescribed. The latest day is included in the determination unless
it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event the latest day is
the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 99-93; Bill No. 5-10)
TITLE 2. COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION
Rule 2-101. Appeals.
   (a)   Time limit. All appeals from orders or decisions from which an appeal
is authorized by law shall be taken within 30 days of the date of such order or
decision, except where a different period is prescribed by law or rule, by the
filing of a notice of appeal with the County Board of Appeals.
   (b)   Notice of appeal from Administrative Hearing Officer decision. In
appeals from the decisions of the Administrative Hearing Officer, the notice of
appeal shall include the following information:
      (1)   the title of the proceedings;
      (2)   the name of the applicant;
      (3)   the application or case number;
      (4)   the date of decision;
      (5)   a copy of the decision;
      (6)   a general statement of the basis for the appeal; and
      (7)   the applicable fee.
   (c)   Notice of appeal from decisions involving real property. In appeals
from administrative decisions of County offices involving real property, the
notice of appeal shall include the following information:
      (1)   location of the subject property;
      (2)   number of the councilmanic district in which the subject property
is located;
      (3)   names and mailing addresses of owners of real property within 175
feet of the subject property;
      (4)   the name of the applicant;
      (5)   a copy of the decision from which the appeal is taken;
      (6)   a general statement of the basis for the appeal; and
      (7)   the applicable fee.
   (d)   Notice for all other appeals. In all other appeals, the notice shall
include the following information:
      (1)   the name of the applicant;
      (2)   a copy of the order or decision from which the appeal is taken;
      (3)   the name of the officer making that order or decision and the date
thereof;
      (4)   a general statement of the basis for the appeal; and
      (5)   the applicable fee.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 12-88; Bill No. 22-90; Bill No. 99-93; Bill No. 32-
97; Bill No. 14-01; Bill No. 5-10; Bill No. 28-25)
Rule 2-102. Docket and calendar.
   (a)   Generally. Each appeal, when filed in proper form, shall be numbered
serially, docketed and placed upon the calendar of the Board by the Clerk.
   (b)   Order of hearing appeals. Appeals shall be heard in the order in which
they are filed with the Board, except that cases to be heard on any given day
maybe arranged in any convenient sequence for that day by the Clerk. The Board
may advance a given case on the docket and hear the case out of order:
      (1)   on its own motion;
      (2)   upon showing of good cause and after notice to all parties or
attorneys of record; or
      (3)   pursuant to County law.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 12-88)
Rule 2-103. Fees.
   (a)   Generally. A notice of appeal shall be accepted by the County Board of
Appeals only when accompanied by the relevant fee listed below:
      (1)   Appeals from decisions of the Administrative Hearing Officer
relating to reclassifications and special exceptions and appeals from decisions
of the Department of Inspections and Permits relating to grading permits, $400.
      (2)   All other appeals, $250.
   (b)   Limitation. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), the
total of fees for consolidated, multiple appeals from decisions of the
Administrative Hearing Officer shall not exceed $1,000.
   (c)   Refund of fees. No fees paid as required by this rule shall be
returned to the appealing party, except by order of the Board upon good cause
shown.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 12-88; Bill No. 22-90; Bill No. 43-92; Bill No. 99-
93; Bill No. 14-01; Bill No. 28-25)
Rule 2-104. Notice of hearing.
   (a)   Generally. Notice of the hearing of an appeal, excluding an appeal
relating to a grading permit, shall be given by first class mail or electronic
mail, at least 30 days before the date of the hearing. Notice of the hearing of
an appeal relating to a grading permit shall be given in as timely a manner as
practicable, either orally or in writing. Notice shall be given to:
      (1)   the appellant or the appellant's attorney if the appellant is
represented by an attorney, at the address stated in the notice of appeal;
      (2)   the Administrative Hearing Officer or other official whose order or
decision is being appealed;
      (3)   the County Attorney;
      (4)   the original applicant or the original applicant's attorney; and
      (5)   other interested parties as the Board may deem appropriate.
   (b)   Publication. Notice of the hearing of any appeal shall be published
once a week for not less than two consecutive weeks, in one newspaper of
general circulation published in the County. Such notice shall specify the
time, date, place, and subject of the hearing. The hearing shall be not less
than six days following the final newspaper publication. The Clerk shall post
the notice on the County’s website when the hearing date is set.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 12-88; Bill No. 22-90; Bill No. 99-93; Bill No. 5-10;
Bill No. 28-25)
Rule 2-105. Appearance and practice.
   (a)   Persons who may appear. An individual may appear in the individual's
own behalf; a member of a partnership may represent the partnership; a bona
fide officer or representative of a corporation, trust or association may
represent same; and an officer or employee of a political subdivision or body
or department may represent same in any proceeding.
   (b)   Attorneys. A person, firm, or corporation may be represented in any
proceeding by an attorney admitted to practice before the Court of Appeals of
Maryland.
   (c)   Limitation on who may appear. A person, firm, or corporation shall not
be represented in any hearing except as provided above.
   (d)   Formal notice of appearance. An attorney who wishes to appear in any
proceeding in a representative capacity which involves a hearing or an
opportunity for a hearing shall file with the County Board of Appeals a written
notice of appearance which includes the attorney's name, business address,
telephone number, and the names and addresses of the persons represented by the
attorney. No formal notice of appearance is necessary if the notice of appeal
contains the required information.
(Bill No. 53-86)
TITLE 3. PREHEARING PROCEDURE
Rule 3-101. Other pleadings.
   No other pleadings shall be required from the appellant or other parties;
but if filed, copies thereof shall be served on the parties or their attorney
of record before the Board, and a certificate of service shall be affixed
thereto.
(Bill No. 53-86)
Rule 3-102. Withdrawal.
   An appellant may withdraw an appeal. A request for withdrawal shall be in
writing and the Board shall serve a copy on:
      (1)   the official whose decision is being appealed;
      (2)   the County Attorney; and
      (3)   all parties of record to the proceedings and their attorneys.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 12-88; Bill No. 22-90; Bill No. 99-93; Bill No. 19-
13; Bill No. 13-21)
Rule 3-103. Request for postponement.
   (a)   Generally. Any party to an appeal may, in writing, request a
postponement of a scheduled hearing. A request for postponement may not be
granted except for good cause shown.
   (b)   Form of request; decision. A request for postponement shall be in
writing, stating in detail the reasons the postponement is desired. The request
shall include a statement by the party making the request, agreeing to pay any
additional expenses incurred if the postponement is granted, including
readvertising, costs of the official stenographer, and other reasonable
administrative costs as assessed by the Board. Copies of all requests shall be
sent by first class mail or electronic mail to all parties and attorneys of
record and to the County Attorney. The request for postponement shall be
decided by a majority vote of a quorum of the Board.
   (c)   Six month limit. The Board shall hear an appeal within six months from
the date of the filing thereof, unless the Board waives this requirement upon
good cause shown.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 12-88; Bill No. 99-93; Bill No. 14-01; Bill No. 13-
21; Bill No. 28-25)
Rule 3-104. Prehearing procedure.
   (a)   Generally. There shall be no prehearing procedure before the County
Board of Appeals except as follows:
      (1)   motion to determine standing;
      (2)   motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction;
      (3)   request for postponement pursuant to Rule
3-103 or for advancement pursuant to Rule
2-102;
      (4)   request for waiver of six-month hearing requirement pursuant to
Rule
3-103; or
      (5)   request for withdrawal of an appeal pursuant to Rule
3-102.
   (b)   Ex parte communications. In accordance with §
3-1-106 of the Anne Arundel County Code, a party, attorney, spokesperson, or
representative of any party or any other person may not communicate ex parte or
confer privately with any member of the County Board of Appeals concerning any
appeal. Any information sought by an interested party shall be directed to the
Clerk of the Board or to the Attorney to the Board. A member of the Board may
not communicate with any party, attorney, spokesperson or representative of any
party, or other person outside of the hearing room concerning any appeal until
after the Board is divested of jurisdiction in the case.
   (c)   Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of subsection (b) shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in §
9-1-101 of the Anne Arundel County Code.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 99-93; Bill No. 14-01)
Rule 3-105. Depositions and discovery.
   There shall be no depositions or discovery.
(Bill No. 53-86)
TITLE 4. HEARINGS
Rule 4-101. Conduct of hearings.
   (a)   Generally. All hearings before the County Board of Appeals shall be
public. The Board may not receive written or oral testimony or exhibits outside
of a hearing. Board members and the Board’s staff may not engage in
communications of any kind with anyone other than Board Counsel or staff, or
other Board members regarding the merits of a case until the decision and order
become final. No hearing shall be private even though all parties agree. All
witnesses shall testify under oath, administered by the Chair, Board’s Counsel,
the Clerk or the Assistant Clerk. All persons attending the meeting who decline
to testify may sign the witness list and thereby be provided with notice of all
future proceedings involving the appeal.
   (b)   Stenographer and transcripts. The Board shall furnish an official
stenographer for taking testimony of the hearing in all appeals. Anyone
desiring a transcript of the testimony may obtain a copy from the official
stenographer and shall bear the full cost. The Board is not required to furnish
a stenographer during a site visit conducted pursuant to subsection (g).
   (c)   Continuance. A continuance, if requested by any party, may be granted
by majority vote of the Board for good cause shown. If a case is continued for
more than 30 days, the case shall be readvertised at the sole expense of the
party requesting the continuance.
   (d)   Presentation of evidence. Evidence at the public hearing shall be
presented first by the applicants, then by persons in opposition, and lastly by
the County agency involved, unless otherwise designated by the Board.
   (e)   Hearing procedures. The Chair shall regulate the course of the hearing
and shall rule upon procedural matters and objections made during the course of
the hearing. Counsel to the Board shall be present at all hearings to advise
the Board on legal and procedural issues.
   (f)   Recess. A hearing may be recessed from time to time for good cause
shown and if the time and place of the recessed hearing is announced publicly.
No further notice of the recessed hearing shall be required.
   (g)   Site visits. Board members may visit the site which is the subject of
the appeal. Site visits may be announced by the Chair on the record. Any
attempts to communicate with Board members during a site visit are prohibited.
   (h)   Appeals from decisions where applicant did not appear. If a case is
appealed to the Board from a decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer,
and the Board determines that the Administrative Hearing Officer’s decision was
based on the failure of the applicant to appear either in person or by
representation, the Board first shall determine if the decision of the
Administrative Hearing Officer to dismiss the application was proper. If the
Board determines that the decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer to
dismiss the application was not proper, the Board shall proceed to hear the
appeal on its merits.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 22-90; Bill No. 99-93; Bill No. 32-97; Bill No. 14-
01; Bill No. 5-10; Bill No. 28-25)
Rule 4-102. Disqualification and discipline of Board members.
   (a)   Disqualification. A member of the Board may not participate in any
matter or proceeding before the Board, except in the exercise of an
administrative or ministerial duty which does not affect the disposition or
decision with respect to that matter, if, to the member's knowledge, the member
or the member's spouse, or any relative of the member or the member's spouse
within the third degree of consanguinity, or the spouse of any such relative,
has an interest therein as that term is defined in §
7-1-101 of the Anne Arundel County Code or if any of the following is a party
thereto:
      (1)   any business entity in which the member has a direct financial
interest as that term is defined in §
7-1-101 of the Anne Arundel County Code of which the member may reasonably be
expected to know;
      (2)   any business entity of which the member is an officer, director,
trustee, partner, or employee, or in which the member knows any of the above-
listed relatives has such interest;
      (3)   any business entity with which the member or, to the member's
knowledge, any of the above-listed relatives is negotiating or has any
arrangement concerning prospective employment;
      (4)   any business entity which is a party to an existing contract with
the member or which the member knows is a party to a contract with any of the
above-named relatives, if the contract could reasonably be expected to result
in a conflict between the private interests of the member and the member's
official County duties;
      (5)   any entity, either engaged in a transaction with the County or
doing business with the County, in which a direct financial interest is owned
by another entity in which the member has a direct financial interest if the
member may reasonably be expected to know of both financial interests;
      (6)   any business entity which the member knows is the member's creditor
or obligee, or that any of the above-named relatives, with respect to a thing
of economic value and which, by reason thereof, is in a position to affect
directly and substantially the interest of the member or any of the above-named
relatives.
   (b)   Disclosure of ex parte communications or special knowledge. A member
of the Board shall reveal on the record any ex parte communications or special
knowledge concerning a matter before the Board.
   (c)   Disqualification. A member of the Board may choose to determine his or
her disqualification for bias, conflict of interest, or for other good cause.
Upon doing so, that member shall be prohibited from participating in any
further proceedings relating to the case. If a Board member's participation in
the case is challenged by a party to the appeal for alleged bias, conflict of
interest, or other good cause, and if the member declines to disqualify himself
or herself, the remaining Board members participating in the appeal shall
decide by majority vote whether or not the member shall be disqualified.
   (d)   Complaints. Whenever a complaint against a member of the Board is
filed pursuant to §
3-1-103 of the Anne Arundel County Code, the following procedures shall apply:
      (1)   The Clerk shall notify all members of the Board that an affidavit
has been filed charging a member of the Board with a violation of the Anne
Arundel County Code or of these rules. No information about the allegations,
the contents of the affidavit, or the fact that it has been filed may be
released to any person other than the individual filing the affidavit, the
Board members, and the attorney to the Board. After a hearing has been
scheduled before the County Council, the Clerk may release the contents of the
affidavit and the fact that it has been filed. No other information may be
released.
      (2)   During the confidential meeting of the Board to discuss the
allegation, only the complainant, Board members, Clerk to the Board, and
attorney to the Board may be present. The Board shall hear from the complainant
and from the member or members against whom the allegation was made. The
meeting may be conducted in an informal manner, in the discretion of the Board
member chairing the meeting.
      (3)   If at least four Board members determine that there is a reasonable
belief that there has been a violation as alleged, the Board shall transmit the
affidavit, any pertinent documents relating to the allegation, and the minutes
of the confidential meeting to the County Council for a public hearing on the
merits of the complaint. If the Board does not determine that there is a
reasonable belief that there has been a violation, the matter shall be
considered closed and no information regarding the allegation may be released
to the public.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 99-93)
Rule 4-103. Subpoenas.
   (a)   Powers of the Board. The County Board of Appeals shall have the power
to issue subpoenas to compel the appearance of witnesses, and to require the
production of documentary or other tangible evidence.
   (b)   Issuance. The Board may cause subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum to
be issued upon its own motion, or upon the application of any party of record
to any hearing; but any such application shall be in writing and shall set
forth the persons, books, papers or other documents to be produced and a
general statement as to the purpose of the subpoena.
   (c)   Procedures. Subpoena procedures shall be in accordance with §
1-2-101 of the Anne Arundel County Code. If a party requesting a subpoena
elects to have the subpoena served by the Sheriff, the party requesting the
subpoena shall be responsible for paying any fee for service imposed by the
Sheriff. Affidavits of service shall be filed with the Clerk to the Board prior
to the commencement of the hearing.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 99-93; Bill No. 19-13; Bill No. 28-25)
Rule 4-104. Evidence.
   (a)   Generally. The Chair may admit evidence which possesses probative
value commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent persons in the conduct of
their affairs. The Chair shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized
by law. The Chair may exclude incompetent, irrelevant, immaterial, and unduly
repetitious evidence.
   (b)   Documentary evidence. Documentary evidence may be received in the form
of copies or excerpts, or by incorporation by reference. Exhibits and plats
admitted into evidence may not be mounted and shall be folded to a maximum size
of nine inches by 14 inches. An exact duplicate of the exhibit may be mounted
and used for presentation.
   (c)   Cross-examination. The parties shall have the opportunity to cross-
examine witnesses. The Chair shall permit a representative or representatives
of persons in opposition the opportunity to conduct cross-examination.
   (d)   Authority to testify. The Chair may question witnesses testifying as
representatives of associations as to their authorization to testify on behalf
of the association, and may permit cross-examination as to the authorization by
those representing parties to the appeal.
   (e)   Expert witnesses. The Chair may qualify expert witnesses on the basis
that their testimony, in the form of an opinion or otherwise, will assist the
Board in understanding evidence or determining a fact at issue. In making the
qualification, the Chair shall consider (1) whether the witness is qualified as
an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training or education; (2) the
appropriateness of the testimony for the particular case; and (3) whether
sufficient facts exist to support the testimony.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 22-90; Bill No. 99-93; Bill No. 5-10; Bill No. 28-25)
Rule 4-105. Findings and conclusions.
   (a)   Generally. Within 60 days after the termination of the hearing, the
County Board of Appeals shall prepare and file in the proceedings a written
succinct memorandum of opinion, including its findings and conclusions. If the
Board determines that more than 60 days are required, the Clerk shall so notify
the parties. For purposes of this subsection, a hearing shall be considered
terminated upon the closing of testimony, or the submission of any final items
of evidence or written arguments pursuant to an order of the Board, whichever
shall occur last. The Board’s decision shall rest entirely upon the pleadings
and the evidence.
   (b)   Revisions and corrections. At any time within 30 days after the filing
of the memorandum and in the absence of an appeal to the Circuit Court for Anne
Arundel County, the Board may revise and submit a written memorandum to correct
clerical or other errors of form, providing such corrections make no change of
substance in the memorandum. The revised memorandum shall be furnished to all
parties and attorneys of record.
   (c)   Copies of decisions. The Board shall furnish copies of all orders and
opinions to all parties to the proceedings or their attorneys of record. Any
opinions rendered by the Board shall include a summary of pleadings, a summary
of the evidence, findings of fact, and the basis for the conclusion reached by
the Board. Any orders rendered by the Board shall be approved as to form by the
attorney to the Board.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 22-90; Bill No. 99-93; Bill No. 28-25)
Rule 4-106. Virtual or remote hearings; meetings; calculation of time.
   (a)   Generally. When the Chair of the Board determines that emergency or
extenuating circumstances exist, the Board shall be permitted to conduct
hearings in a virtual or remote format.
   (b)   Notice. The notice of the hearing or the Board's website, or both,
shall state that the hearing will be held virtually and shall state the time,
date, virtual location, and registration information.
   (c)   Public access. The Board shall ensure that the public has the ability
to listen to the proceeding through remote electronic means.
   (d)   Hearing participants. All interested participants, parties, and
proposed witnesses shall register with the Board prior to the hearing using the
options for registration set forth in the notice of the hearing or on the
Board's website. All persons must be shown using their full name or name on
record while in the virtual or remote hearing. Each witness shall enable and
use both video and audio at all times during their testimony. All viewable
participants in the hearing shall wear appropriate attire and present
themselves as they would if they were appearing in a physical hearing room. All
participants shall ensure that there will be no interruptions or distractions
for the duration of their appearance at the hearing.
   (e)   Right to object to virtual or remote hearings.
      (1)   Generally. Any party to an appeal may object in writing to a
hearing being conducted in a virtual or remote format. An objection to a
virtual or remote hearing may not be granted except for good cause shown.
      (2)   Form of request; decision. An objection to a virtual or remote
hearing format shall be in writing, stating in detail the reasons for the
objection. The objection shall include a statement by the party objecting that
the party agrees to pay any additional expenses incurred if the objection is
granted, including readvertising, costs of the official stenographer, and other
reasonable administrative costs as assessed by the Board. Copies of the
objection shall be mailed or emailed by the Clerk to all parties and attorneys
of record and to the County Attorney. The objection to a virtual or remote
hearing format shall be decided by a majority vote of a quorum of the Board.
   (f)   Exhibits. All participants shall pre-file proposed exhibits at least
seven (7) calendar days in advance of the virtual or remote hearing through the
options for filing set forth in the notice of the hearing or on the Board's
website. The Chair may allow exhibits not submitted prior to the hearing to be
used at the hearing, such as documents used to impeach a witness or for
rebuttal. At the Chair's discretion, the Chair may permit a party to transmit
an exhibit to the Board during the hearing by email or other method approved by
the Chair. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Clerk of the Board may not
be obligated to maintain any proposed exhibits that were not made part of the
record and may delete them from an e-mail inbox, virtual drop box, or other
virtual storage folder at the Clerk's convenience.
   (g)   Calculation of dates during state of emergency. If the office of the
Board is closed to the public due to a state of emergency, appeals and evidence
shall be delivered through the options for filing set forth on the Board's
website. If the delivery date of any items received by the Board cannot be
immediately determined, the delivery date shall be presumed to be the next
business day after the Clerk last received deliveries.
(Bill No. 13-21)
TITLE 5. APPEALS
Rule 5-101. Appeals from decisions of the Board.
   (a)   Generally. All appeals from decisions of the County Board of Appeals
shall be in accordance with the provisions of §
604 of the Charter of Anne Arundel County and the Maryland Rules of Procedure.
   (b)   Notice. Upon receipt of the copy of the first petition for judicial
review filed with the Court and unless otherwise ordered by the Court, the
Clerk to the Board shall give written notice promptly by first class or
electronic mail to all parties to the Board’s proceedings that a petition for
judicial review has been filed, the date of the filing, the name of the Court,
and the civil action number and that a party wishing to oppose the petition
must file a response within 30 days after the date the notice was mailed unless
the Court shortens or extends the time. The Clerk shall file with the Court a
certificate of compliance with this requirement, pursuant to Maryland Rule 7-
202(e).
   (c)   Transmittal of Record to the Court. Within 60 days after the agency
receives the first petition for judicial review, unless the time is extended or
shortened by the Court, the Clerk shall file with the Circuit Court the record
as required by Maryland Rule 7-206.
(Bill No. 53-86; Bill No. 14-01; Bill No. 19-13; Bill No. 28-25)
REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location of State Law references and Bills contained in
the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the County Board of Appeals.
 
State Law Cite         Location
Maryland Rule 7-202(e) Rule
                       5-101
 
Bill Number Disposition
Bill Number Disposition
            1-101 to
            1-105,
            2-101 to
            2-105,
53-86       3-101 to
            3-105,
            4-101 to
            4-105,
            5-101
            2-101 to
12-88       2-104,
            3-102,
            3-103
            1-103,
            2-101,
            2-103,
22-90       2-104,
            3-102,
            4-101,
            4-104,
            4-105
43-92       2-103
            1-103,
            1-105,
            2-101,
            2-103,
99-93       2-104,
            3-102 to
            3-104,
            4-101 to
            4-105
            1-103,
32-97       2-101,
            4-101
            2-101,
            2-103,
14-01       3-103,
            3-104,
            4-101,
            5-101
            1-103,
            1-105,
5-10        2-101,
            2-104,
            4-101,
            4-104
            3-102,
19-13       4-103,
            5-101
            1-103,
80-17       3-102,
            3-103,
            4-106
            1-103,
            1-104,
            2-101,
            2-103,
28-25       2-104,
            3-103,
            4-101,
            4-103 to
            4-105,
            5-101
 
PARALLEL REFERENCE TABLES
References to State Law
References to 1985 County Code
References to County Bills
REFERENCES TO STATE LAW
State Law Cite 2005 Code Section
State Law Cite                               2005 Code Section
Article 1
§ 11                                        1-2-202
Article 81
§ 278B                                      4-3A-102
§ 278C                                      4-11-111
Agriculture Article
§ 1-101(f)                                  17-10-301
                                             17-1-101,
Title 2, Subtitle 5                          17-10-101,
                                             17-10-102,
                                             17-10-201
§ 2-504.1                                   17-10-201
§ 2-509                                     4-2-302
Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article
§ 1-101                                     9-1-202,
                                             18-1-101
§ 1-322                                     4-11-126
Title 2, Subtitle 2                          18-1-101
§ 11-204                                    5-3-103
§ 11-1603                                   18-10-104,
                                             18-10-148
§ 36-101                                    4-11-126
Business Occupations and Professions Article
Title 6                                      11-4-102
                                             11-4-102,
                                             Article 11, Title 4, Subtitle 6,
Title 12                                     11-4-605,
                                             15-2-501,
                                             15-2-502
Title 18                                     12-5-102
Business Regulation Article
Title 12                                     11-12-101,
                                             11-12-102
§ 12-213                                    11-12-104
§ 16.7-101                                  11-6-104
Commercial Law Article
§ 12-127                                    4-2-401
§ 12-311                                    4-2-401
§ 12-409.1                                  4-2-401
§ 12-925                                    4-2-401
§ 12-1029                                   4-2-401
Correctional Services Article
§ 8-201(e)                                  4-2-309
§ 11-203(c)                                 4-12-105
Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article
§ 2-315(c)(2)                               6-1-308
§ 2-510                                     5-3-103
§ 2-510(e)                                  6-1-308
§ 3-224                                     6-4-111
§ 7-204(d)                                  4-11-113
Criminal Law Article
Title 3, Subtitle 3                          6-1-303
§ 3-602                                     6-1-303
§ 3-604                                     6-1-303
§ 3-802                                     6-1-303
§ 3-1102                                    12-7-107
§ 4-201                                     9-1-601,
                                             18-10-141
§ 4-203                                     12-7-107
§ 4-204                                     12-7-107
§ 5-601                                     12-7-107
§ 5-602                                     12-7-107
§§ 6-401 et seq.                           9-1-502
Article 9, Subtitle 8                        12-7-107
§ 10-110                                    9-1-703
§§ 10-601 et seq.                          12-4-302,
                                             12-4-901
§§ 10-604 through 10-618                   12-4-901
§ 10-604                                    12-4-901
§ 10-606                                    12-4-901
§ 10-607                                    12-4-101
§ 10-608                                    12-4-101
§ 10-615                                    12-4-901
§ 10-615(f)                                 12-4-901
§ 11-101                                    9-1-301,
                                             18-1-101
§ 11-204                                    Article 9, Title 1, Subtitle 3
§ 14-101                                    3-16-103,
                                             12-7-107
Criminal Procedure Article
§ 13-201                                    12-2-201
§ 15-403(c)(1)(i)                           6-1-308
§ 15-403(c)(1)(ii)                          6-1-308
Economic Development Article
§ 5-301(i)                                  4-2-306
§ 5-301(r)                                  4-2-306
§ 5-310                                     4-2-306
Title 12, Subtitle 1                         4-3A-103
Education Article
§ 4-109                                     17-1-101
§ 9-102                                     17-2-101
§ 9.5-401                                   18-1-101
Election Law Article
§ 1-101                                     1-12-101,
                                             3-2-102
§ 7-103                                     3-3-109
Title 13                                     1-12-101
Environment Article
Title 4                                      4-2-306
§ 4-201.1                                   16-3-206
§ 4-201.1(d)                                13-7-101
§ 4-202.1                                   13-7-102
§ 4-202.1(e)                                13-7-103
§ 4-202.1(e)(2)                             13-7-105
§ 4-202.1(f)(1)                             13-7-107
§ 4-202.1(h)(1)(ii)                         13-7-103
§ 4-202.1(h)(3)                             4-11-119
§ 4-202.1(h)(4)                             4-11-119
§ 4-202.1(h)(4)(vi)                         13-7-108
§ 4-203                                     16-3-206
Title 6, Subtitle 8                          15-4-404
Title 7, Subtitle 5                          4-2-306
§ 9-1701                                    13-1-101,
                                             18-1-101
Title 15, Subtitle 5                         17-6-301
Title 15, Subtitle 6                         17-6-301
Title 15, Subtitle 8                         17-6-301
§ 16-101                                    17-1-101
Family Law Article
§ 2-404(a)                                  2-3-104
§ 4-501(m)                                  6-1-303
General Provisions Article
§ 1-208                                     1-1-104
§ 1-209                                     1-1-102
§ 3-305                                     3-11-206
Title 5                                      Article 7;
                                             Article 7, Title 7
§ 5-101                                     7-1-101
§ 5-102                                     7-1-102
§ 5-104                                     7-1-103
§ 5-105                                     7-1-104
§ 5-203                                     7-2-101
§ 5-204(a)                                  7-2-102
§ 5-204(d) and (e)                          7-2-103
§ 5-205                                     7-2-104
§ 5-205(d)                                  7-1-105
§ 5-206                                     7-2-105
§ 5-207                                     7-2-106
§ 5-209                                     7-2-107
§ 5-301                                     7-3-101
§ 5-302                                     7-3-102
§ 5-303(a)                                  7-3-102
§ 5-303(b)                                  7-3-103
§ 5-401                                     7-4-101
§ 5-403                                     7-4-102
§ 5-404                                     7-4-103
§ 5-405                                     7-4-104
§ 5-406                                     7-4-105
§ 5-407                                     7-4-106
§ 5-408                                     7-4-107
§ 5-409                                     7-4-108
§ 5-501                                     7-5-101
§ 5-502                                     7-5-102
§ 5-503                                     7-5-103
§ 5-504(a)                                  7-5-104
§ 5-504(d)                                  7-5-105
§ 5-505                                     7-5-106
§ 5-506                                     7-5-107
§ 5-507                                     7-5-108
§ 5-512                                     7-5-109,
                                             7-5-110
§ 5-513                                     7-5-111
§ 5-601                                     7-6-101
§ 5-602                                     7-6-102
§ 5-602(f)                                  7-2-104
§ 5-603                                     7-6-102
§ 5-604                                     7-6-102
§ 5-605                                     7-6-103
§ 5-606                                     7-6-107
§ 5-607                                     7-6-104
§ 5-608                                     7-6-105
§ 5-609                                     7-6-106
§ 5-701(a)(1), (2), (3), or (4)             4-12-107
§ 5-702(a)                                  7-1-101
§ 5-702(b)                                  7-7-101
§ 5-703                                     7-7-102
§ 5-704                                     7-7-102
§ 5-704(f)                                  7-7-103
§ 5-705                                     7-7-105
§ 5-712                                     7-7-107
§ 5-714                                     7-7-104
§ 5-901                                     7-8-101
§ 5-902                                     7-8-102
§ 5-904                                     7-8-103
Health-General Article
§ 3-302                                     2-1-603
§ 7.5-401(b)(1)                             18-1-101
§ 8-101                                     18-1-101
Title 8, Subtitle 4                          18-1-101
§§ 10-1201 et seq.                         3-4-101
Title 19                                     17-7-902
§ 19-301(f)                                 17-11-203
§ 19-901                                    18-1-101
§ 19-901(c)                                 17-11-203
§ 19-1401(e)                                17-11-203,
                                             18-1-101
§ 19-1801                                   17-11-203,
                                             18-1-101
Title 19, Subtitle 25                        15-3-102
                                             11-6-101,
§ 21-301                                    18-1-101,
                                             18-2-207
§ 21-330.1                                  18-1-101
§ 24-701                                    18-1-101
Health Occupations Article
Title 6                                      11-9A-104
§ 6-101                                     11-9A-101
§ 6-301                                     11-9A-101
§ 6-405                                     11-9A-101
Housing and Community Development Article
Division II                                  Article 3, Title 9
Human Services Article
§ 5-5A-07                                   13-7-106
§ 8-301                                     3-12-111
Insurance Article
§ 19-601                                    6-1-309
§ 19-602                                    6-1-309
§ 19-603                                    6-1-309
Labor and Employment Article                 3-11-101
                                             5-3-307,
Title 9                                      5-4-206,
                                             5-5-205,
                                             5-6-207
Land Use Article
§§ 1-405 et seq.                           18-2-104
§ 4-214                                     18-1-101
§ 7-501(c)                                  13-5-813
§§ 11-201 through 11-209                   18-17-203
Local Government Article
§§ 1-702 through 1-706                     Article 10
§ 1-1101                                    4-2-401
§§ 1-1101 et seq.                          4-2-401
§§ 6-103 through 6-115                     9-2-101
§ 6-104                                     9-2-101
§ 6-106                                     9-2-101
§ 6-107                                     9-2-101
§ 6-108(b)                                  9-2-101
§ 9-205                                     Article 3, Title 3
                                             1-6-105,
                                             9-1-101,
                                             11-1-105,
§ 10-202                                    11-3-101,
                                             11-7-101,
                                             12-4-1001,
                                             15-5-102
§ 10-203                                    4-10-103
§ 10-205                                    Article 6
§ 10-302                                    2-2-101,
                                             3-19-101
§ 10-303                                    Article 6
                                             Article 3, Title 2,
§ 10-305                                    3-2-106,
                                             12-1-307
§ 10-306                                    3-3-101
                                             8-3-101,
§ 10-312                                    Article 10,
                                             13-2-102,
                                             13-2-204
§ 10-313                                    4-3A-101,
                                             4-6-108
§ 10-314                                    4-3A-101,
                                             4-6-108
§ 10-317                                    12-3-203
§ 10-323                                    Article 14,
                                             14-3-101
§ 16-107                                    4-11-106
§ 16-108                                    12-5-108
§§ 16-305 through 16-308                   4-7-103
Title 19                                     Article 4, Title 10
§§ 19-201 et seq.                          3-17-101,
                                             3-22-101
§ 19-205                                    4-10-307,
                                             4-10-406
§ 19-206                                    4-10-307,
                                             4-10-406
§ 19-207                                    3-17-213,
                                             3-22-213
§ 20-113                                    13-7-104
§ 20-117                                    13-7-104
§ 20-603                                    4-6-105
§ 20-603(c)                                 4-11-122,
                                             4-11-123
§§ 21-201 et seq.                          Article 4, Title 7, Subtitle 3
§ 21-204                                    4-7-303
§§ 21-301 et seq.                          Article 4, Title 7, Subtitle 3,
                                             4-7-303
§ 21-303                                    4-7-301
                                             4-8-101,
                                             4-8-103,
§§ 21-501 et seq.                          4-8-105,
                                             4-8-106,
                                             4-9-101,
                                             4-9-102
Title 22                                     3-18-102
Natural Resources Article
§ 3-2A-01                                   4-2-308
Title 5                                      17-1-101
§ 5-103                                     17-6-301
                                             17-1-101,
§ 5-1601                                    17-6-301,
                                             17-6-303
§ 5-1602(b)(3)                              17-6-301
§ 5-1602(b)(5)                              17-6-301
§ 5-1607(b)(2)                              17-6-304
§ 5-1610                                    17-6-308
§ 5-1610.1                                  17-6-304
                                             Article 4, Title 7, Subtitle 4,
§§ 8-705 through 8-709                     4-7-401,
                                             4-7-402
§ 8-705(a)                                  4-7-401
§§ 8-1001 through 8-1007                   Article 4, Title 7, Subtitle 3
§ 8-1802                                    17-1-101,
                                             18-1-101
§ 8-1806                                    17-1-101
§ 8-1807                                    18-1-101
§ 8-1808                                    3-2-207,
                                             18-16-305
§ 8-1808.4(c)                               18-13-204
§ 8-1808.4(c)                               18-13-204
§§ 10-2A-01 et seq.                        17-6-303
Public Safety Article
§ 1-101(c)                                  4-2-309
                                             3-16-102,
Title 3, Subtitle 1                          3-16-110,
                                             3-16-112
§ 3-101                                     3-16-101
§ 3-104                                     3-16-110,
                                             3-16-112
§ 3-105                                     3-16-112
§ 5-101                                     12-6-201,
                                             12-6-301
§ 5-145.1                                   12-6-101
§ 7-101(b)                                  4-2-309
§§ 7-201 et seq.                           Article 12, Title 1, Subtitle 3
§ 7-202(a)                                  4-2-309
§ 7-203(a)                                  4-2-309
Title 14                                     Article 1, Title 6,
                                             11-11-108
Public Utilities Article
§ 1-101                                     9-1-707
§§ 4-201 et seq.                           17-11-301
§ 7-207                                     18-10-164,
                                             18-11-156
§ 7-306.2                                   18-1-101
§ 10-406                                    4-6-107
§ 10-406(g)                                 4-6-107
§ 10-406(h)                                 4-6-107
Real Property Article
§ 2-114                                     17-1-101
§ 3-104                                     2-3-101
§ 3-108                                     17-3-302
§ 8-402.1                                   11-9A-104,
                                             12-7-107
Title 8A                                     3-10-101,
                                             17-6-108
Title 11                                     17-1-101
Title 12                                     8-3-101
§§ 12-101 et seq.                          8-3-101,
                                             13-2-102
State Finance and Procurement Article
§ 5-408                                     4-11-111
§ 7-331(f)                                  4-11-125
§ 16-311                                    8-2-117
State Government Article
§ 2-1257                                    3-18-113
§ 9-1A-27                                   4-11-118
§ 9-1A-31                                   Article 3, Title 13,
                                             18-10-172
§ 9-1A-31(b)                                4-11-118
§ 10-611                                    1-3-102
§§ 10-614 - 10-619                         Article 1, Title 4
§ 10-901                                    4-12-106
§ 10-904                                    4-12-106
§ 20-301                                    1-9-101
State Personnel and Pensions Article
                                             5-1-302,
Title 37                                     5-1-304,
                                             5-1-305,
                                             5-1-306
§ 37-203(f)(2)                              5-1-306
§ 37-203(f)(3)                              5-1-306
Tax-General Article
Title 4                                      11-2-224
§§ 4-101 - 4-105                           4-5-101
§ 4-101(b)                                  4-5-101
§ 4-102(b)(1)                               4-5-101
§ 4-102(b)(2)                               4-5-101
§ 4-103                                     4-5-101
§ 4-105                                     4-5-101
§ 4-105(b)                                  4-5-101
§ 4-105(f)                                  4-5-101
Title 4, Subtitle 2                          11-2-220
§ 10-106                                    4-4-101
§ 11-210(b)                                 4-6-104
§ 11-239                                    4-3-104
Tax-Property Article
                                             4-2-302,
                                             4-2-303,
                                             4-2-308,
                                             4-2-310,
§ 1-201                                     4-2-311,
                                             4-2-314,
                                             4-2-315,
                                             4-2-316,
                                             4-3-101
§ 6-202                                     4-1-102
§ 6-302                                     4-1-102
Title 7, Subtitle 2                          4-7-205
§ 7-204                                     4-2-314,
                                             13-7-101
§ 7-207                                     4-2-202
§ 7-208                                     4-2-202
§ 7-237                                     4-3-102,
                                             4-3-103
§ 7-248                                     4-3-104
§ 7-303                                     4-2-201
§ 7-514                                     4-3-103
§ 8-109(c)                                  4-10-101,
                                             4-10-103
§ 8-209                                     18-1-101
§ 8-302                                     4-2-201
                                             4-2-311 to
Title 9                                      4-2-313,
                                             4-2-319
                                             4-2-203,
§ 9-104                                     4-2-204,
                                             13-7-106
§ 9-104(a)                                  4-2-204
§ 9-104(g)                                  4-2-204
                                             4-2-204,
§ 9-105                                     4-2-301,
                                             4-2-313,
                                             4-2-318
Title 9, Subtitle 2                          4-2-301
§ 9-203                                     4-2-315
§ 9-204                                     4-2-312
§ 9-210                                     4-2-309
§ 9-215                                     4-2-204
§ 9-229                                     4-2-306
§ 9-229(c)(2)                               4-2-306
§ 9-242                                     4-2-311
§ 9-258(a)(3)(ii)                           4-2-318
§ 9-260                                     4-2-313
§ 9-262                                     4-2-301
§ 9-265                                     4-2-317
§ 9-303                                     4-2-201
§ 10-204.3                                  4-1-104
§ 10-205                                    4-1-104
§ 12-103                                    4-3A-103
Title 13, Subtitle 2                         4-3A-102
§ 13-209                                    4-3A-102
§§ 13-401 et seq.                          4-3A-101
§ 14-603(b)(5)(i)                           4-1-103
§ 14-808(a)                                 4-1-105
§ 14-820(b)(2)                              4-1-105
Transportation Article
Title 5                                      4-2-201
§ 11-104                                    12-3-103,
                                             14-1-101
§ 11-134.1                                  12-3-103
§ 11-176                                    9-1-202
§ 13-912                                    12-3-107
§ 13-913                                    9-1-202
§ 13-916                                    12-3-107
§ 13-937                                    12-3-107
§ 21-10A-02                                 11-16-402
§ 21-101                                    14-1-101
§ 21-706.1                                  12-3-108
§ 21-809                                    12-3-109
§ 21-1103                                   12-3-103
§ 22-412                                    12-3-107
§ 23-206.4                                  8-2-122
§ 25-101                                    Article 12, Title 3
§ 25-101.1                                  Article 11, Title 11
§ 25-102                                    Article 12, Title 3
§ 25-102(a)(1)                              12-3-203
§ 25-102(a)(3)                              Article 11, Title 11
§ 25-102(a)(5)                              14-2-115
§ 25-102.1                                  12-3-110
§§ 25-201 et seq.                          12-3-103
§ 26-301                                    12-3-203
§§ 26-302 et seq.                          12-3-110,
                                             12-3-301
Maryland Laws
1943 Md. Laws, Ch. 808                       4-11-113
1968 Md. Laws, Ch. 695, § 1                 9-1-708
1982 Md. Laws, Ch. 841, § 1                 1-8-104
1985 Md. Laws, Ch. 8, § 10                  4-11-111
1986 Md. Laws, Ch. 350, § 1                 17-11-213
1990 Md. Laws, Ch. 595, § 2                 5-1-304
1994 Md. Laws, Ch. 96                        4-11-111
1996 Md. Laws, Ch. 302, § 1                 3-17-101
1997 Md. Laws, Ch. 539, § 1                 3-22-101
                                             4-3A-102,
2021 Md. Laws, Ch. 10, § 1                  4-11-111,
                                             4-11-124
Maryland Rules
2-121                                        3-11-201
Title 7, Chapter 200                         7-4-105
Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR)
                                             17-1-101,
Title 08                                     17-6-302,
                                             17-6-303
Title 08, Subtitle 19                        17-6-302
08.19.03.01, Articles X-1 and X-2            17-6-304
08.19.04.02                                  17-6-302
                                             11-14-302,
10.17.01                                     11-14-303,
                                             11-14-305,
                                             11-14-401
10.17.01.05                                  11-14-304
10.17.01.40F                                 11-14-304
10.47.02.03                                  18-1-101
11.18.02.01 et seq.                          11-1-103,
                                             11-15-202
11.18.02.04                                  11-1-103,
                                             11-15-202
                                             13-5-505,
                                             17-1-101,
Title 26                                     17-2-101,
                                             18-1-101,
                                             18-2-101
26.02.03.02B                                 18-10-163,
                                             18-11-155
26.02.03.02C                                 18-10-163,
                                             18-11-155
26.02.03.02D                                 18-10-163,
                                             18-11-155
26.03.13.04D                                 13-5-816
26.03.13.04D(1)                              13-5-816
26.04.03.01-1                                16-1-101
26.17.01.00                                  16-3-101
26.17.01.01                                  16-1-101
26.17.01.07                                  16-3-204
26.17.01.07B                                 16-3-305
26.17.02                                     16-4-101
26.17.02.01-2                                16-4-101
26.17.02.02                                  16-1-101
26.17.02.08B                                 16-1-101,
                                             16-4-201
26.17.02.08C                                 16-1-101,
                                             16-4-202
26.17.02.09E                                 16-4-201
26.17.02.10                                  16-4-301
26.17.02.11                                  16-4-303
                                             3-2-207,
                                             17-1-101,
                                             17-2-101,
                                             17-2-106,
                                             17-3-201,
                                             17-3-301,
                                             17-4-202,
                                             17-8-205,
                                             17-8-301,
Title 27                                     17-8-501,
                                             17-8-502,
                                             17-8-602,
                                             17-8-1002, 
                                             18-1-101,
                                             18-2-101,
                                             18-2-403,
                                             18-13-104,
                                             18-13-401,
                                             18-16-305
36.06.01.02                                  11-2-501
 
REFERENCES TO 1985 COUNTY CODE
 
1967 Code Section 2005 Code Section
17-402            4-7-305
 
1985 Code Section 2005 Code Section
1985 Code Section    2005 Code Section
Art. 1, § 1-101     1-1-101
Art. 1, § 1-102     1-1-102,
                     1-1-103
Art. 1, § 1-103     1-1-104
Art. 1, § 1-104     1-7-101
Art. 1, § 1-105     1-7-102
Art. 1, § 1-105.1   1-7-103
Art. 1, § 1-105.2   1-7-104
Art. 1, § 1-105.3   1-8-104
Art. 1, § 1-106     1-1-105
Art. 1, § 1-107     1-1-105
Art. 1, § 1-108     1-1-106
Art. 1A, § 1-101    Repealed
Art. 1A, § 1-102    2-1-101
Art. 1A, § 1-103    2-1-102
Art. 1A, § 1-104    2-1-103
Art. 1A, § 1-105    2-1-103
Art. 1A, § 1-106    Repealed
Art. 1A, § 2-101    2-1-301
Art. 1A, § 2-102    2-1-301
Art. 1A, § 3-101    2-1-201
Art. 1A, § 3-102    2-1-202
Art. 1A, § 4-101    2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 4-102    2-1-402
Art. 1A, § 4A-101   2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 4A-102   2-1-402
Art. 1A, § 5-101    2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 5-102    2-1-402
Art. 1A, § 6-101    2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 6-102    2-1-402
Art. 1A, § 6A-101   2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 6A-102   2-1-402
Art. 1A, § 7-101    2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 7-102    2-1-402,
                     2-1-502
Art. 1A, § 7A-101   2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 7A-102   2-1-402
Art. 1A, § 8-101    2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 8-102    2-1-402,
                     2-1-501
Art. 1A, § 9-101    2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 9-102    2-1-402,
                     2-1-505
Art. 1A, § 10-101   2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 10-102   2-1-402
Art. 1A, § 11-101   2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 11-102   2-1-402
Art. 1A, § 12-101   2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 12-102   2-1-402
Art. 1A, § 13-101   2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 13-102   2-1-402,
                     2-1-504
Art. 1A, § 14-101   2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 14-102   2-1-402,
                     2-1-503
Art. 1A, § 15-101   2-1-401
Art. 1A, § 15-102   2-1-402
Art. 1A, § 16-101   2-1-603
Art. 1A, § 17-101   2-1-604
Art. 1A, § 18-101   2-1-602
Art. 1A, § 19-101   2-1-605
Art. 1A, § 20-101   2-1-601
Art. 2, § 1-101     1-2-101
Art. 2, § 1-102     1-2-102
Art. 2, § 1-103     1-7-101
Art. 2, § 1-104     1-8-102
Art. 2, § 1-105     1-8-103
Art. 2, § 1-106     6-1-111
                     2-2-101,
Art. 2, § 2-101     2-2-102,
                     3-9-101
Art. 2, § 2A-101    2-1-603
Art. 2, § 2A-102    Repealed
Art. 2, § 2B-101    3-15-101
Art. 2, § 2B-102    3-15-102
Art. 2, § 3-101     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-102     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-103     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-201     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-202     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-203     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-204     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-205     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-206     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-207     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-208     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-301     3-9-101
Art. 2, § 3-302     3-9-102
Art. 2, § 3-303     3-9-103
Art. 2, § 3-401     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-402     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-403     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-404     Repealed
Art. 2, § 3-405     Repealed
Art. 2, § 4-101     1-3-101
Art. 2, § 4-102     1-3-102
Art. 2, § 4-103     1-3-103
Art. 2, § 4A-101    3-10-101,
                     3-10-102
Art. 2, § 5-101     3-21-101
Art. 2, § 5-102     3-21-102
Art. 2, § 5-103     3-21-103
Art. 2, § 5-103.1   3-21-104
Art. 2, § 5-104     3-21-105
Art. 2, § 5-105     3-21-107
Art. 2, § 5-105.1   3-21-108
Art. 2, § 5-105.2   3-21-109
Art. 2, § 5-106     3-21-110
Art. 2, § 5-107     3-21-111
Art. 2, § 6-101     1-5-101
Art. 2, § 6-102     1-5-102
Art. 2, § 6-103     1-5-103
Art. 2, § 6-104     1-5-104
Art. 2, § 6-105     1-5-105
Art. 2, § 6-106     1-5-106
Art. 2, § 7-101     1-4-101
Art. 2, § 7-102     1-4-102
Art. 2, § 7-103     1-4-103
Art. 2, § 7-104     1-4-104
Art. 2, § 7-105     1-4-105
Art. 2, § 7-106     1-4-106
Art. 2, § 8-101     1-6-101
Art. 2, § 8-102     1-6-102
Art. 2, § 8-103     1-6-103
Art. 2, § 8-104     1-6-104
Art. 2, § 8-105     1-6-105
Art. 2, § 9-101     3-7-101
Art. 2, § 9-102     3-7-102
Art. 2, § 9-103     3-7-103
Art. 2, § 10-101    3-12-101
Art. 2, § 10-201    3-12-102
Art. 2, § 10-202    3-12-103
Art. 2, § 10-203    3-12-104
Art. 2, § 10-204    3-12-105
Art. 2, § 10-205    3-12-106
Art. 2, § 10-206    3-12-107
Art. 2, § 10-207    3-12-108
Art. 2, § 10-208    3-12-109
Art. 2, § 10-301    3-12-110
Art. 2, § 10-401    3-12-111
Art. 2, § 10-501    3-12-112
Art. 2, § 11-101    3-17-101
Art. 2, § 11-201    3-17-201
Art. 2, § 11-202    3-17-202
Art. 2, § 11-203    3-17-203
Art. 2, § 11-204    3-17-204
Art. 2, § 11-205    3-17-205
Art. 2, § 11-206    3-17-206
Art. 2, § 11-207    3-17-207
Art. 2, § 11-208    3-17-208
Art. 2, § 11-209    3-17-209
Art. 2, § 11-210    3-17-210
Art. 2, § 11-211    3-17-211
Art. 2, § 11-212    3-17-212
Art. 2, § 11-213    3-17-213
Art. 2, § 11-214    3-17-214
Art. 2, § 11-215    3-17-215
Art. 2, § 11-216    3-17-216
Art. 2, § 11-217    3-17-217
Art. 2, § 11-218    3-17-218
Art. 2, § 11-219    3-17-219
Art. 2, § 11-301    Repealed
Art. 2, § 12-101    3-22-101
Art. 2, § 12-201    3-22-201
Art. 2, § 12-202    3-22-202
Art. 2, § 12-203    3-22-203
Art. 2, § 12-204    3-22-204
Art. 2, § 12-205    3-22-205
Art. 2, § 12-206    3-22-206
Art. 2, § 12-207    3-22-207
Art. 2, § 12-208    3-22-208
Art. 2, § 12-209    3-22-209
Art. 2, § 12-210    3-22-210
Art. 2, § 12-211    3-22-211
Art. 2, § 12-212    3-22-212
Art. 2, § 12-213    3-22-213
Art. 2, § 12-214    3-22-214
Art. 2, § 12-215    3-22-215
Art. 2, § 12-216    3-22-216
Art. 2, § 12-217    3-22-217
Art. 2, § 12-218    3-22-218
Art. 2, § 12-219    3-22-219
Art. 2, § 12-301    Repealed
Art. 2, § 13-101    3-25-101
Art. 2, § 13-102    3-25-102
Art. 2, § 13-103    3-25-103
Art. 3, § 1-101     3-2-101
Art. 3, § 1-102     3-2-102
Art. 3, § 1-103     3-2-103
Art. 3, § 1-104     3-2-104
Art. 3, § 1-105     3-2-105
Art. 3, § 1-106     3-2-106
Art. 3, § 2-101     3-2-201
Art. 3, § 2-102     3-2-202
Art. 3, § 2-103     3-2-203
Art. 3, § 2-104     3-2-204
Art. 3, § 2-105     3-2-205
Art. 3, § 2-106     3-2-206
Art. 3, § 2-107     3-2-207
Art. 3, § 3-101     Repealed
Art. 3, § 3-102     Repealed
Art. 3, § 3-103     Repealed
Art. 4, § 1-101     2-3-101
Art. 4, § 1-102     2-3-102
Art. 4, § 1-103     Repealed
Art. 4, § 1-201     2-3-103
Art. 4, § 1-202     Repealed
Art. 4, § 2-101     1-2-201
Art. 4, § 2-102     1-2-202
Art. 4, § 2-103     1-2-203
Art. 4, § 3-101     Repealed
Art. 4, § 3-102     2-3-201
Art. 4, § 4-101     Repealed
Art. 5, § 1-101     3-3-101
Art. 5, § 2-101     3-3-102
Art. 5, § 2-102     3-3-103
Art. 5, § 2-103     3-3-104
Art. 5, § 2-104     3-3-105
Art. 5, § 2-105     3-3-106
Art. 5, § 2-106     3-3-107
Art. 5, § 2-107     3-3-108
Art. 5, § 2-108     3-3-109
Art. 5, § 2-109     3-3-110
Art. 5, § 2-110     3-3-111
Art. 5, § 2-111     Repealed
Art. 6, § 1-101     4-1-102
Art. 6, § 1-102     4-1-103
Art. 6, § 1-102.1   4-1-104
Art. 6, § 1-102.2   4-1-104
Art. 6, § 1-103     4-2-201
Art. 6, § 1-104     4-2-201
Art. 6, § 1-104.1   4-2-302
Art. 6, § 1-104.2   4-2-303
Art. 6, § 1-104.3   4-2-308
Art. 6, § 1-104.4   4-2-318
Art. 6, § 1-104.5   4-2-314
Art. 6, § 1-104.6   4-2-309
Art. 6, § 1-104.7   4-2-319
Art. 6, § 1-104.8   4-2-304
Art. 6, § 1-105     4-2-315
Art. 6, § 1-106     4-2-202
Art. 6, § 1-107     4-2-203
Art. 6, § 1-108     4-2-204
Art. 6, § 1-109     4-3-102
Art. 6, § 1-110     4-3-101
Art. 6, § 1-111     4-2-307
Art. 6, § 1-201     4-2-102
Art. 6, § 1-202     Repealed
Art. 6, § 1-203     Repealed
Art. 6, § 1-204     Repealed
Art. 6, § 1-205     Repealed
Art. 6, § 1-206     Repealed
Art. 6, § 1-207     Repealed
Art. 6, § 1-208     Repealed
Art. 6, § 1-209     Repealed
Art. 6, § 1-210     4-2-102
Art. 6, § 2-101     4-7-101
Art. 6, § 2-102     4-7-101,
                     4-7-201
Art. 6, § 2-103     4-7-101,
                     4-7-202
Art. 6, § 2-104     4-7-204
Art. 6, § 2-104.1   4-7-201
Art. 6, § 2-105     4-7-102
Art. 6, § 2-106     4-7-205
Art. 6, § 2-107     4-7-101
Art. 6, § 2-108     4-7-101,
                     4-7-102
Art. 6, § 2-109     4-7-203
Art. 6, § 2-110     Repealed
Art. 6, § 2-111     Repealed
Art. 6, § 3-101     4-7-101
Art. 6, § 3-102     4-7-101
Art. 6, § 3-103     4-7-101,
                     4-7-301
Art. 6, § 3-104     4-7-303
Art. 6, § 3-105     4-7-102
Art. 6, § 3-106     4-7-101,
                     4-7-103
Art. 6, § 3-107     4-7-101,
                     4-7-102
Art. 6, § 3-108     4-7-101,
                     4-7-305
Art. 6, § 3-109     4-7-304
Art. 6, § 4-101     4-7-101
Art. 6, § 4-102     4-7-101,
                     4-7-401
Art. 6, § 4-103     4-7-101,
                     4-7-401
Art. 6, § 4-104     4-7-406
Art. 6, § 4-105     4-7-402
Art. 6, § 4-106     4-7-403
Art. 6, § 4-107     4-7-101,
                     4-7-103
Art. 6, § 4-108     4-7-101,
                     4-7-102
Art. 6, § 4-109     4-7-405
Art. 6, § 4-110     4-7-405
Art. 6, § 4A-101    4-8-101
Art. 6, § 4A-102    4-8-102
Art. 6, § 4A-103    4-8-103
Art. 6, § 4A-104    4-8-104
Art. 6, § 4A-105    4-8-105
Art. 6, § 4A-106    4-8-106
Art. 6, § 4B-101    4-9-101
Art. 6, § 4B-102    4-9-102
Art. 6, § 5-101     13-5-801
Art. 6, § 5-102     13-5-801
Art. 6, § 5-103     13-5-802
Art. 6, § 5-201     13-5-803
Art. 6, § 5-201.1   13-5-804
Art. 6, § 5-201.2   13-5-805
Art. 6, § 5-202     13-5-806
Art. 6, § 5-202.1   13-5-807
Art. 6, § 5-203     13-5-808
Art. 6, § 5-204     13-5-809
Art. 6, § 5-205     13-5-810
Art. 6, § 5-206     13-5-811
Art. 6, § 5-207     13-5-812
Art. 6, § 5-208     13-5-813
Art. 6, § 5-208.1   Repealed (Bill No. 98-20)
Art. 6, § 5-209     13-5-814
Art. 6, § 5-210     13-5-817
Art. 6, § 5A-101    13-4-109
Art. 6, § 5A-102    13-4-105
Art. 6, § 5A-103    13-4-107
Art. 6, § 6-101     4-1-105
Art. 6, § 6-102     4-1-105
Art. 6, § 6-103     4-1-105
Art. 6, § 7-101     4-3A-101
Art. 6, § 7-101.1   4-11-111
Art. 6, § 7-101.2   4-3A-102
Art. 6, § 7-102     4-3A-103
Art. 6, § 7-103     4-3A-103
Art. 6, § 7-201     4-4-101
Art. 6, § 7-301     4-5-101
Art. 6, § 7-302     4-5-101
Art. 6, § 7-401     4-6-101
Art. 6, § 7-402     4-6-102
Art. 6, § 7-403     Repealed (Bill No. 69-11)
Art. 6, § 7-404     4-6-106
Art. 6, § 7-405     Repealed
Art. 6, § 7-406     4-6-104
Art. 6, § 7-407     4-6-103
Art. 6, § 7-408     4-6-108
Art. 6, § 8-101     4-11-101
Art. 6, § 8-102     4-11-102
Art. 6, § 8-103     4-11-103
Art. 6, § 8-104     4-11-104
Art. 6, § 8-105     4-11-105
Art. 6, § 8-106     4-7-103
Art. 6, § 8-107     4-11-106
Art. 6, § 8-108     4-11-107
Art. 6, § 8-109     Repealed
Art. 6, § 8-110     4-11-109
Art. 6, § 8-111     4-11-110
Art. 6, § 9-101     4-10-101
Art. 6, § 9-102     4-10-102
Art. 6, § 9-103     4-10-103
Art. 6, § 9-104     4-10-104
Art. 6, § 9-105     4-10-105
Art. 6, § 9-201     4-10-301
Art. 6, § 9-202     4-10-302
Art. 6, § 9-203     4-10-303
Art. 6, § 9-204     4-10-304
Art. 6, § 9-205     4-10-305
Art. 6, § 9-206     4-10-306
Art. 6, § 9-207     4-10-307
Art. 6, § 9-208     4-10-308
Art. 6, § 9-209     4-10-309
Art. 6, § 9-210     4-10-310
Art. 6, § 9-301     4-10-201
Art. 6, § 9-302     4-10-202
Art. 6, § 10-101    4-12-101
Art. 6, § 10-102    4-12-103
Art. 6, § 10-103    4-12-104
Art. 6, § 10-104    2-3-105,
                     4-11-112
Art. 6, § 10-105    4-12-105
Art. 6, § 10-106    4-12-106
Art. 6, § 10-107    4-12-102
Art. 7, § 1-101     5-1-101
Art. 7, § 1-102     5-1-102
Art. 7, § 1-103     5-1-103
Art. 7, § 1-104     5-1-104
Art. 7, § 1-105     5-1-105
Art. 7, § 1-106     5-1-106
Art. 7, § 1-107     5-1-107
Art. 7, § 1-108     5-1-108
Art. 7, § 1-109     5-1-109
Art. 7, § 1-110     5-1-110
Art. 7, § 1-201     5-1-201
Art. 7, § 1-202     5-1-202
Art. 7, § 1-203     5-1-203
Art. 7, § 1-204     5-1-204
Art. 7, § 1-205     5-1-205
Art. 7, § 1-206     5-1-206
Art. 7, § 1-207     5-1-207
Art. 7, § 1-208     5-1-208
Art. 7, § 1-209     5-1-209
Art. 7, § 1-210     5-1-210
Art. 7, § 1-211     5-1-211
Art. 7, § 1-301     5-1-301
Art. 7, § 1-302     5-1-302
Art. 7, § 1-303     5-1-303
Art. 7, § 1-304     5-1-304
Art. 7, § 1-305     5-1-305
Art. 7, § 1-306     5-1-306
Art. 7, § 1-401     5-1-401
Art. 7, § 1-402     5-1-402
Art. 7, § 1-403     5-1-403
Art. 7, § 1-404     5-1-404
Art. 7, § 1-405     5-1-405
Art. 7, § 1-406     5-1-406
Art. 7, § 1-407     5-1-407
Art. 7, § 1-408     5-1-408
Art. 7, § 1-501     5-1-501
Art. 7, § 1-502     5-1-502
Art. 7, § 1-503     5-1-503
Art. 7, § 1-504     5-1-504
Art. 7, § 1-505     5-1-505
Art. 7, § 1-506     5-1-506
Art. 7, § 1-507     5-1-507
Art. 7, § 1-508     5-1-508
Art. 7, § 1-509     5-1-509
Art. 7, § 1-510     5-1-510
Art. 7, § 1-511     5-1-511
Art. 7, § 1-512     5-1-512
Art. 7, § 1-513     5-1-513
Art. 7, § 1-514     5-1-514
Art. 7, § 1-515     5-1-515
Art. 7, § 2-101     5-2-101
Art. 7, § 2-102     5-2-102
Art. 7, § 2-103     5-2-103
Art. 7, § 2-104     5-2-104
Art. 7, § 2-105     5-2-105
Art. 7, § 2-106     5-2-106
Art. 7, § 2-107     5-2-107
Art. 7, § 2-108     5-2-108
Art. 7, § 2-109     5-2-109
Art. 7, § 2-110     5-2-110
Art. 7, § 2-111     5-2-111
Art. 7, § 2-201     5-2-201
Art. 7, § 2-202     5-2-202
Art. 7, § 2-203     5-2-203
Art. 7, § 2-204     5-2-204
Art. 7, § 2-205     5-2-205
Art. 7, § 2-206     5-2-206
Art. 7, § 2-207     5-2-207
Art. 7, § 2-208     5-2-208
Art. 7, § 2-209     5-2-209
Art. 7, § 2-301     5-2-301
Art. 7, § 2-302     5-2-302
Art. 7, § 2-303     5-2-303
Art. 7, § 2-401     5-2-401
Art. 7, § 2-402     5-2-402
Art. 7, § 2-403     5-2-403
Art. 7, § 2-404     5-2-404
Art. 7, § 2-405     5-2-405
Art. 7, § 2-406     5-2-406
Art. 7, § 2-407     5-2-407
Art. 7, § 2-408     5-2-408
Art. 7, § 2-409     5-2-409
Art. 7, § 2-410     5-2-410
Art. 7, § 2-501     5-2-501
Art. 7, § 2-502     5-2-502
Art. 7, § 3-101     5-3-101
Art. 7, § 3-102     5-3-102
Art. 7, § 3-103     5-3-103
Art. 7, § 3-104     5-3-104
Art. 7, § 3-105     5-3-105
Art. 7, § 3-106     5-3-106
Art. 7, § 3-201     5-3-201
Art. 7, § 3-202     5-3-202
Art. 7, § 3-203     Repealed (Bill No. 86-16)
Art. 7, § 3-204     5-3-203
Art. 7, § 3-205     5-3-204
Art. 7, § 3-206     5-3-205
Art. 7, § 3-301     5-3-301
Art. 7, § 3-302     5-3-302
Art. 7, § 3-303     5-3-303
Art. 7, § 3-304     5-3-304
Art. 7, § 3-305     5-3-305
Art. 7, § 3-306     5-3-306
Art. 7, § 3-307     5-3-307
Art. 7, § 3-308     5-3-308
Art. 7, § 3-309     5-3-309
Art. 7, § 4-101     5-4-101
Art. 7, § 4-102     5-4-102
Art. 7, § 4-103     5-4-103
Art. 7, § 4-201     5-4-201
Art. 7, § 4-202     5-4-202
Art. 7, § 4-203     5-4-203
Art. 7, § 4-203.1   5-4-204
Art. 7, § 4-204     5-4-205
Art. 7, § 4-205     5-4-206
Art. 7, § 4-206     5-4-207
Art. 7, § 5-101     5-5-101
Art. 7, § 5-102     5-5-102
Art. 7, § 5-103     5-5-103
Art. 7, § 5-201     5-5-201
Art. 7, § 5-202     5-5-202
Art. 7, § 5-203     5-5-203
Art. 7, § 5-204     5-5-204
Art. 7, § 5-205     5-5-205
Art. 7, § 5-206     5-5-206
Art. 7, § 6-101     5-6-101
Art. 7, § 6-102     5-6-102
Art. 7, § 6-103     5-6-103
Art. 7, § 6-201     5-6-201
Art. 7, § 6-202     5-6-202
Art. 7, § 6-203     5-6-203
Art. 7, § 6-204     5-6-204
Art. 7, § 6-205     5-6-205
Art. 7, § 6-206     5-6-206
Art. 7, § 6-207     5-6-207
Art. 7, § 6-208     5-6-208
Art. 7, § 6-209     5-6-209
Art. 7, § 7-101     5-7-101
Art. 7, § 7-102     5-7-102
Art. 7, § 7-103     5-7-103
Art. 7, § 7-104     5-7-104
Art. 7, § 7-201     5-7-201
Art. 7, § 7-202     5-7-202
Art. 7, § 7-203     5-7-203
Art. 7, § 7-204     5-7-204
Art. 7, § 7-205     5-7-205
Art. 8, § 1-101     6-1-101
Art. 8, § 1-102     6-1-102
Art. 8, § 1-103     6-1-103
Art. 8, § 1-104     6-1-104
Art. 8, § 1-105     6-1-105
Art. 8, § 1-106     6-1-106
Art. 8, § 1-107     6-1-107
Art. 8, § 1-108     6-1-108
Art. 8, § 1-109     6-1-109
Art. 8, § 1-110     6-1-110
Art. 8, § 1-201     Repealed (Bill No. 4-24)
Art. 8, § 1-202     Repealed (Bill No. 4-24)
Art. 8, § 1-203     Repealed (Bill No. 41-07)
Art. 8, § 1-204     6-1-203
Art. 8, § 1-204.1   6-1-204
Art. 8, § 1-204.2   6-1-205
Art. 8, § 1-204.3   6-1-206
Art. 8, § 1-205     6-1-207
Art. 8, § 1-206     6-1-208
Art. 8, § 1-206.1   6-1-209
Art. 8, § 1-206.2   6-1-210
Art. 8, § 1-207     6-1-211
Art. 8, § 1-208     6-1-212
Art. 8, § 1-209     6-1-213
Art. 8, § 1-209.1   6-1-214
Art. 8, § 1-210     6-1-215
Art. 8, § 1-210.1   6-1-217
Art. 8, § 1-211     6-1-
                     218
Art. 8, § 1-212     6-1-
                     219
Art. 8, § 1-301     6-1-301
Art. 8, § 1-302     6-1-302
Art. 8, § 1-303     6-1-303
Art. 8, § 1-304     6-1-304
Art. 8, § 1-305     6-1-305
Art. 8, § 1-305.1   6-1-306
Art. 8, § 1-306     6-1-307
Art. 8, § 1-307     6-1-308
Art. 8, § 1-307.1   6-1-309
Art. 8, § 1-307.2   6-1-310
Art. 8, § 1-308     6-1-311
Art. 8, § 1-309     6-1-312
Art. 8, § 1-310     6-1-313
Art. 8, § 2-101     6-2-101
Art. 8, § 2-101.1   6-2-102
Art. 8, § 2-101.2   6-2-103
Art. 8, § 2-102     6-2-104
Art. 8, § 2-102.1   6-2-105
Art. 8, § 2-103     6-2-106
Art. 8, § 3-101     6-3-101
Art. 8, § 3-102     6-3-102
Art. 8, § 3-103     6-3-103
Art. 8, § 3-104     6-3-104
Art. 8, § 3-105     6-3-105
Art. 8, § 4-101     6-4-101
Art. 8, § 4-102     6-4-102
Art. 8, § 4-103     6-4-103
Art. 8, § 4-104     6-4-104
Art. 8, § 4-105     6-4-105
Art. 8, § 4-106     6-4-106
Art. 8, § 4-107     6-4-107
Art. 8, § 4-108     6-4-108
Art. 8, § 4-109     6-4-109
Art. 8, § 4-110     6-4-110
Art. 8, § 4-110.1   6-4-111
Art. 8, § 4-111     6-4-112
Art. 8, § 4-112     6-4-113
Art. 9, § 1-101     7-1-101
Art. 9, § 1-102     7-1-102
Art. 9, § 1-103     7-1-103
Art. 9, § 1-104     7-1-104
Art. 9, § 2-101     7-2-101
Art. 9, § 2-102     7-2-102
Art. 9, § 2-103     7-2-103
Art. 9, § 2-104     7-2-104
Art. 9, § 2-105     7-2-105
Art. 9, § 2-106     7-2-106
Art. 9, § 2-107     7-2-107
Art. 9, § 3-101     7-3-101
Art. 9, § 3-102     7-3-102
Art. 9, § 3-103     7-3-103
Art. 9, § 4-101     7-4-101
Art. 9, § 4-102     7-4-102
Art. 9, § 4-103     7-4-103
Art. 9, § 4-104     7-4-104
Art. 9, § 4-105     7-4-105
Art. 9, § 4-106     7-4-106
Art. 9, § 4-107     7-4-107
Art. 9, § 4-108     7-4-108
Art. 9, § 4-109     7-4-109
Art. 9, § 5-101     7-5-101
Art. 9, § 5-102     7-5-102
Art. 9, § 5-103     7-5-103
Art. 9, § 5-104     7-5-104
Art. 9, § 5-105     7-5-105
Art. 9, § 5-106     7-5-106
Art. 9, § 5-107     7-5-107
Art. 9, § 5-108     7-5-108
Art. 9, § 5-109     7-5-109
Art. 9, § 5-110     7-5-110
Art. 9, § 5-111     7-5-111
Art. 9, § 6-101     7-6-101
Art. 9, § 6-102     7-6-102
Art. 9, § 6-103     7-6-103
Art. 9, § 6-104     7-6-104
Art. 9, § 6-105     7-6-105
Art. 9, § 6-106     7-6-106
Art. 9, § 6-107     7-6-107
Art. 9, § 7-101     7-7-101
Art. 9, § 7-102     7-7-102
Art. 9, § 7-103     7-7-103
Art. 9, § 7-104     7-7-104
Art. 9, § 7-105     7-7-105
Art. 9, § 7-106     7-7-106
Art. 9, § 7-107     7-7-107
Art. 9, § 8-101     7-8-101
Art. 9, § 8-102     7-8-102
Art. 9, § 8-103     Repealed
Art. 9, § 8-104     7-8-103
Art. 9, § 9-101     Repealed
Art. 10, § 1-101    8-1-101
Art. 10, § 1-102    8-1-102
Art. 10, § 1-103    8-1-103
Art. 10, § 1-104    8-1-104
Art. 10, § 1-105    8-1-105
Art. 10, § 1-106    8-1-105
Art. 10, § 1-107    Repealed (Bill No. 8-17)
Art. 10, § 1-108    8-1-106
Art. 10, § 1-109    8-1-107
Art. 10, § 2-101    8-2-101
Art. 10, § 2-102    Repealed (Bill No. 8-17)
Art. 10, § 2-103    8-2-102
Art. 10, § 2-104    8-2-104
Art. 10, § 2-105    8-2-105
Art. 10, § 2-106    8-2-106
Art. 10, § 2-107    8-2-107
Art. 10, § 2-108    8-2-109
Art. 10, § 2-109    8-2-110
Art. 10, § 2-110    8-2-111
Art. 10, § 2-111    8-2-113
Art. 10, § 2-112    8-2-114
Art. 10, § 2-113    8-2-115
Art. 10, § 2-114    8-2-118
Art. 10, § 2-115    8-2-119
Art. 10, § 2-116    Repealed (Bill No. 8-17)
Art. 10, § 2-117    Repealed (Bill No. 8-17)
Art. 10, § 2-118    8-2-120
Art. 10, § 3-101    8-3-101
Art. 10, § 3-201    Repealed
Art. 10, § 3-202    Repealed (Bill No. 79-23)
Art. 10, § 3-203    Repealed (Bill No. 79-23)
Art. 10, § 3-204    Repealed (Bill No. 79-23)
Art. 10, § 3-205    Repealed (Bill No. 79-23)
Art. 10, § 3-206    Repealed (Bill No. 79-23)
Art. 10, § 3-207    8-3-205
Art. 10, § 3-208    Repealed (Bill No. 79-23)
Art. 10, § 3-209    8-3-206
Art. 10, § 3-301    8-3-301
Art. 11, § 1-101    9-1-201
Art. 11, § 1-102    9-1-202
Art. 11, § 1-103    9-1-203
Art. 11, § 2-101    9-1-301
Art. 11, § 2-102    9-1-302
Art. 11, § 2A-101   9-1-401
Art. 11, § 2A-102   Repealed
Art. 11, § 3-101    9-1-501
Art. 11, § 3-102    9-1-502
Art. 11, § 4-101    9-1-601
Art. 11, § 4-102    9-1-602
Art. 11, § 4-102.1  Repealed (Bill No. 18-13)
Art. 11, § 4-103    9-1-604
Art. 11, § 5-101    9-1-701
Art. 11, § 5-102    9-1-702
Art. 11, § 5-103    9-1-704
Art. 11, § 5-103A   9-1-705
Art. 11, § 5-104    9-1-706
Art. 11, § 5-105    9-1-707
Art. 11, § 5-106    9-1-708
Art. 11, § 5-107    9-1-709
Art. 11, § 5-108    9-1-710
Art. 11, § 5-109    9-1-711
Art. 11, § 5-110    9-1-712
Art. 11, § 6-101    9-1-101
Art. 11, § 6-102    9-2-101
Art. 12, § 1-101    12-4-101
Art. 12, § 1-102    12-4-102
Art. 12, § 1-103    12-4-103
Art. 12, § 1-104    12-4-104
Art. 12, § 1-105    Repealed
Art. 12, § 1-106    Repealed
Art. 12, § 2-101    12-4-201
Art. 12, § 2-102    12-4-202
Art. 12, § 2-103    12-4-203
Art. 12, § 2-104    12-4-204
Art. 12, § 2-105    12-4-205
Art. 12, § 2-106    12-4-206
Art. 12, § 3-101    12-4-301
Art. 12, § 3-102    12-4-302
Art. 12, § 3-103    12-4-303
Art. 12, § 3-104    12-4-304
Art. 12, § 3-105    12-4-305
Art. 12, § 3-106    12-4-306
Art. 12, § 3-107    12-4-307
Art. 12, § 3-108    12-4-308
Art. 12, § 3-109    12-4-309
Art. 12, § 3-110    12-4-310
Art. 12, § 3-111    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 3-112    12-4-311
Art. 12, § 4-101    12-4-402
Art. 12, § 4-102    12-4-403
Art. 12, § 4-103    Repealed (Bill No. 59-17)
Art. 12, § 5-101    12-4-501
Art. 12, § 5-102    12-4-502
Art. 12, § 5-103    12-4-503
Art. 12, § 5-104    12-4-504
Art. 12, § 5-105    12-4-505
Art. 12, § 6-101    12-4-601
Art. 12, § 6-102    12-4-602
Art. 12, § 6-103    12-4-603
Art. 12, § 6-104    12-4-604
Art. 12, § 6-105    12-4-605
Art. 12, § 6-106    12-4-606
Art. 12, § 6-107    12-4-607
Art. 12, § 6-108    12-4-608
Art. 12, § 6-109    12-4-609
Art. 12, § 6-110    12-4-610
Art. 12, § 6-111    12-4-611
Art. 12, § 7-101    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-102    Repealed (Bill No. 65-11)
Art. 12, § 7-103    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-103A   Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-104    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-105    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-105A   Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-106    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-107    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-108    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-109    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-110    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-111    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-112    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-113    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 7-114    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 8-101    12-4-801
Art. 12, § 8-102    12-4-802
Art. 12, § 8-103    12-4-803
Art. 12, § 8-104    12-4-804
Art. 12, § 8-105    12-4-805
Art. 12, § 8-106    Repealed (Bill No. 25-25)
Art. 12, § 8-107    12-4-807
Art. 12, § 9-101    12-4-901
Art. 12, § 9-102    12-4-902
Art. 12, § 9-103    12-4-903
Art. 12, § 9-104    12-4-904
Art. 12, § 9-105    12-4-905
Art. 12, § 9-106    12-4-906
Art. 12, § 9-107    12-4-907
Art. 12, § 9-108    12-4-908
Art. 12, § 9-109    12-4-909
Art. 12, § 9-110    12-4-910
Art. 12, § 9-111    12-4-911
Art. 12, § 9-112    12-4-912
Art. 12, § 10-101   12-4-1001
Art. 13, § 1-101    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-102    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-103    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-104    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-105    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-201    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-202    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-203    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-204    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-205    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-206    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-207    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-208    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-209    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-210    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-211    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-212    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-213    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-214    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-215    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-216    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-217    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-301    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-302    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-303    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-304    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-305    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-306    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-401    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-402    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-403    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-404    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-405    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-406    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-501    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-502    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-503    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-504    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-505    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-506    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-507    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-508    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-509    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-510    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-511    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-512    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-513    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-514    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-515    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-516    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-517    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-518    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-601    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-602    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-603    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-604    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-605    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-606    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-701    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-702    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-703    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-704    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-705    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-706    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-707    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-708    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-709    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-710    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-711    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-712    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-801    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-802    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-803    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-804    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-805    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-806    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-807    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-808    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-809    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-810    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-811    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-901    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-902    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-903    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-904    Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1001   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1002   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1003   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1004   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1005   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1006   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1007   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1008   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1009   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1010   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1011   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1101   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1102   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1103   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1104   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1105   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1106   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1107   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1108   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1201   Repealed
Art. 13, § 1-1202   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-101    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-102    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-103    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-104    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-105    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-106    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-107    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-201    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-202    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-203    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-204    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-205    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-206    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-207    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-208    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-209    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-210    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-211    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-212    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-213    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-214    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-215    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-216    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-301    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-302    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-303    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-304    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-305    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-401    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-402    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-403    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-404    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-405    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-406    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-501    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-502    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-503    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-504    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-505    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-506    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-507    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-508    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-509    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-510    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-511    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-512    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-513    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-514    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-515    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-516    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-517    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-601    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-602    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-603    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-604    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-605    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-606    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-701    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-702    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-703    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-704    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-705    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-706    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-707    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-801    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-802    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-803    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-804    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-805    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-806    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-807    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-808    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-809    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-810    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-811    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-812    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-813    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-814    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-815    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-816    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-817    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-818    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-901    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-902    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-903    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-904    Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1001   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1002   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1003   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1004   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1005   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1006   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1007   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1008   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1009   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1010   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1011   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1012   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1101   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1102   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1103   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1104   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1105   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1106   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1107   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1108   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1201   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1301   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1401   Repealed
Art. 13, § 2-1501   Repealed
Art. 14, § 1-101    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 14, § 1-102    15-2-506
Art. 14, § 1-103    Repealed
Art. 14, § 1-104    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 14, § 1-105    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 14, § 2-101    Repealed
Art. 14, § 2-102    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 14, § 2-103    Repealed
Art. 14, § 2-104    Repealed
Art. 14, § 2-105    Repealed (Bill No. 38-05)
Art. 14, § 3-101    Repealed
Art. 14, § 3-102    Repealed
Art. 14, § 3-103    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 14, § 3-104    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 14, § 3-105    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 14, § 3-106    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 14, § 3-107    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 14, § 3-108    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 14, § 4A-101   18-18-101
Art. 14, § 5-101    Repealed
Art. 14, § 5-102    Repealed
Art. 14, § 6-101    11-6-101
Art. 14, § 6-102    11-6-102
Art. 14, § 7-101    11-5-101
Art. 14, § 7-102    Repealed
Art. 14, § 7-103    Repealed
Art. 14, § 7-104    11-5-104
Art. 14, § 7-201    11-5-103
Art. 14, § 7-202    11-5-103
Art. 14, § 7-203    11-5-102
Art. 14, § 7-204    11-5-102
Art. 14, § 7-301    Repealed
Art. 14, § 7-302    Repealed
Art. 14, § 7-303    Repealed
Art. 14, § 7-304    Repealed
Art. 14, § 8-101    Repealed
Art. 14, § 8-102    Repealed
Art. 14, § 8-103    Repealed
Art. 14, § 8-104    Repealed
Art. 14, § 8-105    Repealed
Art. 14, § 8-106    Repealed
Art. 14, § 8-107    Repealed
Art. 14, § 8-108    Repealed
Art. 14, § 8-109    Repealed
Art. 14, § 9-101    15-5-102
Art. 14, § 9-102    Repealed
Art. 14, § 9-103    15-5-101
Art. 14, § 9-104    Repealed
Art. 15              Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 16, § 1-101    11-1-101
Art. 16, § 1-102    11-1-102
Art. 16, § 1-103    11-1-103
Art. 16, § 2-101    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-102    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-103    11-2-101
Art. 16, § 2-104    11-2-102
Art. 16, § 2-105    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-106    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-107    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-108    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-109    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-110    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-111    11-2-104
Art. 16, § 2-112    11-2-104
Art. 16, § 2-201    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-202    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-203    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-204    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-205    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-301    11-2-201
Art. 16, § 2-302    11-2-202
Art. 16, § 2-303    11-2-207
Art. 16, § 2-304    11-2-207
Art. 16, § 2-305    11-2-207
Art. 16, § 2-306    11-2-208
Art. 16, § 2-307    11-2-201,
                     11-2-216
Art. 16, § 2-308    11-2-211
Art. 16, § 2-309    11-2-216
Art. 16, § 2-310    11-2-201,
                     11-2-213
                     11-1-103,
Art. 16, § 2-311    11-2-203,
                     11-2-212
Art. 16, § 2-312    11-2-223
Art. 16, § 2-313    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-314    11-2-217
Art. 16, § 2-315    11-2-219
Art. 16, § 2-316    11-2-209
Art. 16, § 2-317    11-2-214
Art. 16, § 2-318    11-2-208
Art. 16, § 2-319    11-2-215,
                     11-2-220
Art. 16, § 2-320    11-1-103,
                     11-2-210
Art. 16, § 2-321    11-2-206
Art. 16, § 2-322    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-323    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-324    11-2-222
Art. 16, § 2-325    11-2-224
Art. 16, § 2-326    11-2-225
Art. 16, § 2-327    11-2-226
Art. 16, § 2-328    11-2-227
Art. 16, § 2-329    11-2-228
Art. 16, § 2-330    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-401    11-2-301
Art. 16, § 2-402    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-403    11-2-302
Art. 16, § 2-404    11-2-303
Art. 16, § 2-405    11-2-304
Art. 16, § 2-406    11-2-305
Art. 16, § 2-407    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-408    11-2-306
Art. 16, § 2-409    11-2-307
Art. 16, § 2-410    11-2-306
Art. 16, § 2-501    11-2-401
Art. 16, § 2-502    11-2-401
Art. 16, § 2-503    11-2-401
Art. 16, § 2-504    11-2-401
Art. 16, § 2-601    11-2-501
Art. 16, § 2-602    11-2-502
Art. 16, § 2-603    11-2-503
Art. 16, § 2-604    11-2-503
Art. 16, § 2-605    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-606    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-607    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-608    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-609    11-2-504
Art. 16, § 2-610    11-2-504
Art. 16, § 2-611    11-2-504
Art. 16, § 2-612    11-2-504
Art. 16, § 2-613    11-2-504
Art. 16, § 2-614    11-2-504
Art. 16, § 2-615    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-616    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-617    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-618    11-2-505
Art. 16, § 2-619    11-2-505
Art. 16, § 2-620    11-2-505
Art. 16, § 2-621    11-2-505
Art. 16, § 2-622    11-2-505
Art. 16, § 2-623    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-624    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-625    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-626    11-2-506
Art. 16, § 2-627    11-2-506
Art. 16, § 2-628    11-2-102
Art. 16, § 2-629    11-1-103,
                     11-2-102
Art. 16, § 2-630    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-631    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-632    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-633    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-701    11-2-601
Art. 16, § 2-702    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-703    11-2-601
Art. 16, § 2-704    11-2-601
Art. 16, § 2-705    11-2-102
Art. 16, § 2-706    11-2-601
Art. 16, § 2-707    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-708    11-2-102
Art. 16, § 2-801    11-2-701
Art. 16, § 2-802    11-2-702
Art. 16, § 2-803    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-804    11-2-703
Art. 16, § 2-805    11-2-704
Art. 16, § 2-806    11-2-705
Art. 16, § 2-807    11-2-706
Art. 16, § 2-808    11-2-707
Art. 16, § 2-809    11-2-708
Art. 16, § 2-810    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-811    11-2-709
Art. 16, § 2-812    11-2-710
Art. 16, § 2-901    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-902    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-903    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-904    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-905    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-906    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-907    Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1001   11-2-801
Art. 16, § 2-1002   11-2-801
Art. 16, § 2-1003   11-2-801
Art. 16, § 2-1004   11-2-801
Art. 16, § 2-1005   11-2-801
Art. 16, § 2-1006   11-2-801
Art. 16, § 2-1007   11-2-801
Art. 16, § 2-1101   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1102   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1103   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1104   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1105   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1106   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1107   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1108   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1109   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1110   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1111   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1112   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1113   Repealed
Art. 16, § 2-1201   Repealed
Art. 16, § 3-101    11-3-101
Art. 16, § 3-102    11-3-101
Art. 16, § 3-103    11-3-101
Art. 16, § 3-104    11-3-101
Art. 16, § 3-105    Repealed
Art. 16, § 4-101    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-102    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-103    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-201    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-202    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-203    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-204    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-205    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-206    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-301    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-302    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-303    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-304    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-305    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 4-401    Repealed (Bill No. 16-05)
Art. 16, § 5-101    Repealed
Art. 16, § 5-102    Repealed
Art. 16, § 5-103    Repealed
Art. 16, § 5-104    Repealed
Art. 16, § 6-101    11-4-301
Art. 16, § 6-201    11-4-202
Art. 16, § 6-202    11-4-201,
                     11-4-202
Art. 16, § 6-203    11-4-201
Art. 16, § 6-204    11-4-201
Art. 16, § 6-301    11-4-102
Art. 16, § 6-302    11-4-302
Art. 16, § 6-303    11-4-303
Art. 16, § 6-304    11-4-303
Art. 16, § 6-305    11-4-303
Art. 16, § 6-306    11-4-304
Art. 16, § 6-307    11-4-305
Art. 16, § 6-308    11-4-304
Art. 16, § 6-309    11-4-306
Art. 16, § 6-310    Repealed
Art. 16, § 6-311    11-4-307
Art. 16, § 6-312    11-4-308
Art. 16, § 6-313    11-4-104
Art. 16, § 6-314    11-4-103
Art. 16, § 6-315    11-4-107
Art. 16, § 6-316    11-4-309
Art. 16, § 6-401    Repealed
Art. 16, § 6-401.1  11-1-106
Art. 16, § 6-402    Repealed
Art. 16, § 7-101    11-4-401
Art. 16, § 7-102    11-4-402
Art. 16, § 7-201    11-4-203
Art. 16, § 7-202    11-4-201,
                     11-4-203
Art. 16, § 7-203    11-4-201
Art. 16, § 7-204    11-4-201
Art. 16, § 7-301    11-4-102
Art. 16, § 7-302    11-4-403
Art. 16, § 7-303    11-4-404
Art. 16, § 7-304    Repealed
Art. 16, § 7-305    11-4-404
Art. 16, § 7-306    Repealed
Art. 16, § 7-307    Repealed
Art. 16, § 7-308    Repealed
Art. 16, § 7-309    Repealed
Art. 16, § 7-310    11-4-104
Art. 16, § 7-311    11-4-105
Art. 16, § 7-312    11-4-103
Art. 16, § 7-313    11-4-406
Art. 16, § 7-314    11-4-107
Art. 16, § 7-401    Repealed
Art. 16, § 7-402    Repealed
Art. 16, § 8-101    11-7-101
Art. 16, § 8-102    Repealed
Art. 16, § 8-103    11-7-101
Art. 16, § 8-104    11-7-101
Art. 16, § 8-105    11-7-101
Art. 16, § 8-106    11-7-101
Art. 16, § 8-107    11-7-101
Art. 16, § 8-108    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-101    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-102    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-103    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-104    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-201    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-202    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-203    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-204    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-205    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-206    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-207    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-208    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-209    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-210    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-211    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-212    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-213    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-214    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-215    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-216    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-217    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9-218    Repealed
Art. 16, § 9A-101   11-8-101
Art. 16, § 9A-102   11-8-102
Art. 16, § 9A-103   11-8-102
Art. 16, § 9A-104   Repealed
Art. 16, § 9A-105   11-8-102
Art. 16, § 9A-106   11-8-102
Art. 16, § 9A-107   11-8-102
Art. 16, § 9A-108   11-8-103
Art. 16, § 9A-109   11-8-103
Art. 16, § 9A-110   11-8-104
Art. 16, § 9A-111   Repealed
Art. 16, § 9A-112   11-8-105
Art. 16, § 10-101   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-102   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-103   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-104   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-105   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-201   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-202   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-203   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-204   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-205   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-206   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-207   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-208   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-209   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-210   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-211   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-212   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-213   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-214   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-215   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-216   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-217   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-301   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10-302   Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-101  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-102  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-201  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-202  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-203  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-204  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-205  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-206  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-207  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-208  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-209  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-301  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-302  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-303  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-304  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-401  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-402  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-403  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-404  Repealed
Art. 16, § 10A-405  Repealed
Art. 16, § 11-101   11-4-501
Art. 16, § 11-102   Repealed
Art. 16, § 11-201   11-4-204
Art. 16, § 11-202   11-4-201,
                     11-4-204
Art. 16, § 11-203   11-4-201
Art. 16, § 11-204   11-4-201
Art. 16, § 11-301   11-4-102
Art. 16, § 11-302   11-4-502
Art. 16, § 11-303   11-4-503
Art. 16, § 11-304   11-4-504
Art. 16, § 11-305   Repealed
Art. 16, § 11-306   11-4-504
Art. 16, § 11-307   Repealed
Art. 16, § 11-308   11-4-405,
                     11-4-505
Art. 16, § 11-309   Repealed
Art. 16, § 11-310   Repealed
Art. 16, § 11-311   Repealed
Art. 16, § 11-312   11-4-104
Art. 16, § 11-313   11-4-103
Art. 16, § 11-314   11-4-506
Art. 16, § 11-315   11-4-107
Art. 16, § 11-401   Repealed
Art. 16, § 11-402   Repealed
Art. 16, § 12-101   (Repealed 13-23)
Art. 16, § 12-102   (Repealed 13-23)
Art. 16, § 12-103   (Repealed 13-23)
Art. 16, § 12-104   (Repealed 13-23)
Art. 16, § 12-105   (Repealed 13-23)
Art. 16, § 12-106   Repealed
Art. 16, § 13-101   11-12-101
Art. 16, § 13-102   11-12-101
Art. 16, § 13-103   Repealed
Art. 16, § 13-104   11-12-101
Art. 16, § 13-105   Repealed
Art. 16, § 13-106   11-12-101
Art. 16, § 13-107   11-12-101
Art. 16, § 13-108   11-12-101
Art. 16, § 13-109   11-12-102
Art. 16, § 13-110   11-12-103
Art. 16, § 13-111   11-12-103
Art. 16, § 13-112   11-12-104
Art. 16, § 13-113   Repealed
Art. 16, § 14-101   11-4-601
Art. 16, § 14-102   11-4-602
Art. 16, § 14-201   11-4-205
Art. 16, § 14-202   11-4-201,
                     11-4-205
Art. 16, § 14-203   11-4-201
Art. 16, § 14-204   11-4-201
Art. 16, § 14-301   11-4-102
Art. 16, § 14-302   11-4-603
Art. 16, § 14-303   11-4-604
Art. 16, § 14-304   11-4-605
Art. 16, § 14-305   11-4-605
Art. 16, § 14-306   11-4-605
Art. 16, § 14-307   11-4-605
Art. 16, § 14-308   Repealed
Art. 16, § 14-309   Repealed
Art. 16, § 14-310   11-4-607
Art. 16, § 14-311   11-4-608
Art. 16, § 14-312   11-4-104
Art. 16, § 14-313   11-4-103
Art. 16, § 14-314   11-4-107
Art. 16, § 14-315   11-4-609
Art. 16, § 14-316   11-4-610
Art. 16, § 14-401   Repealed
Art. 16, § 14-401.1 11-1-106
Art. 16, § 14-402   Repealed
Art. 16, § 15-101   11-13-101
Art. 16, § 15-102   11-13-101
Art. 16, § 15-103   11-13-101
Art. 16, § 15-104   11-13-101
Art. 16, § 15-105   11-13-102
Art. 16, § 15-106   11-13-103
Art. 16, § 16-101   11-14-101
Art. 16, § 16-102   11-14-102
Art. 16, § 16-103   11-14-103
Art. 16, § 16-104   Repealed
Art. 16, § 16-201   11-14-201
Art. 16, § 16-202   11-14-202
Art. 16, § 16-203   Repealed (Bill No. 71-21)
Art. 16, § 16-204   11-14-203
Art. 16, § 16-205   11-14-204
Art. 16, § 16-301   11-14-301
Art. 16, § 16-302   11-14-302
Art. 16, § 16-303   11-14-303
Art. 16, § 16-304   11-14-304
Art. 16, § 16-305   11-14-305
Art. 16, § 16-401   Repealed
Art. 16, § 16-501   11-14-401
Art. 16, § 17-101   11-15-101
Art. 16, § 17-102   11-15-102
Art. 16, § 17-103   Repealed
Art. 16, § 17-201   11-15-201
Art. 16, § 17-202   Repealed
Art. 16, § 17-203   Repealed
Art. 16, § 17-204   11-15-202
Art. 16, § 17-205   11-15-202
Art. 16, § 17-206   11-15-202
Art. 16, § 17-207   11-15-202
Art. 16, § 17-208   11-15-202
Art. 16, § 17-209   Repealed
Art. 16, § 17-210   Repealed
Art. 16, § 17-211   11-15-203
Art. 16, § 17-212   11-15-203
Art. 16, § 17-213   11-15-203
Art. 16, § 17-214   11-15-204
Art. 16, § 17-215   11-15-203
Art. 16, § 17-216   11-15-203
Art. 16, § 17-217   11-15-203
Art. 16, § 17-301   11-15-301
Art. 16, § 17-302   11-15-302
Art. 16, § 17-303   11-15-303
Art. 16, § 17-304   11-15-304
Art. 16, § 17-305   11-15-305
Art. 16, § 17-401   11-15-403
Art. 16, § 17-402   11-15-404
Art. 16, § 17-403   11-15-401
Art. 16, § 17-404   11-15-403
Art. 16, § 17-405   11-15-402
Art. 16, § 17-501   11-15-103
Art. 16, § 17-502   Repealed
Art. 16, § 18-101   11-16-101
Art. 16, § 18-102   Repealed
Art. 16, § 18-103   11-16-102
Art. 16, § 18-104   Repealed
Art. 16, § 18-201   11-16-201
Art. 16, § 18-202   11-16-201
Art. 16, § 18-203   11-16-201
Art. 16, § 18-204   11-16-201
Art. 16, § 18-205   11-16-201
Art. 16, § 18-206   11-16-202
Art. 16, § 18-207   11-16-201
Art. 16, § 18-208   11-16-201
Art. 16, § 18-209   11-16-103
Art. 16, § 18-301   11-16-302
Art. 16, § 18-302   11-16-303
Art. 16, § 18-303   Repealed (Bill No. 18-09)
Art. 16, § 18-304   Repealed (Bill No. 18-09)
Art. 16, § 19-101   Repealed
Art. 16, § 20-101   Repealed
Art. 16, § 21-101   15-2-507
Art. 17, § 1-101    Repealed
Art. 17, § 1-102    12-7-102
Art. 17, § 1-103    13-5-111
Art. 17, § 1-104    12-7-103
Art. 17, § 1-105    12-7-104
Art. 17, § 1-106    17-10-301
Art. 18, § 1-101    12-1-101
Art. 18, § 1-102    12-1-102
Art. 18, § 1-103    12-1-103
Art. 18, § 1-104    Repealed (Bill No. 71-23)
Art. 18, § 1-201    12-1-201
Art. 18, § 1-202    12-1-202
Art. 18, § 1-203    12-1-203
Art. 18, § 1-204    12-1-204
Art. 18, § 1-205    Repealed
Art. 18, § 1-206    12-1-301
Art. 18, § 1-207    12-1-302
Art. 18, § 1-208    12-1-303
Art. 18, § 1-209    12-1-304
Art. 18, § 1-210    12-1-305
Art. 18, § 1-211    Repealed (Bill No. 90-16)
Art. 18, § 1-212    12-1-306
Art. 18, § 1-213    12-1-307
Art. 18, § 1-214    12-1-308
Art. 18, § 1-301    12-1-401
Art. 18, § 1-302    12-1-402
Art. 18, § 1-303    12-1-403
Art. 18, § 2-101    15-3-101
Art. 18, § 2-102    15-3-102
Art. 18, § 2-103    15-3-105
Art. 18, § 2-103.1  15-3-106
Art. 18, § 2-104    15-3-104
Art. 18, § 2-105    15-3-104
Art. 18, § 2-106    Repealed (Bill No. 82-06)
Art. 18, § 2-107    Repealed (Bill No. 75-13)
Art. 18, § 2-108    15-3-107
Art. 18, § 2-109    15-5-101
Art. 18, § 2-110    15-5-102
Art. 18, § 2-111    Repealed
Art. 18, § 3-101    4-7-201
Art. 18, § 3-102    12-2-101
Art. 18, § 3A-101   12-2-201
Art. 18, § 3A-102   12-2-202
Art. 18, § 3A-103   12-2-203
Art. 18, § 3A-104   12-2-204
Art. 18, § 3A-105   12-2-204
Art. 18, § 4-101    Repealed
Art. 18, § 4-102    12-3-103
Art. 18, § 4-103    Repealed
Art. 18, § 4-104    Repealed
Art. 18, § 4-105    12-3-104
Art. 18, § 4-106    12-3-105
Art. 18, § 4-107    12-3-106
Art. 18, § 4-107.1  12-3-107
Art. 18, § 4-108    Repealed
Art. 18, § 4-201    12-3-201
Art. 18, § 4-202    12-3-202
Art. 18, § 4-203    12-3-203
Art. 18, § 4-204    12-3-204
Art. 18, § 4-205    12-3-205
Art. 18, § 4-206    Repealed
Art. 18, § 4-301    12-3-301
Art. 18, § 4-302    12-3-302
Art. 18, § 4-303    12-3-303
Art. 18, § 5-101    12-7-101
Art. 19, § 1-101    14-1-101
Art. 19, § 1-102    14-1-102
Art. 19, § 1-103    14-1-103
Art. 19, § 1-104    14-1-104
Art. 19, § 2-101    14-2-101
Art. 19, § 2-102    14-2-102
Art. 19, § 2-103    14-2-103
Art. 19, § 2-104    14-2-104
Art. 19, § 2-105    14-2-105
Art. 19, § 2-106    14-2-106
Art. 19, § 2-107    14-2-107
Art. 19, § 2-108    14-2-108
Art. 19, § 2-109    14-2-109
Art. 19, § 2-110    14-2-110
Art. 19, § 2-111    14-2-111
Art. 19, § 2-112    14-2-112
Art. 19, § 2-113    14-2-113
Art. 19, § 2-114    14-2-114
Art. 19, § 2-115    14-2-115
Art. 19, § 2-116    14-2-116
Art. 19, § 2-117    14-2-117
Art. 19, § 2-301    14-3-101
Art. 20, § 1-101    Repealed
Art. 20, § 1-102    Repealed
Art. 20, § 1-103    15-1-102
Art. 20, § 1-104    15-1-102
Art. 20, § 1-105    15-2-505
Art. 20, § 2-101    15-1-108
Art. 20, § 2-102    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 2-102(53)15-5-102
Art. 20, § 2-102(54)15-5-103
Art. 20, § 2-103    15-2-102
Art. 20, § 2-104    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 2-105    15-2-103
Art. 20, § 2-106    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-101    15-2-201
Art. 20, § 3-102    15-1-103
Art. 20, § 3-103    15-2-212
Art. 20, § 3-201    15-2-202
Art. 20, § 3-202    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-301    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-302    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-303    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-304    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-305    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-306    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-307    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-308    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-309    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-310    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-311    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-401    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-402    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 3-403    15-5-104
Art. 20, § 3-404    15-5-102
Art. 20, § 4-101    Repealed
Art. 20, § 4-102    15-2-301
Art. 20, § 4-103    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 4-103(20)15-5-102,
                     15-5-103
Art. 20, § 5-101    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 5-102    15-2-401
Art. 20, § 5-103    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 5-201    15-2-402
Art. 20, § 5-202    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 5-202(19)15-5-102,
                     15-5-103
Art. 20, § 5-203    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 5-204    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 6-101    15-2-501
Art. 20, § 6-102    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 6-103    15-2-503
Art. 20, § 6-201    15-2-502
Art. 20, § 6-202    Repealed (Bill No. 1-12)
Art. 20, § 6-202(20)15-5-103
Art. 20, § 6-301    15-2-504
Art. 20, § 6-302    Construction Codes Supplement
Art. 20, § 6-401    15-5-104
Art. 20, § 6-402    15-5-102
Art. 20, § 7-101    15-5-101
Art. 20, § 7-102    Repealed
Art. 21, § 1-101    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-102    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-103    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-104    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-105    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-106    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-201    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-202    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-301    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-302    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-303    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-304    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-305    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-306    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-307    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-308    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-401    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-402    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-403    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 1-404    Repealed
Art. 21, § 1-501    Repealed
Art. 21, § 2-101    16-2-101
Art. 21, § 2-101.1  Repealed
Art. 21, § 2-102    Repealed
Art. 21, § 2-103    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-104    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-105    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-105.1  Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-106    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-201    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-202    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-203    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-204    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-205    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-206    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-207    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 21, § 2-208    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-209    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-210    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-210.1  Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-211    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-211.1  Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-212    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-213    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-214    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-215    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-215.1  Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-216    Repealed
Art. 21, § 2-301    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-302    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-303    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 21, § 2-304    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-305    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-306    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-307    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-308    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-309    Repealed
Art. 21, § 2-310    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-311    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-312    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-313    Repealed (Bill No. 64-07)
Art. 21, § 2-314    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 21, § 2-315    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 21, § 2-316    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 21, § 2-317    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 21, § 2-318    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 21, § 2-319    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 21, § 2-320    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 21, § 2-321    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 21, § 2-322    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 21, § 2-401    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-402    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-403    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-404    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-405    Repealed
Art. 21, § 2-406    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-407    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-501    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-502    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-503    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-504    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-505    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-506    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-507    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-508    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-601    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-602    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-603    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-604    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-605    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-605.1  Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 21, § 2-606    Repealed (Bill No. 24-07)
Art. 21, § 2-607    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-608    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 2-609    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-101    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-102    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-103    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-104    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-105    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-106    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-107    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-201    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-202    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-203    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-204    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-205    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-206    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-207    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-208    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-301    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-302    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-303    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-304    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-305    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-401    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-402    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-403    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-404    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-501    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-502    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-503    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-504    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 21, § 3-505    Repealed (Bill No. 58-10)
Art. 22, § 1-101    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 1-102    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 1-103    15-1-101
Art. 22, § 1-104    Repealed
Art. 22, § 1-105    Repealed
Art. 22, § 1-106    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 1-107    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-101    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-102    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-103    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-104    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-201    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-202    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-203    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-204    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-205    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-206    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-207    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-208    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-209    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-210    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-211    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-212    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-213    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-301    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-302    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-303    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-304    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-401    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-402    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-403    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-404    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-405    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-501    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-502    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-601    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-602    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-603    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-604    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-605    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-606    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-701    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-702    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-703    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-704    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-705    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-706    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-707    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-708    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-709    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-710    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-711    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 2-712    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 3-101    11-10-102
Art. 22, § 3-102    Repealed
Art. 22, § 3-103    Repealed
Art. 22, § 3-104    11-10-103
Art. 22, § 3-105    11-10-104
Art. 22, § 3-106    11-10-105
Art. 22, § 3-107    11-10-106
Art. 22, § 3-108    11-10-107
Art. 22, § 3-109    11-10-108
Art. 22, § 3-110    11-10-109
Art. 22, § 3-111    11-10-110
Art. 22, § 3-112    11-10-111
Art. 22, § 3-201    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 3-202    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 3-203    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 3-204    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 3-205    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 3-206    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 3-207    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 4-101    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 4-102    15-1-104
Art. 22, § 4-103    15-1-104
Art. 22, § 4-104    15-1-104
Art. 22, § 4-105    15-1-104
Art. 22, § 4-106    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-101    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-102    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-201    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-202    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-203    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-204    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-205    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-206    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-207    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-208    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-209    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-210    15-5-101
Art. 22, § 5-301    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 5-302    Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 22, § 6-101    15-5-102
Art. 22, § 6-102    Repealed
Art. 22, § 7-101    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-101    11-9-101
Art. 23, § 1-102    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-103    11-9-102
Art. 23, § 1-201    11-9-104
Art. 23, § 1-202    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-203    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-301    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-302    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-303    11-9-103
Art. 23, § 1-304    11-9-104
Art. 23, § 1-305    11-9-105
Art. 23, § 1-306    11-9-105
Art. 23, § 1-307    11-9-105
Art. 23, § 1-308    11-9-106
Art. 23, § 1-309    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-310    Repealed (Bill No. 48-17)
Art. 23, § 1-311    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-312    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-313    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-314    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-315    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-316    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-317    Repealed
Art. 23, § 1-401    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-101    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-102    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-103    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-104    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-105    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-106    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-107    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-108    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-109    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-110    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-111    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-112    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-113    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-114    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-115    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-116    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-117    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-118    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-119    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-120    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-121    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-122    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-123    Repealed
Art. 23, § 2-124    Repealed
Art. 24, § 1-101    18-2-103
Art. 24, § 1-102    18-2-103
Art. 24, § 1-103    18-2-104
Art. 24, § 1-104    18-2-104
Art. 24, § 2-101    17-10-101
Art. 24, § 2-102    17-10-102
Art. 24, § 2-201    17-10-201
Art. 24, § 2-202    17-10-202
Art. 24, § 2-203    17-10-203
Art. 24, § 2-203.1  17-10-204
Art. 24, § 2-204    17-10-205
Art. 24, § 2-205    17-10-206
Art. 24, § 2-206    17-10-207
Art. 24, § 2-207    17-10-208
Art. 24, § 2-207.1  17-10-209
Art. 24, § 2-208    17-10-210
Art. 24, § 2-209    17-10-211
Art. 24, § 2-210    17-10-212
Art. 24, § 3-101    Repealed
Art. 24, § 3-102    Repealed
Art. 24, § 3-103    Repealed
Art. 24, § 3-104    Repealed
Art. 24, § 3-105    Repealed
Art. 24, § 3-106    Repealed
Art. 24, § 3-107    Repealed
Art. 24, § 3-108    Repealed
Art. 24, § 3-109    Repealed
Art. 24, § 4-101    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 24, § 4-102    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 24, § 4-103    Repealed (Bill No. 3-05)
Art. 24, § 5-101    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-101    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-102    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-103    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-104    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-105    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-106    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-107    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-108    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-109    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-110    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-111    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-112    Repealed
Art. 24, § 6-201    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-202    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-301    Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-302    Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 6-303    Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 6-304    Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 6-304.1  Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-304.2  Repealed (Bill No. 71-16)
Art. 24, § 6-305    Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 6-305.1  Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 6-306    Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 6-307    Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 6-308    Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 6-309    Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 6-310    Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 6-311    Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 6-312    Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 6-313    Repealed (Bill No. 4-05)
Art. 24, § 7-101    17-11-201
Art. 24, § 7-102    17-11-202
Art. 24, § 7-103    17-11-203
Art. 24, § 7-104    17-11-204
Art. 24, § 7-105    17-11-205
Art. 24, § 7-106    17-11-206
Art. 24, § 7-107    17-11-207
Art. 24, § 7-108    17-11-208
Art. 24, § 7-109    17-11-209
Art. 24, § 7-110    Repealed (Bill No. 71-08)
Art. 24, § 7-111    17-11-211
Art. 24, § 7-112    17-11-212
Art. 24, § 7-113    17-11-213
Art. 24, § 8-101    3-20-101
Art. 24, § 8-102    3-20-102
Art. 24, § 8-103    3-20-103
Art. 24, § 9-101    Repealed (Bill No. 84-23)
Art. 24, § 9-102    Repealed (Bill No. 20-16)
Art. 24, § 9-103    Repealed (Bill No. 84-23)
Art. 24, § 9-104    Repealed (Bill No. 84-23)
Art. 24, § 9-105    Repealed (Bill No. 84-23)
Art. 24, § 9-106    Repealed (Bill No. 84-23)
Art. 25, § 25-1-101 13-1-101
Art. 25, § 25-1-102 13-1-103
Art. 25, § 25-1-103 13-1-104
Art. 25, § 25-1-104 13-1-105
Art. 25, § 25-1-105 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-1-106 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-2-101 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-2-102 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-2-103 13-1-102
Art. 25, § 25-3-101 13-3-101
Art. 25, § 25-3-102 13-3-102
Art. 25, § 25-3-103 13-3-103
Art. 25, § 25-3-104 13-3-104
Art. 25, § 25-3-201 13-3-105
Art. 25, § 25-3-202 13-3-106
Art. 25, § 25-3-203 13-3-107
Art. 25, § 25-3-204 13-3-108
Art. 25, § 25-3-205 13-3-109
Art. 25, § 25-3-206 13-3-110
Art. 25, § 25-3-207 13-3-111
Art. 25, § 25-3-208 13-3-112
Art. 25, § 25-3-209 13-3-113
Art. 25, § 25-3-301 13-3-114
Art. 25, § 25-3-302 13-3-115
Art. 25, § 25-3-303 13-3-116
Art. 25, § 25-3-304 13-3-117
Art. 25, § 25-3-305 13-3-118
Art. 25, § 25-3-401 13-3-119
Art. 25, § 25-3-402 13-3-120
Art. 25, § 25-3-403 13-3-121
Art. 25, § 25-3-501 13-3-122
Art. 25, § 25-3-502 13-3-123
Art. 25, § 25-3-503 13-3-124
Art. 25, § 25-3-504 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-4-101 13-2-101
Art. 25, § 25-4-102 13-2-201
Art. 25, § 25-4-103 13-2-202
Art. 25, § 25-4-104 13-2-102
Art. 25, § 25-4-105 13-2-102
Art. 25, § 25-4-106 13-2-203
Art. 25, § 25-4-107 13-2-203
Art. 25, § 25-4-108 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-4-109 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-4-110 13-2-204
Art. 25, § 25-4-111 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-4-112 13-2-205
Art. 25, § 25-4-113 13-2-206
Art. 25, § 25-4-201 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-4-202 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-4-203 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-4-204 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-4-301 13-2-301
Art. 25, § 25-4-302 13-2-302
Art. 25, § 25-4-303 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-4-401 Repealed (Bill No. 68-06)
Art. 25, § 25-4-402 13-2-303
Art. 25, § 25-4-501 13-6-101
Art. 25, § 25-4-502 13-6-102
Art. 25, § 25-4-503 13-6-102
Art. 25, § 25-4-504 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-4-505 13-6-103
Art. 25, § 25-4-506 13-6-104
Art. 25, § 25-4-507 13-6-105
Art. 25, § 25-4-508 13-6-105
Art. 25, § 25-4-509 13-1-108
Art. 25, § 25-5-101 13-5-101
Art. 25, § 25-5-102 13-5-102
Art. 25, § 25-5-103 13-5-103
Art. 25, § 25-5-104 13-5-104
Art. 25, § 25-5-105 13-5-105
Art. 25, § 25-5-106 13-5-106
Art. 25, § 25-5-107 13-5-107
Art. 25, § 25-5-108 13-5-109
Art. 25, § 25-5-109 13-5-110
Art. 25, § 25-5-201 13-5-201
Art. 25, § 25-5-202 13-5-202
Art. 25, § 25-5-301 Repealed (Bill No. 79-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-302 13-5-302
Art. 25, § 25-5-303 Repealed (Bill No. 79-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-304 Repealed (Bill No. 79-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-305 Repealed (Bill No. 79-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-306 Repealed (Bill No. 79-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-307 Repealed (Bill No. 79-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-308 Repealed (Bill No. 79-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-309 Repealed (Bill No. 79-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-310 Repealed (Bill No. 79-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-311 Repealed (Bill No. 79-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-312 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-5-313 13-5-304
Art. 25, § 25-5-314 13-5-305
Art. 25, § 25-5-315 13-5-306
Art. 25, § 25-5-401 Repealed (Bill No. 5-05)
Art. 25, § 25-5-402 Repealed (Bill No. 5-05)
Art. 25, § 25-5-403 Repealed (Bill No. 5-05)
Art. 25, § 25-5-404 Repealed (Bill No. 5-05)
Art. 25, § 25-5-405 Repealed (Bill No. 5-05)
Art. 25, § 25-5-406 Repealed (Bill No. 5-05)
Art. 25, § 25-5-407 Repealed (Bill No. 5-05)
Art. 25, § 25-5-408 Repealed (Bill No. 5-05)
Art. 25, § 25-5-409 Repealed (Bill No. 5-05)
Art. 25, § 25-5-410 Repealed (Bill No. 5-05)
Art. 25, § 25-5-411 Repealed (Bill No. 5-05)
Art. 25, § 25-5-412 Repealed (Bill No. 5-05)
Art. 25, § 25-5-501 13-5-501,
                     13-5-502
Art. 25, § 25-5-502 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-5-503 13-5-503
Art. 25, § 25-5-504 13-5-504
Art. 25, § 25-5-505 13-5-505
Art. 25, § 25-5-506 13-5-506
Art. 25, § 25-5-507 13-5-507
Art. 25, § 25-5-508 13-5-508
Art. 25, § 25-5-509 13-5-509
Art. 25, § 25-5-510 13-5-510
Art. 25, § 25-5-511 13-5-511
Art. 25, § 25-5-512 13-5-512
Art. 25, § 25-5-513 13-5-513
Art. 25, § 25-5-514 13-5-514
Art. 25, § 25-5-515 13-5-515
Art. 25, § 25-5-516 13-5-516
Art. 25, § 25-5-517 13-5-517
Art. 25, § 25-5-518 13-5-518
Art. 25, § 25-5-519 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-5-520 13-5-519
Art. 25, § 25-5-521 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-5-522 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-5-601 Repealed (Bill No. 80-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-602 Repealed (Bill No. 80-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-603 Repealed (Bill No. 80-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-604 Repealed (Bill No. 80-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-605 Repealed (Bill No. 80-20)
Art. 25, § 25-5-606 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-5-607 13-5-701,
                     13-5-703
Art. 25, § 25-5-608 13-5-702
Art. 25, § 25-5-609 13-5-901
Art. 25, § 25-5-610 13-5-902
Art. 25, § 25-5-611 13-5-903
Art. 25, § 25-5-612 13-5-904
Art. 25, § 25-5-613 13-5-905
Art. 25, § 25-5-614 13-5-906
Art. 25, § 25-6-101 13-4-101
Art. 25, § 25-6-102 13-4-103
Art. 25, § 25-6-103 Repealed
Art. 25, § 25-6-104 13-4-104
Art. 25, § 25-6-105 13-4-104
Art. 25, § 25-6-106 13-4-105
Art. 25, § 25-6-201 13-4-102
Art. 26              Repealed (Bill No. 3-05): See new
                     Art. 17
Art. 27              Repealed
Art. 28              Repealed (Bill No. 4-05): See new
                     Art. 18
Appendix A           Appendix A
Appendix B           Appendix B
                     
 
REFERENCES TO COUNTY BILLS
County Bill No. 2005 Code Section
County Bill No. 2005 Code Section
13-75           4-7-305
6-77            12-4-1001
16-85           11-14-101
                13-5-503 to
40-85           13-5-516,
                13-5-519
47-85           18-2-103
                8-1-101 to
                8-1-107,
                8-2-101,
                8-2-102,
                8-2-104 to
                8-2-107,
                8-2-109 to
59-85           8-2-111,
                8-2-113 to
                8-2-115,
                8-2-118 to
                8-2-120,
                8-3-101,
                8-3-205,
                8-3-206
64-85           13-5-110
                13-5-504,
                13-5-505,
66-85           13-5-507,
                13-5-508,
                13-5-510,
                13-5-519
77-85           18-2-103
78-85           13-2-205
81-85           13-4-107
82-85           18-2-103
8-86            4-6-106
                11-1-106,
11-86           11-4-304 to
                11-4-306,
                15-5-104
12-86           11-1-106,
                11-4-605
29-86           18-2-103
33-86           13-4-107
                2-2-101,
35-86           2-2-102,
                3-19-101
37-86           13-5-508
40-86           4-7-403,
                4-7-406
41-86           4-7-403,
                4-7-406
44-86           6-2-101
52-86           6-1-303
56-86           6-1-312
58-86           3-21-101,
                3-21-105
61-86           18-2-103
74-86           6-1-101,
                6-1-303
78-86           9-2-101
81-86           6-2-101
87-86           6-1-301
89-86           6-1-104
91-86           13-5-508
14-87           4-7-204
15-87           4-7-204
20-87           15-5-101,
                15-5-102
22-87           13-4-107
25-87           4-7-303
32-87           6-2-101
36-87           12-1-304
38-87           13-4-107
42-87           15-5-101,
                15-5-102
43-87           4-7-204
                17-11-201 to
50-87           17-11-209,
                17-11-211,
                17-11-212
54-87           3-2-102
55-87            
                6-2-101
56-87           6-2-101
57-87           12-4-204
                13-5-302,
                13-5-802,
63-87           13-5-806,
                13-5-808,
                13-5-813
66-87           18-2-103
67-87           12-4-905,
                12-4-912
69-87           12-3-203
79-87           12-3-107
83-87           15-2-502
90-87           1-2-203
96-87           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
102-87          4-10-104
106-87          4-6-104
1-88            12-7-101
                11-4-505,
                11-4-506,
2-88            15-1-102,
                15-1-108,
                15-2-202,
                15-2-402
4-88            13-5-806
7-88            4-7-204,
                4-7-205
8-88            4-7-204,
                4-7-205
11-88           9-1-702
                4-7-103,
                4-7-301,
17-88           4-7-303,
                4-7-305,
                4-7-401,
                4-7-403
18-88           13-1-102
                13-5-508,
                13-5-805,
22-88           13-5-810,
                13-5-813,
                13-5-901
32-88           18-2-103
35-88           13-4-107
38-88           4-12-101,
                12-4-1001
39-88           6-1-212,
                6-2-101
49-88           3-2-205,
                18-2-103
51-88           4-7-204
52-88           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
53-88           13-5-805
                6-1-212,
                6-1-302,
60-88           6-1-303,
                6-1-305,
                6-1-307,
                6-2-101
62-88           6-1-106
                13-1-108,
68-88           13-6-103,
                13-6-105
72-88           13-5-501,
                13-5-502
74-88           13-5-814
77-88           4-7-303
81-88           4-7-406
86-88           4-7-406
90-88           2-1-603
93-88           4-2-102
101-88          4-7-204,
                4-7-205
102-88          4-7-406
                1-2-101,
                1-2-102,
                1-4-104,
                1-4-105,
                1-5-104,
                1-7-101,
                3-2-103,
                3-2-202,
                3-2-205, 3-22-105,
                3-21-107 to
                3-21-109 ,
                4-10-104,
                4-10-304,
                4-10-306,
                4-11-107,
                4-12-103,
                6-1-107,
13-89           6-1-108,
                6-1-208,
                6-1-311,
                6-2-101,
                6-4-101,
                7-1-101,
                7-4-101,
                7-4-108,
                7-5-109,
                7-7-103,
                7-7-105,
                8-1-105,
                8-2-101,
                8-2-109,
                8-2-115 ,
                9-2-101,
                11-12-101,
                12-4-203,
                13-5-817
18-89           1-7-103
19-89           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                6-1-208,
32-89           6-1-305,
                6-1-306
                6-1-308,
33-89           6-1-310,
                6-2-101
41-89           11-4-301
                6-1-101,
                6-1-104,
45-89           6-1-213,
                6-1-301 to
                6-1-303,
                6-2-101
49-89           4-2-302
54-89           13-6-103,
                13-6-104
55-89           4-7-204
57-89           11-4-201,
                11-4-204
4-90            1-5-101,
                1-5-104
9-90            4-7-203
10-90           4-7-406
19-90           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
20-90           18-2-103
34-90           6-2-101
35-90           12-1-308
                2-2-101,
39-90           2-2-102,
                3-19-101
40-90           13-5-501,
                13-5-502
                17-10-201 to
                17-10-206,
45-90           17-10-208,
                17-10-210,
                17-10-211,
                17-10-212
46-90           4-2-302
                13-5-505,
53-90           13-5-508,
                13-5-509,
                13-5-512
54-90           4-2-302
                6-1-106,
                6-1-107,
57-90           6-1-301,
                6-1-303,
                6-1-304
59-90           4-7-204
69-90           13-5-805
76-90           4-2-303
77-90           4-2-202
81-90           18-2-103
4-91            6-2-101
5-91            4-7-303
11-91           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
12-91           4-7-205
14-91           11-15-302
17-91           4-7-304
24-91           4-7-204
                12-4-101,
                12-4-605,
29-91           12-4-801 to
                12-4-803,
                12-4-805
31-91           17-11-212
35-91           13-4-107
                11-6-101,
                11-10-103,
37-91           11-14-201  ,
                11-14-202,  
                15-5-101
44-91           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                13-5-501,
55-91           13-5-502,
                13-5-813
                6-1-101,
                6-1-106,
58-91           6-1-108,
                6-1-304,
                6-2-104
61-91           11-4-201,
                11-4-204
62-91           4-10-105
65-91           6-2-104
                3-2-103,
66-91           3-2-201 to
                3-2-203,
                3-2-206
                11-4-104,
                11-4-201,
                11-4-205,
                11-4-402,
                15-1-108,
75-91           15-2-102,
                15-2-103,
                15-2-202,
                15-2-402,
                15-2-502,
                15-5-102
80-91           12-7-103
                1-5-101,
95-91           1-5-103,
                1-5-104
                11-1-103,
                11-2-104,
                11-2-201 to
96-91           11-2-203,
                11-2-206 to
                11-2-217,
                11-2-219 to
                11-2-228
109-91          6-2-101
2-92            4-7-406
9-92            4-5-101
17-92           12-7-104
18-92           4-7-204
19-92           12-3-301,
                12-3-303
25-92           11-10-102 to
                11-10-106
29-92           4-7-204
30-92           11-2-306
31-92           6-1-109
32-92           18-2-103
35-92           3-2-205
45-92           4-11-106
                11-2-401,
                11-2-504,
                11-2-601,
                11-2-710,
                11-3-101,
                11-4-103,
                11-4-304,
                11-4-305,
                11-4-309,
                11-4-404,
                11-4-406,
                11-4-504,
46-92           11-4-506,
                11-4-605,
                11-4-609,
                11-4-610,
                11-6-101,
                11-7-101,
                11-9-102 to
                11-9-104,
                11-12-101,
                11-14-201 ,
                11-14-202,  
                11-15-203,
                11-16-201,
                15-2-505
47-92           4-2-204
48-92           4-7-406
58-92           17-11-209
59-92           11-9-103
61-92           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
64-92           13-4-107
67-92           6-1-307
                11-5-101 to
70-92           11-5-104,
                15-5-101
71-92           6-2-101,
                6-2-104
                6-1-101,
                6-1-106,
73-92           6-1-211,
                6-1-302,
                6-1-304
74-92           18-2-103
78-92           3-2-103
90-92           4-7-406
                13-5-504,
                13-5-505,
                13-5-509,
94-92           13-5-512 to
                13-5-514,
                13-5-517 to
                13-5-519
100-92          6-1-301
4-93            6-4-113
7-93            4-7-204,
                4-7-205
8-93            4-7-204,
                4-7-205
9-93            4-7-303,
                4-7-304
17-93           1-2-101
                2-1-101 to
                2-1-103,
                2-1-201,
                2-1-202,
                2-1-301,
18-93           2-1-401,
                2-1-402,
                2-1-501 to
                2-1-505,
                2-1-601 to
                2-1-604
24-93           15-5-101
26-93           6-1-301
                15-3-101,
                15-3-102,
                15-3-104,
31-93           15-3-105,
                15-3-107,
                15-5-101,
                15-5-102
32-93           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
33-93           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                6-1-101,
                6-1-109,
                6-1-301,
34-93           6-1-302,
                6-1-307,
                6-1-308,
                6-1-310
35-93           13-5-805 to
                13-5-807
37-93           8-1-102,
                8-3-301
38-93           13-4-107
39-93           13-4-109
40-93           3-10-101,
                3-10-102
41-93           3-7-101 to
                3-7-103
46-93           6-1-309,
                6-1-310
49-93           6-2-101
50-93           2-3-105,
                4-11-112
53-93           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                6-1-101,
                6-1-106,
58-93           6-1-109,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-104
61-93           3-2-207
62-93           6-1-313
67-93           18-2-103
71-93           12-4-912
75-93           9-2-101
82-93           11-10-103
87-93           9-1-706
94-93           6-1-101,
                6-1-303
111-93          4-7-101
114-93          6-2-101
116-93          13-5-805
119-93          9-1-704,
                9-1-705
                3-12-101 to
123-93          3-12-109,
                3-12-111,
                3-12-112
10-94           11-3-101
                8-2-120 ,
11-94           12-2-201 to
                12-2-204
13-94           6-1-302,
                6-2-101
14-94           18-2-103
18-94           17-11-211
23-94           4-7-204
24-94           4-7-406
25-94           4-7-204
31-94           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
45-94           3-21-104
46-94           4-12-104
48-94           6-2-101,
                6-2-104
                13-5-805,
49-94           13-5-811,
                13-5-812
50-94           13-4-107
52-94           4-2-308
                2-2-101,
56-94           2-2-102,
                3-19-101
65-94           6-2-101
69-94           11-8-101 to
                11-8-105
70-94           3-20-101 to
                3-20-103
                15-1-108,
                15-2-102,
72-94           15-2-103,
                15-2-202,
                15-2-402,
                15-2-502
73-94           18-2-103
                17-10-206,
79-94           17-10-208,
                17-10-212
83-94           12-4-101
                1-2-101,
                1-2-102,
                7-1-101,
                7-4-101,
                7-4-107 to
95-94           7-4-109,
                7-5-106 to
                7-5-109,
                7-6-101 to
                7-6-106,
                7-7-101 to
                7-7-107
125-94          4-7-406
4-95            6-1-215,
                6-2-101
11-95           11-2-104
12-95           4-6-104
14-95           4-3A-103
17-95           4-12-105
18-95           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
22-95           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
23-95           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
28-95           13-5-805
29-95           13-4-105,
                13-4-107
31-95           4-7-103
                11-6-101,
                11-6-102,
37-95           11-10-105,
                11-14-201,
                15-2-507
                11-7-101,
39-95           11-13-101 to
                11-13-103
44-95           4-11-109
60-95           13-4-107
67-95           11-2-701 to
                11-2-710
71-95           12-1-401 to
                12-1-403
77-95           8-1-101
79-95           4-2-318
81-95           12-1-203,
                12-1-204
84-95           18-2-103
87-95           11-13-101,
                11-13-102
92-95           18-2-103
3-96            6-2-101
10-96           7-1-101
                15-3-102,
18-96           15-3-104 to
                15-3-106
23-96           8-3-301
24-96           11-2-401
                6-1-105,
                6-1-203,
28-96           6-1-204,
                6-1-206,
                6-1-208,
                6-2-101
32-96           2-1-402,
                2-1-503
35-96           6-1-109
36-96           3-2-205
40-96           13-2-301
44-96           6-2-101
47-96           13-4-105,
                13-4-107
49-96           13-5-805,
                13-5-808
50-96           4-1-105
                2-1-103,
                2-1-201,
51-96           2-1-202,
                2-1-301,
                2-1-401,
                2-1-402
53-96           4-12-101
64-96           6-4-105,
                6-4-107
65-96           6-1-218
                 
                6-1-203 to
71-96           6-1-208,
                6-1-219,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-104
84-96           11-16-202
                5-2-101 to
                5-2-111,
                5-2-201 to
                5-2-209,
                5-2-301 to
88-96           5-2-303,
                5-2-401 to
                5-2-409,
                5-2-501,
                5-2-502,
                7-6-101
89-96           4-3-102
97-96           13-5-501,
                13-5-502
100-96          6-1-207
102-96          4-7-204
108-96          18-2-103
112-96          18-2-103
114-96          4-7-406
5-97            4-7-406
7-97            4-7-204,
                4-7-205
17-97           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
18-97           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
19-97           18-2-103
25-97           15-3-104
27-97           6-2-101
                3-17-101,
                3-17-201 to
28-97           3-17-219 ,
                7-1-101,
                7-6-101
40-97           13-4-107
45-97           4-7-406
48-97           6-2-106
51-97           18-2-103
55-97           11-12-101
                11-15-101,
                11-15-102,
                11-15-201 to
                11-15-204,
56-97           11-15-302,
                11-15-304,
                11-15-401,
                11-15-403,
                11-15-404
58-97           4-8-101 to
                4-8-104
60-97           9-1-706
                6-1-101,
                6-1-102,
                6-1-106,
                6-1-109,
                6-1-203 to
                6-1-208,
                6-1-211 to
                6-1-213,
65-97           6-1-215,
                6-1-218,
                6-1-302 to
                6-1-305,
                6-1-312,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-104,
                6-4-106,
                6-4-107
73-97           4-7-204
76-97           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
77-97           9-1-702
78-97           18-2-103
81-97           4-2-314
87-97           18-2-103
88-97           4-12-106
                11-14-101 to
                11-14-103,
                11-14-201 ,
89-97           11-14-202,
                11-14-204 , 11-14-205,
                11-14-301 to
                11-14-305,
                11-14-401
93-97           13-5-105
                7-5-106,
101-97          7-5-109,
                7-6-104
106-97          4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                3-22-101,
                3-22-201 to
115-97          3-22-219 ,
                7-1-101,
                7-6-101,
                7-6-106
116-97          4-8-101,
                4-8-105
4-98            4-2-102
                3-2-101 to
10-98           3-2-106,
                6-2-102
                2-2-101,
13-98           2-2-102,
                3-19-101
25-98           4-11-106
52-98           18-2-103
53-98           6-3-103,
                6-3-104
54-98           3-2-102
55-98           4-8-106
58-98           4-1-104
                2-2-101,
64-98           2-2-102,
                3-19-101
                12-4-101,
                12-4-201,
                12-4-206,
67-98           12-4-301,
                12-4-302,
                13-1-102,
                13-2-101
68-98           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                6-1-101,
                6-1-104,
                6-1-106,
                6-1-206,
79-98           6-1-208 to
                6-1-210,
                6-1-303,
                6-1-304,
                6-2-104,
                6-2-106
98-98           4-7-406
99-98           3-22-219
117-98          18-2-103
1-99            4-6-104
11-99           4-6-106
15-99           3-7-103
16-99           8-3-301
26-99           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
32-99           4-7-204
36-99           4-2-204
                6-1-101,
                6-1-106,
                6-1-206,
40-99           6-1-208,
                6-1-212,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-104
                2-1-201,
                2-1-301,
                2-1-402,
43-99           2-1-504,
                2-1-605,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-103
                6-1-310,
45-99           6-2-101,
                6-2-104
51-99           18-2-103
54-99           13-5-805
                17-10-201 to
56-99           17-10-209,
                17-10-212,
                18-2-103
                4-8-105,
61-99           4-9-101,
                4-9-102
63-99           6-1-207,
                6-2-101
66-99           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
69-99           18-2-103
70-99           1-1-105,
                1-7-103
72-99           18-2-103
                11-16-101 to
                11-16-103,
80-99           11-16-201,
                11-16-202,
                11-16-302
                11-2-201,
                11-2-202,
4-00            11-2-207,
                11-2-216,
                11-2-223
5-00            18-2-103
7-00            3-2-102
12-00           3-2-207 ,
                9-2-101
14-00           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
15-00           4-7-204
16-00           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                2-1-103,
                2-1-401,
                2-1-402,
                3-7-103,
                3-10-101,
                3-10-102,
                3-17-217,
                3-22-218 ,
                4-1-105,
                4-2-202,
                4-2-308,
                4-2-314 ,
                4-6-104,
17-00           4-8-103,
                4-8-104,
                4-11-106,
                4-12-101,
                4-12-104,
                4-12-105,
                5-2-105,
                5-2-106,
                5-2-108,
                5-2-205,
                5-2-207,
                6-2-101,
                7-6-101,
                7-6-102
19-00           4-7-406
                2-1-103,
                2-1-401,
                2-1-402,
                3-2-205,
                3-20-101,
                3-20-102 ,
                4-2-308 ,
                4-12-106,
                6-2-101,
                7-6-101,
20-00           12-4-101,
                13-1-102,
                13-2-101,
                15-2-502,
                15-3-104,
                17-10-201 to
                17-10-203,
                17-10-205,
                17-10-207,
                17-10-208,
                17-11-211
21-00           4-11-110
22-00           18-2-103
                11-15-101 to
                11-15-103,
                11-15-201 to
24-00           11-15-204,
                11-15-301 to
                11-15-305,
                11-15-401 to
                11-15-404
26-00           4-12-102
27-00           4-11-102
                6-1-207,
                6-1-208,
43-00           6-1-211,
                6-1-217,
                6-1-303,
                6-1-307
45-00           17-10-202
46-00           6-1-207,
                6-1-303
50-00           4-7-406
52-00           13-5-813
59-00           9-2-101
62-00           6-4-105
63-00           6-2-104
66-00           2-1-402,
                2-1-504
67-00           3-12-101 to
                3-12-112
69-00           18-2-103
                6-1-104,
                6-1-206,
                6-1-208,
                6-1-209,
70-00           6-1-210,
                6-1-212,
                6-1-213,
                6-1-215,
                6-1-217,
                6-2-101
75-00           4-12-102
82-00           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
1-01            6-1-207
2-01            6-2-101
5-01            7-6-101,
                7-6-106
6-01            4-7-204,
                4-7-205
7-01            4-7-204,
                4-7-205
14-01           11-15-204
16-01           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
17-01           4-7-204
21-01           18-12-401
                12-1-302,
23-01           12-1-304 to
                12-1-306,
                12-1-308
24-01           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
25-01           18-2-103
27-01           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
33-01           18-2-103
                6-1-203,
                6-1-207,
                6-1-208,
                6-1-215,
39-01           6-1-217,
                6-1-302,
                6-1-303,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-104
                12-4-101,
                12-4-402,
                12-4-403,
                12-4-501 to
                12-4-505,
                12-4-601 to
41-01           12-4-611,
                12-4-801 to
                12-4-805,
                12-4-807,
                12-4-901 to
                12-4-912,
                12-4-1001
50-01           4-2-204,
                4-2-303
51-01           2-1-402,
                2-1-502
52-01           3-25-101 to
                3-25-103
54-01           4-9-102,
                4-10-103
63-01           4-7-204
68-01           18-2-103
75-01           18-2-103
77-01           18-2-103
84-01           7-1-101
87-01           4-3-101
89-01           6-1-302 to
                6-1-305
                3-15-101,
                3-15-102 ,
                5-1-101 to
                5-1-110,
                5-1-201 to
                5-1-211,
                5-1-301 to
                5-1-306,
                5-1-401 to
                5-1-408,
                5-1-501 to
                5-1-515,
                5-2-101 to
                5-2-111,
                5-2-201 to
                5-2-209,
                5-2-301,
                5-2-302,
                5-2-401 to
                5-2-409,
                5-2-501,
                5-2-502,
90-01           5-3-101 to
                5-3-106,
                5-3-201 to
                5-3-205,
                5-3-301 to
                5-3-309,
                5-4-101 to
                5-4-103,
                5-4-201 to
                5-4-207,
                5-5-101 to
                5-5-103,
                5-5-201 to
                5-5-206,
                5-6-101 to
                5-6-103,
                5-6-201 to
                5-6-209,
                5-7-101 to
                5-7-104,
                5-7-201 to
                5-7-205,
                6-2-104
92-01           18-2-103
                6-1-101,
                6-1-106,
                6-1-109,
94-01           6-1-209,
                6-1-302,
                6-2-104,
                6-4-107
                17-11-201 to
96-01           17-11-209,
                17-11-211 to
                17-11-213
97-01           4-2-307
99-01           13-5-101
100-01          4-7-204,
                4-7-205
101-01          4-7-204,
                4-7-205
102-01          4-7-204
105-01          3-2-207
                2-2-101,
4-02            2-2-102,
                3-19-101
5-02            18-2-103
7-02            2-1-402
10-02           11-2-202,
                11-2-219
                4-7-103,
12-02           4-7-205,
                4-7-403
13-02           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
14-02           4-7-204
                13-1-101,
                13-2-202,
15-02           13-2-203,
                13-3-101 to
                13-3-124
19-02           4-11-102
24-02           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
27-02           4-6-104
31-02           18-2-103
38-02           4-2-204
                2-1-103,
                2-1-401,
40-02           2-1-402,
                6-2-101,
                7-6-101
42-02           18-2-103
                6-1-207,
                6-1-208,
                6-1-212,
                6-1-217,
52-02           6-1-303,
                6-1-307,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105,
                6-4-101,
                6-4-104
58-02           4-11-106
66-02           6-2-101,
                6-2-105
67-02           18-2-103
                6-1-207 to
                6-1-209,
75-02           6-1-218,
                6-2-104,
                6-2-105
79-02           4-7-204
82-02           4-7-204
83-02           18-2-103
                6-4-101,
1-03            6-4-110,
                6-4-111
2-03            18-2-103
                5-1-202,
                5-3-103,
                5-4-102,
                6-1-218,
                6-2-101,
                7-6-101,
                11-5-102,
7-03            11-9-103,
                12-1-102,
                12-1-201 to
                12-1-203,
                12-1-305,
                12-1-403,
                15-3-102,
                15-3-105,
                15-3-107
                8-2-104,
8-03            8-2-105,
                8-2-118
13-03           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                13-5-805,
24-03           13-5-808,
                13-5-813
34-03           13-4-102,
                13-4-107
35-03           18-2-103
                7-1-101 to
                7-1-104,
                7-2-101 to
                7-2-107,
                7-3-101 to
                7-3-103,
                7-4-101 to
38-03           7-4-109,
                7-5-101 to
                7-5-111,
                7-6-101 to
                7-6-107,
                7-7-101 to
                7-7-107,
                7-8-101 to
                7-8-103
39-03           18-2-103
41-03           18-2-103
                15-1-108,
                15-2-102,
                15-2-103,
                15-2-202,
46-03           15-2-301,
                15-2-402,
                15-2-502,
                15-2-504,
                15-5-102,
                15-5-104
48-03           18-2-103
49-03           3-2-206
50-03           4-7-204
51-03           4-1-105
58-03           4-11-101,
                6-1-110
60-03           9-1-601
62-03           9-1-201
66-03           4-2-308
                6-1-302,
67-03           6-1-307,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
69-03           3-2-207 ,
                18-2-103
70-03           11-15-202
75-03           18-2-103
                13-5-305,
                13-5-501,
                13-5-502,
                13-5-803 to
80-03           13-5-805,
                13-5-807,
                13-5-809,
                13-5-810,
                13-5-813
81-03           4-2-309
5-04            4-7-204,
                4-7-205
16-04           18-2-103
18-04           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
19-04           4-7-406
20-04           6-4-101
21-04           4-7-303,
                4-7-304
22-04           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                1-1-101,
                1-1-102,
                1-1-106,
                1-2-101,
                1-2-102,
                1-2-203,
                1-5-101,
                1-8-104,
                2-1-103,
                2-1-301,
                2-1-401,
                2-1-402,
                2-1-501,
                2-1-502,
                2-2-101,
                2-2-102,
                3-2-205,
                3-3-102,
                3-3-104,
                3-3-109,
                3-7-103,
                3-9-101,
                3-10-101,
                3-10-102,
                3-12-103,
                3-19-101,
                3-21-101,
                3-22-101 ,
                4-2-102,
                4-2-204,
                4-2-302,
                4-2-307,
                4-2-308,
                4-2-314,
                4-2-315 ,
                4-7-204,
                4-7-303,
                4-7-406,
                4-8-102,
                4-10-303,
                4-11-102 to
                4-11-104,
                4-12-105,
                5-1-101,
23-04           5-1-306,
                5-5-202,
                5-5-205,
                5-5-206,
                5-6-207,
                5-7-104,
                6-1-207,
                6-1-301,
                6-1-303,
                6-1-308,
                6-1-309,
                6-1-311,
                6-4-101,
                6-4-108,
                6-4-110,
                7-1-101,
                7-6-104,
                8-2-104,
                8-2-106,
                8-2-115,
                8-2-118 ,
                9-1-202,
                9-1-301,
                9-1-601,
                9-1-706,
                9-1-711,
                11-2-222,
                11-2-306,
                11-2-505,
                11-4-102,
                11-4-201,
                11-4-205,
                11-4-601,
                11-9-101,
                11-9-103,
                11-10-102,
                11-10-111,
                12-2-201,
                12-4-103,
                12-7-101,
                13-5-806,
                13-5-813,
                13-5-814 ,
                13-5-817 ,
                15-1-102,
                15-2-505
                5-1-505,
                5-5-204,
                5-5-206,
                5-6-102,
32-04           5-6-103,
                5-6-201,
                5-6-202,
                5-6-204,
                5-6-207
33-04           6-4-109
                6-1-207 to
                6-1-210,
                6-1-212,
                6-1-214,
34-04           6-1-217,
                6-1-301 to
                6-1-303,
                6-1-307,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
36-04           4-7-204
37-04           9-2-101,
                15-5-102
45-04           4-2-304,
                4-2-319
46-04           18-2-103
                11-15-202,
50-04           11-15-203,
                11-15-302
51-04           18-2-103
52-04           18-2-103
58-04           17-10-301
60-04           18-2-103
61-04           4-10-105,
                4-10-202
62-04           18-2-104
                4-11-104,
                13-1-101 to
                13-1-105,
                13-1-108,
                13-2-101,
                13-2-102,
                13-2-201 to
                13-2-206,
                13-2-301 to
                13-2-303,
                13-3-101 to
                13-3-124,
                13-4-101 to
                13-4-105,
                13-5-101 to
                13-5-107,
63-04           13-5-109 to
                13-5-111,
                13-5-201,
                13-5-202,
                13-5-302   ,
                13-5-304  to
                13-5-306,
                13-5-501 to
                13-5-519,
                13-5-701 to
                13-5-703,
                13-5-805,
                13-5-813,
                13-5-901 to
                13-5-906,
                13-6-101 to
                13-6-105
65-04           3-2-207
78-04           13-5-814
                6-1-101,
                6-1-104,
                6-1-110,
                6-1-207,
86-04           6-1-211,
                6-1-302,
                6-1-303,
                6-1-308,
                6-2-104,
                6-3-104
                17-1-101,
                17-2-101 to
                17-2-110,
                17-3-101,
                17-3-201 to
                17-3-203,
                17-3-301 to
                17-3-304,
                17-3-401 to
                17-3-405,
                17-3-501 to
                17-3-504,
                17-3-701,
                17-3-801,
                17-4-101,
                17-4-202 to
                17-4-205,
                17-4-207,
                17-4-208,
                17-5-101 to
                17-5-103,
                17-5-201 to
                17-5-206,
                17-5-301,
                17-5-401 to
                17-5-403,
                17-5-501 to
                17-5-504,
                17-5-601,
                17-5-701 to
                17-5-703,
                17-5-801,
                17-5-901,
                17-5-902,
                17-6-101,
                17-6-102,
                17-6-104 to
                17-6-107,
                17-6-201,
                17-6-202,
                17-6-301 to
                17-6-308,
                17-6-402 to
3-05            17-6-404,
                17-6-406,
                17-6-501,
                17-6-503 ,  
                17-6-504,  
                17-6-601 to
                17-6-607,
                17-6-701 to
                17-6-704,
                17-7-101,
                17-7-201,
                17-7-401,
                17-7-601 to
                17-7-604,
                17-7-1001 to
                17-7-1004,
                17-7-1101,
                17-8-101 to
                17-8-104,
                17-8-201 to
                17-8-203,
                17-8-301,
                17-8-401 to
                17-8-404,
                17-8-501 to
                17-8-503,
                17-8-601,
                17-8-602,
                17-8-604,
                17-8-701 to
                17-8-704,
                17-8-801,
                17-8-802,
                17-8-901,
                17-9-101 to
                17-9-104,
                17-9-201 to
                17-9-209,
                17-9-301 to
                17-9-305,
                17-9-401,
                17-10-201,
                17-10-204,
                17-11-101
                3-2-103,
                3-2-205 to
                3-2-207 ,
                8-3-301,
                9-1-706,
                13-6-104,
                17-10-204,
                17-10-206,
                17-11-209,
                18-1-101,
                18-2-101,
                18-2-102,
                18-2-105 to
                18-2-108,
                18-2-201 to
                18-2-205,
                18-2-301 to
                18-2-303,
                18-2-401 to
                18-2-404,
                18-3-101 to
                18-3-106,
                18-3-201,
                18-3-301 to
                18-3-307,
                18-3-310  ,
                18-3-311,
                18-3-313,
                18-4-101 to
                18-4-106,
                18-4-201 to
                18-4-205,
                18-4-301,
                18-4-401,
                18-4-501,
                18-4-601,
                18-4-701,
                18-4-801,
                18-4-901,
                18-4-1001,
                18-5-101,
                18-5-102,
                18-5-201,
                18-5-301,
                18-5-401,
                18-5-501,
                18-6-101 to
                18-6-103,
                18-6-201,
                18-6-301,
                18-6-401,
                18-7-101 to
                18-7-108,
                18-8-101 to
                18-8-103,
                18-8-201,
                18-9-201 to
                18-9-203,
                18-9-301 to
                18-9-303,
                18-9-401 to
                18-9-403,
                18-10-101,
                18-10-102,
                18-10-104,
                18-10-108,
                18-10-110,
                18-10-111,
                18-10-115,
                18-10-116,
                18-10-118,
                18-10-120,
4-05            18-10-121,
                18-10-123,
                18-10-124,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
                18-10-134,
                18-10-138,
                18-10-141,
                18-10-143,
                18-10-146,
                18-10-147,
                18-10-149 to
                18-10-151,
                18-10-153,
                18-10-155,
                18-10-156,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-161,
                18-10-166,
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-174,
                18-11-101 to
                18-11-114,
                18-11-116 to
                18-11-122,
                18-11-125 to
                18-11-130,
                18-11-133 to
                18-11-141,
                18-11-143 to
                18-11-153,
                18-11-158 to
                18-11-162,
                18-11-164,
                18-11-165,  
                18-12-101 to
                18-12-106,
                18-12-201 to
                18-12-203,
                18-12-301,
                18-12-401,
                18-12-501,
                18-13-101 to
                18-13-104,
                18-13-201 to
                18-13-206,
                18-13-301 to
                18-13-304,
                18-13-401,
                18-13-403 to
                18-13-405,
                18-14-101,
                18-14-201,
                18-14-202,
                18-14-301,
                18-14-303,
                18-14-401,
                18-15-101 to
                18-15-104,
                18-16-101 to
                18-16-103,
                18-16-201 to
                18-16-203,
                18-16-301 to
                18-16-306,
                18-16-401 to
                18-16-406,
                18-17-101,
                18-17-102,
                18-17-104,
                18-17-201 to
                18-17-205,
                18-18-101
                13-5-401 to
5-05            13-5-408,
                13-5-813
6-05            13-5-805,
                13-5-806
7-05            13-4-105
8-05            4-12-102
                11-2-201 to
                11-2-203,
                11-2-209,
                11-2-212,
                11-2-216,
9-05            11-2-218,
                11-2-219,
                11-2-221,
                11-2-222,
                11-2-224,
                11-2-227
10-05           13-5-805
                11-6-101,
                11-6-102,
                11-8-102,
13-05           11-10-105,
                11-14-104,
                11-14-201,
                15-2-503,
                15-2-507
                8-2-104,
                8-2-106,
14-05           8-2-109,
                8-2-110,
                8-2-115
15-05           13-4-107
                17-4-202,
19-05           17-6-404 ,
                17-9-208
20-05           17-2-110
27-05           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
38-05           13-1-106
40-05           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
41-05           6-2-101,
                6-2-105
42-05           6-2-101
51-05           13-5-111
                18-4-106,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-9-402,
54-05           18-10-159,
                18-10-160,
                18-11-153,
                18-12-103,
                18-12-202,
                18-14-303
                18-4-106,
55-05           18-10-108,
                18-11-110,
                Art. 18 Appendix A
58-05           7-1-101,
                7-4-105
62-05           11-15-302
                5-1-101,
                5-1-203,
                5-1-508,
                5-1-509,
                5-1-512,
                5-3-104,
66-05           5-4-103,
                5-5-102,
                5-5-103,
                5-6-103,
                5-7-103,
                5-7-202,
                5-7-204
75-05           6-2-104
                17-1-101,
                17-2-101,
                17-2-105,
                17-2-107,
                17-2-109,
                17-2-110,
                17-3-204,
                17-3-801,
                17-4-202,
77-05           17-5-201,
                17-5-901,
                17-6-301,
                17-6-304,
                17-6-307 to
                17-6-309,
                17-6-602,
                17-6-702,
                17-7-101,
                17-7-401,
                17-11-101
                18-1-101,
                18-2-101,
                18-2-202,
                18-2-204,
                18-2-206,
                18-2-301 to
                18-2-304,
                18-2-401,
                18-2-403,
                18-2-404,
                18-3-104,
                18-3-301,
                18-3-303,
                18-3-305 to
                18-3-311,
                18-3-313,
                18-4-102,
                18-4-106,
                18-4-301,
                18-4-401,
                18-4-501,
                18-4-601,
                18-4-701,
                18-4-801,
                18-4-901,
                18-4-1001,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-7-106,
                18-7-107,
                18-9-202,
                18-9-402,
                18-10-115,
                18-10-116,
78-05           18-10-123,
                18-10-125,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
                18-10-134,
                18-10-138,
                18-10-141,
                18-10-143,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-151,
                18-10-153,
                18-10-155,
                18-10-156,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-161,
                18-10-166,
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-174,
                18-11-119,
                18-11-126 to
                18-11-130,
                18-11-133 to
                18-11-141,
                18-11-143 to
                18-11-148,
                18-12-202,
                18-12-203,
                18-14-301 to
                18-14-303,
                18-14-401,
                18-16-201,
                18-16-405,
                18-17-103,
                18-17-203,
                18-18-101
82-05           Adopting Ordinance
86-05           4-7-204
                12-3-101,
                12-3-102,
90-05           12-3-104 to
                12-3-107,
                12-3-203,
                13-2-301
92-05           18-10-153
98-05           18-2-103
2-06            4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                4-7-302 to
3-06            4-7-305,
                4-7-404 to
                4-7-406
                17-1-101,
                18-10-120,
                18-10-159,
                18-11-101,
                18-11-112,
                18-11-113,
4-06            18-11-118,
                18-11-120,
                18-11-126,
                18-11-127,
                18-11-130,
                18-11-148,
                18-11-153,
                18-11-160
7-06            17-5-503
8-06            13-5-804
16-06           1-7-101
17-06           13-2-204
19-06           18-14-303
                17-1-101,
                18-1-101,
                18-10-120,
                18-10-159,
                18-11-101,
                18-11-112,
                18-11-113,
21-06           18-11-118,
                18-11-120,
                18-11-126,
                18-11-127,
                18-11-130,
                18-11-148,
                18-11-153,
                18-11-160
                3-23-101,
26-06           3-23-103 to
                3-23-110
28-06           6-4-105
29-06           18-5-102
41-06           4-2-204
                6-1-217,
                6-1-218,
43-06           6-1-307,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
47-06           11-15-302
48-06           9-1-101
52-06           17-2-101,
                18-2-101
                13-3-101,
                13-3-105,
                13-3-201 to
                13-3-209,
53-06           13-3-301 to
                13-3-305,
                13-3-401 to
                13-3-404,
                13-3-501 to
                13-3-503
                10-1-101 to
                10-1-107,
                10-2-101 to
                10-2-116,
                10-3-101 to
                10-3-105,
                10-4-101 to
                10-4-106,
                10-5-101 to
                10-5-107,
                10-6-101 to
                10-6-104,
                10-7-101,
54-06           10-7-102,
                10-7-201 to
                10-7-205,
                10-8-101 to
                10-8-119,
                10-9-101 to
                10-9-104,
                10-10-101 to
                10-10-110,
                10-11-101 to
                10-11-108,
                10-12-101,
                10-13-101,
                10-14-101
57-06           3-5-101 to
                3-5-110
                6-1-207 to
59-06           6-1-209,
                6-1-214,
                6-1-303
62-06           4-7-406
                15-1-105,
                15-4-101 to
                15-4-104,
                15-4-201,
68-06           15-4-301 to
                15-4-303,
                15-4-401 to
                15-4-403,
                15-5-105,
                15-5-106
69-06           6-1-307
81-06           12-4-801,
                12-4-802
82-06           15-3-101 to
                15-3-107
83-06           4-7-205
84-06           4-7-406
87-06           6-1-307,
                6-2-104
94-06           4-2-307
2-07            6-1-302
3-07            3-23-102
6-07            4-7-204,
                4-7-205
7-07            18-5-102,
                18-10-106
8-07            4-2-204
                12-4-101,
                12-4-103,
                12-4-202,
                12-4-203,
11-07           12-4-205,
                12-4-206,
                12-4-301,
                12-4-302,
                12-4-912,
                12-4-1001
12-07           4-5-101,
                11-2-219
14-07           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                17-11-201,
27-07           17-11-209,
                17-11-210
35-07           4-3A-103
36-07           13-5-808,
                13-5-813
40-07           4-2-306
                6-1-202,
                6-1-207,
41-07           6-1-208,
                6-1-307,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
42-07           6-1-202,
                6-1-207
44-07           12-3-101,
                12-3-102
                6-1-202,
45-07           6-1-207,
                6-1-217
51-07           6-1-202,
                6-2-105
56-07           3-13-101 to
                3-13-110
57-07           3-2-102
                5-4-206,
58-07           5-5-103,
                5-5-205,
                5-6-207
59-07           7-1-101,
                7-5-102
61-07           17-5-403
62-07           17-2-107
                13-4-107,
                15-4-101,
64-07           18-1-101,
                18-6-103,
                18-11-113,
                18-11-130
67-07           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                3-2-207,
                18-1-101,
                18-2-202,
                18-2-204,
                18-2-301,
                18-2-401,
                18-2-403,
                18-3-106,
                18-4-104,
                18-4-106,
                18-4-801,
                18-4-901,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-7-107,
                18-9-202,
69-07           18-9-402,
                18-10-104,
                18-10-118,
                18-10-128,
                18-10-146,
                18-10-149,
                18-10-150,
                18-11-104,
                18-11-106,
                18-11-140,
                18-12-106,
                18-12-202,
                18-14-302,
                18-15-102,
                18-15-104,
                18-16-305,
                18-17-203,
                18-18-101
71-07           6-1-217
                18-3-104,
77-07           18-4-106,
                18-5-102,
                18-10-142
                18-3-104,
79-07           18-4-106,
                18-10-137
80-07           6-1-106
84-07           18-2-103
85-07           4-2-316
86-07           6-1-307
90-07           17-5-201,
                17-5-207
91-07           17-5-503
3-08            4-7-204
4-08            13-4-106
10-08           8-2-121
11-08           3-5-103
16-08           18-16-404
19-08           4-3-103
24-08           4-11-113
25-08           3-23-105
29-08           4-11-114
30-08           3-7-101 ,
                4-10-203
31-08           8-3-101,
                13-2-102
                6-1-202,
32-08           6-1-204,
                6-2-101
33-08           18-2-103
                11-6-101,
                11-6-102,
                11-8-102,
42-08           11-14-104,
                11-14-201 ,
                11-14-202,  
                15-2-507
43-08           17-11-101,
                18-18-101
44-08           12-1-104
50-08           6-1-202
                6-1-202,
51-08           6-2-101,
                6-2-105
55-08           6-1-202,
                6-2-101
                8-1-101 to
                8-1-107,
                8-2-101,
                8-2-102,
                8-2-104 to
58-08           8-2-107,
                8-2-109 to
                8-2-111,
                8-2-113 to
                8-2-115,
                8-2-118 to
                8-2-120
65-08           17-5-201,
                17-5-207
                3-2-104,
                3-2-201 to
                3-2-203,
                3-2-206 ,
67-08           17-8-203,
                17-8-204,
                17-8-503,
                18-16-203,
                18-16-302,
                18-18-101
                17-11-203,
                17-11-204,
71-08           17-11-206,
                17-11-210,
                17-11-212,
                17-11-213
73-08           11-15-302
74-08           18-5-102
77-08           9-1-601,
                14-2-117
78-08           13-5-813
80-08           18-2-205
81-08           4-2-315
89-08           3-12-101 to
                3-12-112
                5-1-101,
                5-1-402 to
92-08           5-1-405,
                5-2-103,
                5-2-501
94-08           12-4-801
95-08           11-15-302
96-08           3-8-101 to
                3-8-110
93-08           18-2-103
97-08           18-4-106
                18-3-104,
                18-4-106,
                18-10-152,
                18-10-153,
                18-10-155,
2-09            18-10-156,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-161,
                18-10-166,
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-174
4-09            13-5-403
7-09            5-2-105
9-09            18-3-306
14-09           4-7-204
15-09           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
16-09           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                11-16-101,
                11-16-201,
18-09           11-16-203 to
                11-16-205,
                11-16-301,
                18-3-302
31-09           13-4-107
                6-1-202,
33-09           6-1-207,
                6-1-216,
                6-1-310
34-09           6-1-202,
                6-1-207
35-09           4-2-309
41-09           12-5-101 to
                12-5-110
                18-4-106,
45-09           18-10-106,
                18-11-104
52-09           17-5-201
53-09           8-2-115
55-09           4-2-203
56-09           11-6-101
60-09           5-3-103
63-09           4-12-107
64-09           18-2-102 to
                18-2-104
68-09           4-2-203
69-09           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
70-09           18-5-102
74-09           5-1-505,
                5-1-508
78-09           6-1-202,
                6-1-207
                18-1-101,
                18-3-104,
                18-6-103,
                18-10-101,
82-09           18-10-102,
                18-10-173,
                18-10-174,
                18-11-137,
                18-12-301
83-09           3-24-101 to
                3-24-103
84-09           4-11-107
85-09           17-11-209
86-09           4-11-109
87-09           6-1-106
89-09           18-2-103
                17-3-203,
                17-3-303,
                17-4-203,
90-09           17-5-202,
                17-5-203,
                18-2-103,
                18-16-305
                5-3-307,
                5-3-309,
                5-4-206,
6-10            5-4-207,
                5-5-205,
                5-5-206,
                5-6-207,
                5-6-209
7-10            18-9-403
                17-5-201,
13-10           18-1-101,
                18-5-102
                4-2-310,
                4-2-314,
17-10           4-2-315,
                4-2-316,
                4-2-319
18-10           2-2-101,
                2-2-102
23-10           2-2-102
27-10           4-11-115
38-10           6-1-202,
                6-1-207
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-7-107,
                18-10-163,
                18-10-166,
                18-10-168,
39-10           18-10-170,
                18-10-174,
                18-11-155,
                18-11-158 to
                18-11-162,
                18-11-164,
                18-11-165,
                18-13-206,
                18-13-207
40-10           5-1-508,
                5-4-103
                5-5-103,
41-10           5-6-103,
                5-6-206
42-10           6-1-202
                4-2-305 to
                4-2-310,
48-10           4-2-314,
                4-2-315,
                4-2-316,
                4-2-319
49-10           18-2-103
50-10           17-6-308
51-10           6-1-217
52-10           6-1-202
56-10           4-7-204
57-10           4-11-116
                16-1-101 to
                16-1-109,
                16-2-101 to
                16-2-105,
                16-2-201 to
                16-2-206,
                16-2-301,
                16-3-101 to
                16-3-106,
                16-3-201 to
                16-3-213,
                16-3-301,
58-10           16-3-303 to
                16-3-307,
                16-3-401,
                16-4-101 to
                16-4-104,
                16-4-201 to
                16-4-204,
                16-4-301 to
                16-4-303,
                16-4-401 to
                16-4-403,
                16-5-101 to
                16-5-106
                17-1-101,
                17-2-101,
                17-2-103,
                17-2-106 to
                17-2-108,
                17-2-110,
                17-3-201,
                17-3-203,
                17-3-204,
                17-3-301 to
                17-3-304,
                17-3-401,
                17-3-403,
                17-3-404,
                17-3-406,
                17-3-502,
                17-3-701,
                17-3-801,
                17-4-101,
                17-4-201 to
                17-4-208,
                17-5-201 to
                17-5-205,
                17-5-207,
                17-5-301,
59-10           17-5-403,
                17-5-701,
                17-5-102,
                17-5-901,
                17-5-1001,
                17-6-103,
                17-6-106,
                17-6-107,
                17-6-110 to
                17-6-112,
                17-6-202,
                17-6-301,
                17-6-303,
                17-6-304,
                17-6-307,
                17-6-403,
                17-6-406 ,
                17-6-501,
                17-6-502,
                17-6-602,
                17-6-604,
                17-6-607,
                17-6-608,
                17-7-501,
                17-11-101,
                17-11-102
                18-1-101,
                18-2-101,
                18-2-110,
                18-4-206,
                18-4-301,
                18-4-401,
                18-4-501,
                18-4-601,
                18-4-701,
                18-5-102,
60-10           18-5-201,
                18-5-301,
                18-5-401,
                18-5-501,
                18-6-103,
                18-6-301,
                18-6-401,
                18-10-113 ,
                18-16-201,
                18-16-304,
                18-16-404
                3-4-101,
65-10           3-5-101 to
                3-5-110
66-10           6-4-105
71-10           13-5-112
72-10           4-2-306
73-10           2-2-102
                18-2-106 ,
75-10           18-2-107,
                18-2-109 ,
                18-16-201
76-10           11-12A-101 to
                11-12A-104
78-10           4-2-311
87-10           6-4-105
88-10           6-4-110,
                6-4-111
                13-1-101,
91-10           13-4-108,
                13-4-109
1-11            4-7-204
3-11            4-7-204,
                4-7-205
4-11            6-4-110,
                6-4-111
                13-5-403,
5-11            13-5-405,
                17-5-202
6-11            16-3-202,
                16-3-203
                17-3-203,
7-11            17-3-303,
                17-4-203
8-11            17-4-101
                17-2-108,
9-11            17-5-203 to
                17-5-205
                18-4-106,
10-11           18-10-118,
                18-11-117
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
13-11           18-5-102,
                18-9-302,
                18-9-402,
                18-13-206
                18-1-101,
                18-3-104,
14-11           18-4-106,
                18-9-402,
                18-13-206
15-11           3-13-103
16-11           13-5-805
                6-1-112,
17-11           6-2-107,
                6-4-101
18-11           6-2-103
22-11           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
24-11           13-5-112
35-11           4-12-104
36-11           13-5-812
37-11           13-5-805,
                13-5-813
38-11           13-4-105
45-11           5-1-503
                6-1-202,
                6-1-207,
                6-1-212,
                6-1-214,
46-11           6-1-217,
                6-1-218,
                6-1-302,
                6-1-303,
                6-1-310
50-11           4-4-101
51-11           18-7-107
54-11           12-3-201 to
                12-3-204
55-11           18-10-128
56-11           18-4-106
57-11           13-5-403
58-11           16-4-101
59-11           7-5-102
60-11           18-2-103
                13-5-302,
                13-5-306,
62-11           13-5-408,
                13-5-804,
                13-5-813
63-11           18-1-101,
                18-9-402
64-11           18-10-128
69-11           4-6-105
71-11           18-1-101
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
                18-5-102,
                18-11-131,
                18-11-133 to
                18-11-141,
73-11           18-11-143 to
                18-11-153,
                18-11-155,
                18-11-158 to
                18-11-162,
                18-11-164,
                18-11-165
                16-1-101,
                16-2-105,
                16-3-101,
                16-4-103,
74-11           16-4-201,
                16-4-202,
                16-4-301,
                16-4-303,
                16-5-101
83-11           17-5-403
86-11           8-2-118
                15-1-102,
                15-1-105,
                15-2-101 to
                15-2-103,
                15-2-202,
1-12            15-2-301,
                15-2-401,
                15-2-402,
                15-2-502,
                15-2-503 to
                15-2-507
2-12            18-2-103
3-12            4-2-311
4-12            4-2-307
7-12            11-16-201
9-12            17-11-209
                12-3-101 to
                12-3-104,
11-12           12-3-202,
                12-3-301,
                12-3-302
12-12           18-11-106
                17-2-107,
                18-1-101,
                18-9-202,
                18-9-203,
                18-10-154 to
                18-10-156,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-161,
15-12           18-10-163,
                18-10-166,
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173,
                18-10-174,
                18-11-163 to
                18-11-165
18-12           13-5-405,
                17-5-202
21-12           11-1-103,
                11-15-202
27-12           17-8-203
28-12           18-5-102
                Art. 2, Title 3, Subtitle 1,
29-12           4-3A-101 to
                4-3A-103
                5-4-103,
30-12           5-5-103,
                5-6-103
42-12           13-5-808
43-12           13-4-105
                17-11-204,
45-12           17-11-209,
                17-11-211 to
                17-11-213
46-12           4-2-307
                17-1-101,
47-12           17-5-501,
                17-5-901,
                17-11-207
48-12           4-2-203
49-12           11-14-101
52-12           11-14-304
53-12           6-1-202,
                6-1-302
                13-5-107,
58-12           13-5-805,
                13-5-904,
                13-5-905
64-12           14-1-105
66-12           6-1-211
67-12           5-5-103
69-12           18-9-201 to
                18-9-204
                7-1-101,
                7-5-105,
70-12           7-5-106,
                7-6-102,
                7-6-103
72-12           12-4-912
73-12           18-6-103
75-12           3-21-106 to
                3-21-111
76-12           13-4-109
78-12           6-4-105,
                6-4-107
82-12           6-1-211
83-12           11-6-101
84-12           4-2-315
85-12           6-1-207
91-12           6-4-110,
                6-4-111
92-12           4-11-118
                3-2-104,
                3-2-207 ,
                9-2-101,
                16-1-101,
                16-3-201,
                16-5-105,
                17-1-101,
                17-2-101,
                17-2-106,
                17-2-108,
                17-2-109,
                17-3-201,
                17-3-301,
                17-3-302,
                17-4-202,
                17-6-302 to
                17-6-304,
                17-6-405,
                17-6-406 ,
                17-6-701,
                17-8-102,
                17-8-105,
                17-8-106,
                17-8-201 to
                17-8-205,
                17-8-301,
                17-8-401 to
                17-8-405,
                17-8-501 to
                17-8-503,
                17-8-601 to
93-12           17-8-604,
                17-8-701 to
                17-8-705,
                17-8-901,
                17-9-401,
                17-11-101,
                17-11-102,
                18-1-101,
                18-2-101,
                18-2-111,
                18-2-402,
                18-2-403,
                18-4-301,
                18-4-401,
                18-4-501,
                18-4-601,
                18-4-701,
                18-7-106 ,
                18-10-149,
                18-11-140,
                18-13-104,
                18-13-105,
                18-13-206,
                18-13-304,
                18-13-401 to
                18-13-405,
                18-15-102,
                18-16-201,
                18-16-202,
                18-16-305,
                18-16-402,
                18-16-403
95-12           4-2-307
97-12           4-1-105
98-12           5-1-101
                4-11-119,
                13-7-101 to
2-13            13-7-108,
                17-11-101,
                17-11-102
3-13            13-5-403,
                13-5-405
5-13            13-4-105,
                13-5-809
12-13           18-6-103,
                18-10-143
                17-3-204,
                17-3-304,
15-13           17-4-207,
                17-5-203,
                17-5-205
16-13           4-2-311
17-13           18-2-103
18-13           12-7-105
20-13           17-5-901
24-13           4-7-204
25-13           5-1-104
38-13           4-1-102
40-13           13-7-103
42-13           13-7-102,
                13-7-103
43-13           13-7-103
                13-7-101,
44-13           13-7-103,
                13-7-104
45-13           13-7-103
47-13           6-1-112
51-13           5-1-104
                11-1-102,
                11-16-101,
52-13           11-16-203 to
                11-16-205,
                11-16-401 to
                11-16-405
55-13           2-1-202
                6-1-202,
57-13           6-1-217,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
                6-1-202,
                6-1-207,
58-13           6-1-302,
                6-1-303,
                6-1-310
60-13           6-1-202,
                6-1-218
                5-1-503,
64-13           5-1-506,
                5-1-508
65-13           3-2-203,
                18-16-203
67-13           13-5-901
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-7-107,
                18-9-202,
                18-9-302,
68-13           18-9-402,
                18-10-166,
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173,
                18-10-174,
                18-12-103,
                18-13-206
70-13           11-2-601
                5-3-103,
                5-5-102,
72-13           6-2-101,
                6-2-103,
                6-2-108,
                7-6-101
73-13           6-1-202
                13-7-101,
74-13           13-7-103,
                13-7-104
                15-3-101,
75-13           15-3-102,
                15-3-104,
                15-3-107
                3-2-104,
                16-3-201,
                17-1-101,
                17-2-101,
                17-8-204,
76-13           17-8-602,
                18-2-101,
                18-13-104,
                18-13-206,
                18-16-305,
                18-16-402
77-13           4-7-201
79-13           12-4-801,
                18-4-104
                4-11-117 to
                4-11-119,
                6-1-308,
85-13           8-2-112 to
                8-2-115,
                8-2-118 to
                8-2-121
88-13           18-9-402
91-13           18-2-103
92-13           18-3-301
96-13           4-12-107
                5-1-209,
                5-1-211,
                5-3-301,
97-13           5-3-302,
                5-3-307,
                5-6-201,
                5-6-202
                5-3-103,
                5-4-102,
98-13           6-2-101,
                6-2-103,
                7-6-101
104-13          4-11-120,
                17-11-301
                5-1-208,
2-14            5-1-401,
                5-1-403,
                5-1-405
4-14            4-7-204
5-14            4-7-406
7-14            18-11-112
13-14           4-12-102
16-14           18-10-146
17-14           13-2-303
19-14           13-7-104
                3-10-101,
                3-10-102 ,
20-14           17-3-304,
                17-4-203,
                17-6-108,
                17-11-101
21-14           18-4-106,
                18-6-103
                6-1-202,
35-14           6-1-310,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
                5-3-103,
36-14           6-2-103,
                6-2-106
38-14           18-15-101
                12-4-101,
                12-4-806,
44-14           12-4-807,
                12-4-808,
                18-10-141
47-14           4-11-118
48-14           3-21-110
49-14           12-4-912
51-14           13-5-813
52-14           13-5-806
56-14           18-2-103
                18-1-101,
58-14           18-5-102,
                18-6-103
60-14           18-2-103
63-14           4-7-204
64-14           12-1-104
66-14           13-5-403,
                13-5-809
68-14           4-2-401 to
                4-2-403
69-14           18-15-102
72-14           13-2-301
74-14           18-2-103
75-14           4-2-307
81-14           18-13-204
82-14           18-4-106
87-14           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
2-15            13-7-103,
                13-7-104
7-15            18-1-101,
                18-15-101
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-10-115,
                18-10-116,
                18-10-118,
                18-10-120,
                18-10-121,
                18-10-123 to
                18-10-125,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
                18-10-134,
8-15            18-10-137,
                18-10-138,
                18-10-141 to
                18-10-143,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-156,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-161,
                18-10-163,
                18-10-166,
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173,
                18-10-174
                16-1-101,
9-15            16-2-103,
                16-2-204
10-15           4-7-204
12-15           18-2-103
13-15           6-5-101 to
                6-5-104
                18-1-101,
                18-3-104,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
14-15           18-10-167,
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173,
                18-10-174
15-15           3-21-105,
                3-21-107
18-15           4-11-114
                13-5-813,
20-15           16-3-207,
                17-11-203
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-10-161,
21-15           18-11-154,
                18-11-155,
                18-11-158 to
                18-11-165
                18-1-101,
23-15           18-3-104,
                18-4-106
43-15           18-1-101
                18-5-102,
                18-10-135,
                18-10-137,
                18-10-138,
                18-10-141 to
                18-10-143,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-156,
44-15           18-10-159 to
                18-10-161,
                18-10-163,
                18-10-166 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173,
                18-10-174
                6-1-202,
45-15           6-1-217,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
                5-3-103,
                5-5-102,
47-15           6-2-101,
                6-2-103,
                7-6-101
48-15           6-1-211
49-15           5-5-202
                5-1-502,
                5-1-503,
50-15           5-1-505 to
                5-1-512,
                5-1-515
56-15           3-2-102
59-15           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
60-15           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
61-15           15-4-404
62-15           4-4-101
64-15           11-2-211
                6-2-101,
65-15           6-2-103,
                7-6-101
                6-2-101,
66-15           6-2-103,
                7-6-101
                6-2-101,
67-15           6-2-103,
                7-6-101
68-15           7-6-101
                14-2-118,
69-15           14-2-119,
                14-3-101
70-15           4-11-106
                17-3-505,
72-15           18-1-101,
                18-2-301,
                18-4-106
73-15           13-5-805
74-15           13-5-813
75-15           18-2-103
76-15           4-11-101
77-15           6-1-218
78-15           13-5-403
                16-1-101,
                16-3-201,
                16-3-204,
83-15           16-3-206,
                16-3-209,
                16-3-303 to
                16-3-308
85-15           4-2-203
88-15           12-4-802
89-15           18-2-103
91-15           13-7-103
92-15           8-2-111
93-15           18-11-117
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-156,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-161,
                18-10-163,
96-15           18-10-166 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173,
                18-10-174,
                18-11-133 to
                18-11-141,
                18-11-143 to
                18-11-155,
                18-11-158 to
                18-11-165
100-15          13-5-104
104-15          16-1-110
105-15          17-5-501
106-15          17-5-501,
                18-1-101
107-15          18-5-102
109-15          13-5-813
110-15          17-5-202,
                17-5-1001
                13-5-112,
                13-5-401 to
111-15          13-5-403,
                13-5-405,
                13-5-813,
                13-5-814
115-15          18-17-204
116-15          18-14-501 to
                18-14-503
117-15          11-6A-101 to
                11-6A-113
                4-2-312,
                4-2-314,
118-15          4-2-315,
                4-2-316,
                4-2-319
122-15          4-7-202
                15-2-101 to
                15-2-104,
                15-2-202,
123-15          15-2-301,
                15-2-402,
                15-2-502,
                15-5-103 
11-16           12-4-809
                17-3-302,
17-16           17-3-304,
                17-5-203,
                17-5-204
19-16           12-4-808
                18-2-103,
20-16           18-2-105,
                18-16-303
                18-1-101,
21-16           18-3-104,
                18-10-106,
                18-11-104
                4-2-203,
                4-2-304,
22-16           4-2-308,
                4-2-311,
                4-2-316
23-16           17-2-104,
                17-2-111
24-16           18-1-101,
                18-7-107
27-16           6-1-211
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
                18-7-107,
28-16           18-9-202,
                18-10-104 ,
                18-10-148,
                18-10-173
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
30-16           18-7-107,
                18-9-202,
                18-10-173
42-16           13-5-805,
                13-5-808
44-16           6-1-302,
                7-6-101
                6-2-101,
45-16           6-2-103,
                7-6-101
                6-1-202,
                6-1-207,
47-16           6-1-217,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
53-16           13-7-103
54-16           12-7-106
                18-5-102,
55-16           18-12-202,
                18-12-203,
                Art. 18 Appendix A
                5-1-506,
56-16           5-1-508,
                5-1-515
                17-6-301,
57-16           17-6-303,
                17-11-101
58-16           18-1-101,
                18-10-113
59-16           12-4-504
                11-16-201,
60-16           11-16-302,
                11-16-303
61-16           1-7-101
                4-2-315,
                4-2-316,
66-16           4-2-319,
                16-1-101,
                16-3-207
                4-1-103,
                4-2-203,
                4-2-301,
69-16           4-2-302,
                4-2-307,
                4-2-311,
                13-5-403,
                13-7-103
                1-1-102 to
                1-1-104,
                1-2-101,
                1-2-102,
                1-2-202,
                1-3-101 to
71-16           1-3-103,
                1-4-101 to
                1-4-105,
                1-5-102,
                1-6-101,
                1-6-102,
                1-8-101 to
                1-8-104
74-16           18-10-161
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
                18-10-119 to
                18-10-121,
                18-10-123 to
                18-10-125,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
                18-10-134 to
                18-10-138,
                18-10-141 to
75-16           18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-156,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-161,
                18-10-163,
                18-10-166 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173,
                18-10-174
77-16           18-10-144
78-16           13-5-813
79-16           8-3-206
80-16           4-11-114
81-16           4-11-115
                18-1-101,
                18-3-104,
                18-4-106,
                18-10-136 to
                18-10-138,
                18-10-141 to
                18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
83-16           18-10-156,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-161,
                18-10-163,
                18-10-166 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173,
                18-10-174
85-16           18-2-103
                5-3-201,
86-16           5-3-203 to
                5-3-205
                12-1-301,
90-16           12-1-302,
                12-1-304 to
                12-1-308
92-16           4-7-303
95-16           13-1-107,
                13-1-108
                18-1-101,
                18-3-104,
                18-4-106,
                18-11-123,
                18-11-125 to
96-16           18-11-131,
                18-11-133 to
                18-11-141,
                18-11-143 to
                18-11-155,
                18-11-158 to
                18-11-165
2-17            4-10-401 to
                4-10-406
3-17            17-1-101,
                18-2-303
6-17            4-2-307
                8-1-101 to
                8-1-103,
                8-1-105 to
                8-1-108,
                8-2-101,
8-17            8-2-102,
                8-2-104 to
                8-2-107,
                8-2-109 to
                8-2-115,
                8-2-118 to
                8-2-121
                4-2-307,
                17-5-401,
10-17           18-14-301 to
                18-14-303,
                Art. 18 Appendix A
15-17           16-1-101
16-17           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                18-5-102,
                18-10-109 to
                18-10-111,
                18-10-113,
                18-10-115,
                18-10-116,
                18-10-118 to
                18-10-121,
                18-10-123 to
                18-10-125,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
                18-10-134 to
17-17           18-10-138,
                18-10-141 to
                18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-156,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-161,
                18-10-163,
                18-10-166 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173,
                18-10-174
18-17           7-1-101,
                7-5-102
20-17           18-5-102
21-17           18-10-144
                13-1-106,
                13-2-205,
23-17           13-5-702,
                13-6-105,
                16-4-303,
                16-4-401
24-17           16-3-201,
                16-3-202
                18-5-102,
26-17           18-6-103,
                18-9-402
46-17           4-5-101
47-17           4-5-101
48-17           4-6-106,
                4-6-108
50-17           18-15-104
53-17           18-16-202
                6-1-202,
                6-1-205,
                6-1-207,
58-17           6-1-217,
                6-1-302,
                6-1-303,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
                12-4-101,
                12-4-402 to
59-17           12-4-406,
                12-4-501,
                12-4-505
                6-2-101,
62-17           6-2-103,
                7-6-101
64-17           18-2-204,
                18-4-203
                4-2-316,
                16-3-206,
                16-4-103,
                16-4-201,
                16-4-202,
                17-3-201,
                17-3-301,
                17-4-201,
                17-4-202,
65-17           18-1-101,
                18-2-202,
                18-10-110,
                18-10-118,
                18-11-108,
                18-17-102,
                18-17-201,
                18-17-202,
                18-17-204,
                18-17-205
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-9-202,
                18-10-103 to
                18-10-106,
                18-10-108 to
                18-10-111,
                18-10-113,
                18-10-115,
                18-10-116,
                18-10-118 to
                18-10-121,
                18-10-123 to
                18-10-125,
67-17           18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
                18-10-134 to
                18-10-138,
                18-10-141 to
                18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-156,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-161,
                18-10-163,
                18-10-166 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173,
                18-10-174
68-17           4-5-101
75-17           18-6-103
76-17           18-2-103,
                18-2-104
78-17           5-1-203,
                5-1-515
                4-2-313 to
81-17           4-2-316,
                4-2-319
                2-1-101 to
                2-1-103,
                2-1-201,
                2-1-301,
83-17           2-1-503 to
                2-1-505,
                2-1-603,
                2-3-102,
                2-3-104
84-17           18-5-102,
                18-10-175
85-17           18-4-104
                17-5-501,
92-17           17-5-502,
                17-5-901
                5-3-103,
                5-3-301,
                6-6-101 to
                6-6-103,
95-17           6-6-201 to
                6-6-207,
                6-6-301 to
                6-6-307,
                8-2-122
                12-4-101,
                12-4-501,
96-17           12-4-503,
                12-4-504,
                12-4-905,
                12-4-907
98-17           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
100-17          4-7-204
101-17          18-6-103
2-18            2-2-101,
                2-2-102
                18-1-101,
3-18            18-5-102,
                18-6-103
4-18            18-2-204,
                18-4-201
8-18            12-4-802,
                12-4-808
13-18           18-2-103
                17-5-207,
15-18           17-5-501,
                17-5-502
                3-2-207,
18-18           3-2-208 ,
                18-2-101,
                18-16-304
                18-1-101,
19-18           18-16-201,
                18-16-203
21-18           18-2-103
23-18           17-2-107
24-18           18-10-144
25-18           18-6-103
27-18           17-2-108
                17-3-203,
28-18           17-3-303,
                17-4-203
                18-8-301,
30-18           18-8-302,
                18-8-303 ,
                18-10-161
32-18           18-17-204
34-18           18-1-101,
                18-5-102
50-18           12-4-101,
                12-4-801
51-18           8-1-101,
                8-3-206
53-18           8-3-101,
                13-2-102
                6-1-203,
                6-1-207,
                6-1-208,
                6-1-216,
56-18           6-1-217,
                6-1-220,
                6-1-303,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
                6-2-101,
59-18           6-2-103,
                7-6-101
                6-2-101,
60-18           6-2-103,
                7-6-101
64-18           17-2-101
65-18           11-14-101,
                11-14-304
66-18           5-1-506,
                5-1-508
67-18           18-4-106,
                18-4-203
68-18           2-3-202
70-18           12-4-801,
                18-4-104
                11-16-101,
71-18           11-16-401,
                11-16-402,
                11-16-404
                18-1-101,
                18-5-102,
                18-10-167,
74-18           18-11-142 to
                18-11-155,
                18-11-158 to
                18-11-165
                12-4-503 to
75-18           12-4-505,
                12-4-905,
                12-4-908
76-18           4-2-318,
                4-2-319
77-18           18-10-144
                17-1-101,
                17-2-102,
                17-3-201,
                17-3-301,
                17-3-403,
                17-4-201,
78-18           17-4-202,
                17-5-901,
                17-5-902,
                17-6-103,
                17-6-111,
                17-6-113,
                17-11-101
                7-1-101,
                7-1-105,
                7-2-104,
                7-2-107,
                7-3-101 to
                7-3-103,
                7-4-101 to
                7-4-104,
                7-4-106,
                7-4-107,
                7-5-101,
                7-5-102,
80-18           7-5-106,
                7-5-107,
                7-5-109,
                7-5-110,
                7-6-101 to
                7-6-105,
                7-6-107,
                7-7-101 to
                7-7-103,
                7-7-105,
                8-2-103 to
                8-2-114,
                8-2-117 to
                8-2-121
86-18           18-14-301,
                Art. 18 Appendix A
87-18           17-11-209
88-18           18-10-166
                18-1-101,
                18-2-101,
                18-4-106,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-7-107,
                18-9-202,
                8-9-302,
                18-9-402,
89-18           18-10-164 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173,
                18-10-174,
                18-11-156 to
                18-11-165,
                18-12-103,
                18-13-206
                12-4-101,
                12-4-102,
                12-4-206,
90-18           12-4-402 to
                12-4-404,
                12-4-406,
                12-4-501
91-18           7-11-103
93-18           11-6-101
                17-2-101,
94-18           17-5-201,
                17-5-207
95-18           12-4-801
98-18           4-11-116
101-18          17-2-101,
                17-6-110
2-19            17-11-209
5-19            11-6-103
6-19            18-2-205
7-19            18-5-102,
                18-10-144
9-19            17-8-1001,
                17-8-1002
10-19           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
12-19           6-4-103
13-19           17-5-201,
                17-5-207
14-19           18-1-101,
                18-4-106
17-19           13-5-403,
                13-5-405
18-19           13-5-813
                8-2-104,
                8-2-106,
19-19           8-2-109,
                8-2-114,
                8-2-120
20-19           18-5-102
24-19           6-1-308,
                8-2-110
28-19           4-7-202
39-19           13-5-808
40-19           13-7-103
41-19           13-5-805,
                13-5-813
42-19           4-11-121
43-19           4-5-101
44-19           4-4-101
47-19           4-2-316
49-19           17-2-107
                13-5-813,
                18-4-106,
54-19           18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-10-176
55-19           1-9-101 to 1-9-106
56-19           8-2-117
                1-2-101,
                1-2-102,
                3-11-101 to
57-19           3-11-108,
                3-11-201 to
                3-11-205,
                3-11-207 to
                3-11-209
                6-1-202,
                6-1-208,
                6-1-302,
58-19           6-1-303,
                6-1-307,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
59-19           17-3-203,
                17-3-303
60-19           6-1-201,
                6-1-207
                6-2-101,
61-19           6-2-103,
                7-6-101
62-19           18-1-101
                17-1-101,
                17-2-101,
                17-2-108,
68-19           17-6-301 to
                17-6-303,
                17-6-305,
                17-6-306,
                17-11-101
69-19           6-1-301,
                6-1-305
70-19           6-1-303,
                6-2-101
75-19           8-3-301,
                18-1-101
                13-3-101,
                13-3-106,
                13-3-201,
                13-3-205,
                13-3-304,
                18-1-101,
                18-2-202,
                18-4-106,
76-19           18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-7-107,
                18-10-162,
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176,
                18-13-206
77-19            
78-19           13-2-301
80-19           4-2-401
82-19           4-7-204
                11-16-101,
                11-16-201 to
                11-16-203,
83-19           11-16-205,
                11-16-303,
                11-16-402,
                11-16-404
85-19           6-1-201
                11-10-101,
                11-10-104,
87-19           11-10-105,
                11-10-108,
                11-10-110,
                11-10-111
88-19           4-6-102,
                4-6-105
                11-13A-101 to
89-19           11-13A-104,
                18-12-601,
                18-12-602
90-19           13-5-813 ,
                13-5-815
                3-11-102,
94-19           3-11-103,
                3-11-108,
                7-6-101
95-19           13-5-816
                18-4-106,
                18-10-142,
97-19           18-11-129 to
                18-11-131,
                18-11-133 to
                18-11-165
1-20            12-3-108
2-20            13-1-105,
                13-3-502
5-20            18-16-305
6-20            18-4-106
7-20            18-9-202
8-20            4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                3-5-102 to
10-20           3-5-104,
                3-5-107,
                3-5-109
11-20           12-3-109
12-20           17-5-201,
                17-5-207
13-20           18-14-301,
                Art. 18 Appendix A
14-20           18-14-301,
                Art. 18 Appendix A
                18-1-101,
                18-2-101,
                18-3-104,
                18-4-106,
                18-10-107 to
                18-10-111,
                18-10-113,
                18-10-115,
                18-10-116,
                18-10-118 to
                18-10-121,
                18-10-123 to
                18-10-125,
16-20           18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
                18-10-134 to
                18-10-139,
                18-10-141 to
                18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-157,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176
                4-2-301 to
17-20           4-2-316,
                4-2-318,
                4-2-319
18-20           4-2-313
20-20           7-5-104
22-20           17-2-101
43-20           3-21-105,
                3-21-107
                6-1-202,
                6-1-208,
                6-1-209,
44-20           6-1-214,
                6-1-216,
                6-1-217,
                6-1-302,
                6-1-303
45-20           11-13A-102,
                11-13A-103
48-20           7-6-101
49-20           6-2-104
51-20           4-2-313
52-20           18-11-137
                5-1-503,
54-20           5-1-505,
                5-3-103,
                5-6-102
55-20           5-1-506,
                5-1-508
58-20           6-1-202
58-20           6-1-202
                15-2-101 to
                15-2-105,
60-20           15-2-202,
                15-2-301,
                15-2-402,
                15-2-502
                13-5-107,
                13-5-108,
                13-5-306,
61-20           13-5-806,
                13-5-809,
                13-5-811,
                13-5-812 
62-20           12-3-110
63-20           11-6-104
                4-2-307,
                17-5-201,
                17-5-207,
                17-5-401,
64-20           17-5-901,
                17-7-301 to
                17-7-305,
                17-11-102,
                18-14-601 to
                18-14-604
                16-3-212,
67-20           16-4-302,
                16-4-303
                4-5-101,
                18-1-101,
                18-3-104,
                18-4-106,
                18-10-115,
                18-10-116,
                18-10-118 to
                18-10-121,
                18-10-123 to
                18-10-125,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
68-20           18-10-130,
                18-10-134 to
                18-10-139,
                18-10-141 to
                18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-157,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176,
                18-13-206
                18-1-101,
                18-2-203,
                18-4-106,
                18-10-132 to
                18-10-139,
                18-10-141 to
                18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-157,
69-20           18-10-159 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176,
                18-11-124 to
                18-11-131,
                18-11-133 to
                18-11-165
                5-3-307,
70-20           5-4-206,
                5-5-205,
                5-6-207
71-20           6-4-101,
                6-4-105
72-20           11-17-101 to
                11-17-106
73-20           18-4-104
78-20           17-11-209
                13-5-301,
79-20           13-5-303 to
                13-5-307
80-20           13-5-601 to
                13-5-605
81-20           18-1-101,
                18-10-141
82-20           18-11-150
                13-5-110,
                13-5-113,
85-20           13-5-404,
                13-5-813 to
                13-5-815
87-20           12-4-101,
                18-1-101
88-20           18-3-308,
                18-3-309
                12-4-101,
                12-4-103,
                12-4-201,
                12-4-202,
                12-4-206,
                12-4-301,
                12-4-302,
                12-4-304 to
                12-4-311,
                12-4-312,
                12-4-402,
                12-4-403,
89-20           12-4-406,
                12-4-502,
                12-4-504,
                12-4-604,
                12-4-609,
                12-4-611,
                12-4-802,
                12-4-808,
                12-4-901,
                12-4-905 to
                12-4-907,
                12-4-910,
                12-4-912,
                12-4-913
                18-1-101,
                18-3-104,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-10-122 to
                18-10-125,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
                18-10-130,
                18-10-132 to
90-20           18-10-139,
                18-10-141 to
                18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-157,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176
91-20           4-7-204
93-20           7-1-101
94-20           12-7-107
                15-3-101,
95-20           15-3-102,
                15-3-104
97-20           3-23-101 to
                3-23-110
                13-5-102,
                13-5-403,
98-20           13-5-404,
                13-5-808,
                13-5-813 to
                13-5-817
99-20           18-14-603
                6-2-101,
101-20          6-2-103,
                7-6-101
                18-6-103,
104-20          18-8-301,
                18-9-402,
                18-10-141
105-20          4-2-317
106-20          8-2-123
                8-2-104,
1-21            8-2-106,
                8-2-110,
                8-2-115
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
                18-10-112,
                18-10-113,
                18-10-115,
                18-10-116,
                18-10-118 to
                18-10-125,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
                18-10-130,
2-21            18-10-132 to
                18-10-139,
                18-10-141 to
                18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-157,
                18-10-159 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176
7-21            18-10-142
11-21           17-11-209,
                18-2-103
14-21           18-4-701
15-21           11-13A-102
16-21           6-2-101,
                6-2-103
18-21           4-11-101
19-21           9-1-703 to
                9-1-712
                18-4-106,
21-21           18-11-133 to
                18-11-165
24-21           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
25-21           4-11-106
26-21           9-1-707
27-21           13-3-205,
                13-3-306
28-21           17-2-107,
                17-2-110
30-21           18-1-101
31-21           3-18-101 to
                3-18-113
42-21           4-11-122,
                4-11-123
43-21           13-4-105,
                13-4-107
                6-1-202,
                6-1-208,
                6-1-212,
                6-1-214,
45-21           6-1-217,
                6-1-303,
                6-1-307,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
46-21           6-2-101,
                6-2-103
                18-6-103,
47-21           18-10-173 to
                18-10-176
48-21           18-10-104
49-21           18-11-104
59-21           12-3-103
60-21           1-8-105
61-21           18-3-201
62-21           17-8-901
63-21           18-2-101,
                18-13-103
                17-5-401,
                17-5-901,
65-21           17-7-301,
                17-7-303,
                18-14-602
                18-1-101,
66-21           18-3-303,
                18-3-306
68-21           12-4-501,
                12-4-801
                11-14-202 to
71-21           11-14-204,
                11-14-304
72-21           8-2-116 to
                8-2-123
74-21           17-4-101
75-21           17-2-107
79-21           5-1-506
80-21           16-5-105,
                17-1-101
82-21           11-16-402
                17-5-207,
85-21           17-5-501,
                17-5-502,
                17-5-901
86-21           4-2-313
87-21           11-2-206
93-21           17-5-201,
                17-5-207
94-21           17-5-207,
                18-14-601
98-21           3-11-103,
                3-11-104
99-21           17-4-101
100-21          5-1-203
102-21          18-10-124
                18-5-102,
                18-10-140 to
                18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-157,
103-21          18-10-159 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176
                18-1-101,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-10-158 to
104-21          18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176
105-21          6-4-105
106-21          18-13-206
108-21          12-7-108
                12-6-201 to
                12-6-207,
                12-6-301 to
109-21          12-6-305,
                12-6-401,
                12-7-101 to
                12-7-107
110-21          17-8-705
111-21          4-11-114
112-21          4-11-114
114-21          13-5-809
115-21          4-1-103
116-21          18-15-102,
                18-15-104
117-21          4-2-307
118-21          4-7-204
                6-2-101,
3-22            6-2-103,
                7-6-101
4-22            4-11-102
5-22            11-2-501 to
                11-2-506
8-22            18-2-103,
                18-11-156
9-22            6-1-301
13-22           4-3-104
                3-16-101 to
16-22           3-16-112,
                7-6-101
18-22           4-11-125
20-22           2-2-101,
                2-2-102
22-22           4-7-204,
                4-7-205
                6-2-101,
24-22           6-2-103,
                7-6-101
25-22           1-10-101 to
                1-10-104
26-22           13-6-103
27-22           5-1-408
30-22           1-11-101 to
                1-11-108
                17-2-101,
31-22           18-1-101,
                18-10-113
33-22           18-4-106,
                18-10-128
47-22           4-4-101
49-22           4-7-205
50-22           4-11-106
                6-1-202,
                6-1-207,
                6-1-208,
                6-1-211,
51-22           6-1-217,
                6-1-303,
                6-1-307,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-105
52-22           6-2-101
57-22           18-1-101,
                18-10-146
60-22           2-3-202
61-22           5-1-506
62-22           9-1-703
                18-4-501,
63-22           18-4-601,
                18-4-701
                12-6-101,
                12-6-201 to
70-22           12-6-207,
                12-6-301 to
                12-6-305,
                12-6-401
                18-13-401,
71-22           18-13-402,
                18-13-405
                17-1-101,
73-22           17-2-101,
                17-3-502,
                18-1-101
75-22           11-2-502
                11-1-102,
76-22           11-9A-101 to
                11-9A-105
77-22           3-26-101 to
                3-26-107
                15-4-501 to
79-22           15-4-505,
                15-5-102
80-22           14-3-101
                18-5-102,
                18-10-117 to
                18-10-125,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
                18-10-130,
81-22           18-10-132 to
                18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176
82-22           17-2-108
88-22           17-2-101
92-22           18-13-206
93-22           3-2-202
1-23            18-2-203
3-23            18-9-402
                13-5-813,
                17-11-203,
6-23            18-1-101,
                18-3-104,
                18-10-122
8-23            6-1-202
                16-1-101,
                16-2-101,
10-23           17-4-101,
                17-6-401 to
                17-6-406
13-23           11-11-101 to
                11-11-108
                18-4-106,
                18-10-114 to
                18-10-125,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
                18-10-130,
15-23           18-10-132 to
                18-10-144,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176
                7-1-101,
                7-4-106,
                7-5-106,
16-23           7-5-112,
                7-6-104,
                7-6-105,
                7-6-107
19-23           12-7-109
21-23           18-10-142
22-23           18-2-106,
                18-2-107
                3-18-103,
23-23           3-18-107,
                3-18-108,
                3-18-113
25-23           1-12-101 to
                1-12-112
36-23           13-4-105
37-23           13-5-805
38-23           4-6-105
39-23           4-6-107,
                4-6-108
                4-3A-101,
40-23           4-11-111,
                4-11-124
41-23           4-11-106
42-23           4-4-101
                6-1-106,
                6-1-202,
                6-1-208,
                6-1-217,
                6-1-218,
                6-1-302,
                6-1-303,
44-23           6-1-307,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-103,
                6-2-105,
                6-4-101,
                6-4-105,
                7-6-101,
                12-1-402
45-23           12-3-103
50-23           4-2-317,
                4-2-318
                17-1-101,
52-23           17-5-201,
                17-5-501,
                17-5-502
                18-1-101,
                18-5-102,
53-23           18-10-164,
                18-11-156,
                18-11-157
54-23           4-2-311
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
56-23           18-10-143,
                18-10-144,
                18-10-167,
                18-11-133 to
                18-11-165
                3-6-101 to
57-23           3-6-108,
                4-11-126
                5-1-506,
58-23           5-1-508 to
                5-1-510
                15-3-102,
                18-1-101,
61-23           15-3-102,
                18-3-104,
                18-4-106
                17-4-101,
                18-1-101,
                18-2-202,
                18-4-106,
                18-10-131 to
                18-10-144,
62-23           18-10-146 to
                18-10-168,
                18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176,
                18-17-103,
                18-17-202
                3-2-207,
                17-1-101,
                17-2-101,
                17-5-201,
                17-5-207,
64-23           17-5-401,
                17-7-901 to
                17-7-909,
                17-11-209,
                18-14-401,
                18-16-305
                5-1-506,
                5-3-103,
67-23           5-5-102,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-103,
                7-6-101
68-23           6-5-102
69-23           18-2-106 to
                18-2-108
73-23           17-4-101
                18-4-106,
                18-6-103,
                18-10-146 to
                18-10-168,
77-23           18-10-170,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176,
                18-11-134
79-23           8-3-201 to
                8-3-206
82-23           6-1-303
                18-3-104,
83-23           18-3-105,
                18-10-142,
                18-10-176
                3-2-205,
                3-2-207,
                3-14-101 ,
                4-2-306,
                4-2-307,
                13-5-112,
                13-7-101,
                13-7-103,
                13-7-104,
                17-2-101,
                17-3-203,
                17-3-303,
                17-5-201 to
84-23           17-5-203,
                17-5-401,
                17-5-403,
                17-5-901,
                17-6-113,
                17-7-801 to
                17-7-810,
                17-11-209,
                18-2-101,
                18-2-105,
                18-9-101 to
                18-9-108,
                18-16-303,
                18-16-305
85-23           18-2-203
                18-1-101,
88-23           18-2-204,
                18-2-301
89-23           4-2-309
91-23           4-2-313
                17-7-1101,
                18-3-309,
92-23           18-3-313,
                18-9-402,
                18-9-403
                5-3-103,
                5-3-301,
93-23           5-3-307,
                5-4-102,
                5-4-201,
                5-5-201
94-23           18-10-114
                12-4-501,
                12-4-504,
1-24            12-4-702,
                12-4-901,
                12-4-912
2-24            18-10-161
                18-1-101,
                18-2-105,
                18-7-102,
                18-7-106,
                18-7-107,
3-24            18-10-126 to
                18-10-128,
                18-10-130,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176
                6-1-101,
                6-1-102,
                6-1-104,
                6-1-105,
                6-1-110,
                6-1-201 to
                6-1-203,
4-24            6-1-206,
                6-1-208 to
                6-1-210,
                6-1-215,
                6-1-302,
                6-2-101,
                6-2-103 to
                6-2-105
11-24           9-1-601
                17-7-1101,
                18-3-309,
14-24           18-3-312,
                18-3-313,
                18-9-402,
                18-9-403
16-24           18-2-207
                18-1-101,
                18-4-106,
17-24           18-10-124,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128
18-24           3-2-102
19-24           18-10-176
20-24           18-10-127
                1-2-101,
                1-9-101 to
                1-9-103,
                1-9-201 to
                1-9-203,
                1-9-301,
21-24           1-9-401,
                3-11-103,
                3-11-108 to
                3-11-110,
                3-11-202 to
                3-11-204,
                3-11-206 to
                3-11-208
                15-2-101 to
                15-2-105,
25-24           15-2-202,
                15-2-301,
                15-2-402,
                15-2-502
26-24           18-2-108
                18-1-101,
29-24           18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
                18-14-303
31-24           5-1-203
                16-3-207,
44-24           16-5-102,
                17-11-101
45-24           13-5-805
46-24           13-4-105,
                13-4-107
47-24           4-4-101
49-24           6-6-103
50-24           5-1-506
                6-1-207,
51-24           6-1-302,
                6-2-103,
                7-6-101
52-24           4-11-114
53-24           13-5-803,
                13-5-813
                18-2-203,
                18-10-132,
57-24           18-10-133,
                18-11-124,
                18-13-206
59-24           8-1-108
                8-1-101,
                8-1-102,
60-24           8-2-101,
                8-2-107 to
                8-2-123
                18-4-106,
63-24           18-6-103,
                18-11-134
70-24           9-1-713
71-24           11-12A-101
                4-11-124,
                13-5-603,
                13-5-813,
                13-6-103,
                17-1-101,
                17-2-101,
                17-2-102,
                17-3-201,
                17-3-301,
                17-3-302,
                17-3-401,
                17-4-201,
                17-4-202,
                17-6-104,
                17-6-110,
                17-6-111,
                17-6-307,
                17-6-604,
                17-7-305,
                17-7-604,
                17-7-801,
                17-7-905,
                17-7-1002,
                17-9-208,
                17-11-207,
                17-12-101 to
                17-12-116,
72-24           18-1-101,
                18-3-104,
                18-4-106,
                18-4-301,
                18-4-401,
                18-4-501,
                18-4-601,
                18-4-701,
                18-4-801,
                18-4-901,
                18-4-1001,
                18-5-102,
                18-9-103,
                18-9-303,
                18-9-402,
                18-10-106,
                18-10-124,
                18-10-125,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128,
                18-11-104,
                18-11-117,
                18-11-133 to
                18-11-165,
                18-12-203,
                18-12-701,
                18-14-303,
                18-14-503
73-24           4-7-204
74-24           17-4-101,
                18-2-202
                3-2-203,
                3-2-205,
                17-2-101,
                17-7-604,
                18-2-101,
                18-2-103,
75-24           18-2-105,
                18-8-102 to
                18-8-104,
                18-8-301 to
                18-8-303,
                18-16-203,
                18-16-303
76-24           18-10-126
                11-16-101,
77-24           11-16-201,
                11-16-302,
                11-16-303
80-24           13-5-813
                18-1-101,
                18-5-102,
                18-6-103,
81-24           18-10-129,
                18-10-171,
                18-10-173 to
                18-10-176
82-24           4-2-318
84-24           13-7-103
85-24           5-1-212
91-24           18-10-141
                3-1-101 to
                3-1-110,
                3-2-101 to
                3-2-106,
                3-2-201 to
                3-2-208,
                3-3-101 to
                3-3-111,
                3-4-101,
                3-5-101 to
                3-5-110,
                3-6-101 to
                3-6-108,
                3-7-101 to
                3-7-103,
                3-8-101 to
                3-8-110,
                3-9-101 to
                3-9-103,
                3-10-101,
                3-10-102,
                3-11-101 to
                3-11-110,
                3-11-201 to
                3-11-209,
                3-12-101 to
                3-12-112,
94-24           3-13-101 to
                3-13-110,
                3-14-101,
                3-15-101,
                3-15-102,
                3-16-101 to
                3-16-112,
                3-17-101,
                3-17-201 to
                3-17-219,
                3-18-101 to
                3-18-113,
                3-19-101,
                3-20-101 to
                3-20-103,
                3-21-101 to 3-20-111,
                3-22-101,
                3-22-201 to
                3-22-219,
                3-23-101 to
                3-23-110,
                3-24-101 to
                3-24-103,
                3-25-101 to
                3-25-103,
                3-26-101 to
                3-26-107,
                4-11-118
96-24           17-4-101
97-24           18-5-102,
                18-10-157
98-24           8-2-106
                2-1-103,
                2-1-401,
1-25            2-1-402,
                2-1-506,
                7-6-101
                17-7-301,
                17-7-1201 to
                17-7-1208,
2-25            17-11-102,
                18-5-102,
                18-10-125,
                18-10-127,
                18-10-128
5-25            18-10-173
6-25            12-4-801,
                18-4-104
                18-1-101,
                18-5-102,
13-25           18-6-103,
                18-10-105 to
                18-10-171
14-25           17-1-101,
                17-6-502
15-25           18-3-304
16-25           18-11-104,
                18-11-140
17-25           4-7-406
18-25           3-2-205,
                18-16-303
20-25           18-10-127,
                18-10-176
21-25           18-4-202
23-25           3-26-103,
                3-26-104
24-25           18-1-101,
                18-12-103
                2-1-103,
                2-1-401,
                2-1-402,
                2-1-507,
                3-27-101 to
                3-27-107,
                6-2-103,
                7-6-101,
                12-4-101 to
                12-4-103,
                12-4-105,
                12-4-201 to
                12-4-203,
                12-4-205,
                12-4-206,
                12-4-301 to
                12-4-308,
                12-4-310,
                12-4-311,
                12-4-402 to
25-25           12-4-406,
                12-4-501 to
                12-4-505,
                12-4-601,
                12-4-602,
                12-4-604,
                12-4-605,
                12-4-608,
                12-4-609,
                12-4-611,
                12-4-701 to
                12-4-708,
                12-4-806 to
                12-4-808,
                12-4-901,
                12-4-902,
                12-4-905 to
                12-4-907,
                12-4-910 to
                12-4-913,
                12-4-1001
26-25           17-2-101
                18-1-101,
29-25   ,    18-4-106,
                18-10-172 to
                18-10-176
30-25           18-14-501 to
                18-14-503
                13-5-813,
31-25           17-2-101,
                17-7-604,
                18-8-301
42-25           4-6-106
43-25           13-5-805
44-25           13-4-105
                3-18-107,
                6-1-220,
47-25           6-1-302,
                6-2-103,
                7-6-101
                18-8-302,
50-25           18-10-113,
                Art. 18 Appendix A
58-25           18-10-141
                5-1-205,
                5-1-505,
59-25           5-1-506,
                5-1-508,
                5-4-103,
                5-5-103
63-25           18-11-140
                
 
 
