FREDERICK COUNTY, MARYLAND
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2025 S-43 Supplement:
Local legislation current through Bill No. 25-09, passed September 2, 2025
State legislation current through May, 2012
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS OF
FREDERICK COUNTY, MARYLAND
Jessica Fitzwater
County Executive
 
Brad Young, President
Kavonté Duckett, Vice President
Mason Carter
Jerry Donald
M.C. Keegan-Ayer
Renee Knapp
Steve McKay
County Council
 
John Peterson
Chief Administrative Officer
 
Bryon C, Black
County Attorney
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 04-04-348
THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS ORDINANCE IS APRIL 20, 2004
   Re:   An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting the Frederick County Code, 2004;
Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances not Included Therein, Except as
Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code of
Ordinances; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; and Providing When
This Ordinance Shall Become Effective
RECITALS
   Whereas, by Ordinance No. 80-8-160, the Frederick County Code, 1979, was
adopted and enacted, and
   Whereas, there have been numerous amendments to the Frederick County Code
since that time, and
   Whereas, the Board of County Commissioners of Frederick County, Maryland,
believes that recodification of the 1979 Code is warranted to bring he Code up
to date.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COUNTY
COMMISSIONERS OF FREDERICK COUNTY, MARYLAND:
   Section 1.   That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapter 1-1 to 1-24
each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Frederick County Code,
2004" and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive
ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances of
the County passed on or before June 17, 2003, to the extent provided in Section
2 hereof.
   Section 2.   That all provisions of such Code shall be in fill force and
effect from and after the 20th day of April, 2004, and all ordinances of a
general and permanent nature of Frederick County, Maryland, enacted on final
passage on or before June 17, 2003, and not included in such Code or recognized
and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after
the 20th day of April, 2004, except as hereinafter provided.
   Section 3.   That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not
affect the following:
   (a)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this ordinance;
   (b)   Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the
County, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the County, or any evidence
of the County's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the
County;
   (c)   The administrative ordinances of the County, not in conflict or
inconsistent with the provisions of such Code;
   (d)   Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the County;
   (e)   Any appropriation ordinance;
   (f)   Any right or franchise granted by the Board of County Commissioners of
the County to any person, firm or corporation;
   (g)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating,
opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the
County;
   (h)   Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any
street in the County;
   (i)   Any ordinance zoning or rezoning property;
   (j)   Any resolution not embodied in such Code;
   (k)   Any ordinance enacted after June 17, 2003;
nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an
ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance.
   Section 4.   That any and all additions and amendments to such Code when
passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of County
Commissioners to make the same a part thereof shall be deemed to be
incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Frederick County Code,
2004" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments.
   Section 5.   That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of
the Board of County Commissioners, preserved in looseleaf form or in such other
form as the Board of County Commissioners may consider most expedient. It shall
be the express duty of the Administrative Officer to the Board of County
Commissioners, or someone authorized by said officer, to insert in their
designated places all amendments and all ordinances or resolutions which
indicate the intention of the Board of County Commissioners to make the same a
part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form,
and to extract from such Code all provisions which from time to time maybe
repealed by the Board of County Commissioners. This copy of such Code shall be
available for all persons desiring to examine the same.
   Section 6.   That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith, are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed.
   Section 7.   Whenever in the Code adopted by this ordinance or in any other
ordinance or resolution of the County or in any rule, regulation or order
promulgated by any officer or agency of the County under authority duly vested
in him or if any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to
do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
such Code or any other ordinance or resolution of the County or such rule,
regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred
dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
   Except where otherwise provided, every day any violation of such Code or any
other ordinance or resolution of the County or such rule, regulation or order
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED AND ORDAINED BY THE AUTHORITY AFORESAID, that this
Ordinance shall take effect on the 20th day of April, 2004.
   The undersigned hereby certifies that the aforegoing Ordinance was approved
and adopted on the 20th day of April, 2004.
ATTEST:                     BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
                              OF FREDERICK COUNTY, MARYLAND
______________________________         By: _________________________________
Douglas D. Browning, County Manager    John L. Thompson, Jr., President
CHARTER OF FREDERICK COUNTY, MARYLAND
(Adopted by the voters of Frederick County, Maryland, Tuesday, November 6,
2022.)
PREAMBLE
ARTICLE 1.
General Provisions
   
101.   Body Corporate and Politic
   
102.   Exercise of Powers
   
103.   Name and Boundaries
   
104.   Definitions
ARTICLE 2.
County Council
   
201.   Composition
   
202.   Powers
   
203.   Council to Act as a Body
   
204.   Election
   
205.   Qualifications
   
206.   Term of Office
   
207.   Salary
   
208.   Forfeiture of Office
   
209.   Vacancies
   
210.   Officers
   
211.   Investigations by the Council
   
212.   Non-interference
   
213.   Council Assistance
   
214.   Redistricting
ARTICLE 3.
Legislative Process
   
301.   Legislative Powers
   
302.   Legislative Sessions
   
303.   Non-legislative Sessions
   
304.   Legislative Procedure
   
305.   Enactment of Legislation
   
306.   Executive Veto
   
307.   Effective Date of Laws
   
308.   Referendum
   
309.   Publication of Laws
   
310.   Compilation of Laws
ARTICLE 4
Executive
   
401.   Composition
   
402.   County Executive Powers and Duties
   
403.   Election of the County Executive
   
404.   Term of the County Executive
   
405.   Qualifications of the County Executive
   
406.   Compensation of the County Executive
   
407.   Forfeiture of Office by the Executive
   
408.   Vacancy in the Office of County Executive
   
409.   Temporary Absence
   
410.   Chief Administrative Officer
   
411.   County Attorney
   
412.   Appointment and Removal of Department Heads and Others
   
413.   Temporary Administrative Appointments
   
414.   Plan of Organization
ARTICLE 5.
Budget and Finance
   
501.   Establishment of Position of Director of Finance
   
502.   Fiscal Year and Tax Year
   
503.   Preparation of the County Budget
   
504.   Budget Message
   
505.   Public Budget Hearing
   
506.   Action on the Budget by the Council
   
507.   Tax Levy and Balanced Budget
   
508.   Borrowing Limitations
   
509.   Transfer of Appropriations
   
510.   Supplemental Appropriations
   
511.   Emergency Appropriations
   
512.   Lapsed Appropriations
   
513.   Amendment to Capital Budget after Adoption of the Budget
   
514.   Composition and Limitation upon County Funds
ARTICLE 6.
Land Use
   
601.   Adoption of Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
ARTICLE 7.
Miscellaneous
   
701.   Charter Amendments
   
702.   Termination of Charter
   
703.   Charter Review Commission
   
704.   Independent Auditor
   
705.   Right to Organize, Collectively Bargain, and Binding Arbitration for
Career Fire Fighters
ARTICLE 8
Transitional Provisions
   
801.   Nature of This Article
   
802.   Time Certain Articles Become Effective
   
803.   First Election
   
804.   Existing Laws
   
805.   Reference in State Constitution and Laws to County Commissioners
   
806.   Existing Officers and Employees
   
807.   Existing Members of Boards and Commissions
   
808.   Office of the County Commissioner Abolished
PREAMBLE
   We the citizens of Frederick County, Maryland, a body corporate and politic,
under the Constitution and general laws of the State of Maryland, in order to
establish a more dynamic, efficient, and responsive form of county government,
which shall be empowered by us to exercise greater local authority to govern
and be manifest in its scope to all, do adopt, ordain, and establish as our
instrument of government this Charter of Frederick County, Maryland.
ARTICLE 1.
General Provisions
101.   Body Corporate and Politic
   Frederick County as it now exists constitutes a body corporate and politic.
Under this Charter it shall have all the rights and powers of local self-
government and home rule as are now or may be provided or necessarily implied
by this Charter, the Maryland Constitution and laws of the State of Maryland.
102.   Exercise of Powers
   The powers provided in Section
101 of this Charter shall be exercised only by the County Executive, the County
Council and other officers, employees and agents of Frederick County, acting
under their respective authorities or under such other authorities as may be
provided by this Charter or by law.
103.    Name and Boundaries
   The corporate name shall be "Frederick County, Maryland," and it shall be so
designated in all actions and proceedings touching its rights, powers,
properties, liabilities, and duties. Its boundaries and County seat shall be
and remain as they are at the Effective Date of the Charter, unless otherwise
changed in accordance with law.
104.   Definitions
   (a)   The term "Agency" means any agency, department, office, board,
commission or administrative entity of the Frederick County Government.
   (b)   The term “Allowances” means the amount of money granted to an office
holder to meet the personal expenditure necessitated by the special
circumstances in which a duty is performed. It includes mileage reimbursement,
other travel expenses, and the cost of attending conferences and conventions
related to duties that are directly relevant to the office.
   (c)   The term "Bill" means any proposed act of the County Council resulting
in a law or ordinance. It may not mean a resolution that is not intended to
have the effect of law.
   (d)   The term "Budget" means the package of materials consisting of the
Operating Budget, the Capital Budget, the Capital Improvement Program, and the
budget message.
   (e)   The term "Capital Budget" means the plan to receive and expend funds
for capital projects during the next fiscal year.
   (f)   The term "Capital Improvement Program" means the plan to receive and
expend funds for capital projects during the next fiscal year and the next
succeeding five fiscal years.
   (g)   The term "Capital Project" means any physical betterment or
improvement; any preliminary studies and surveys related to a physical
betterment and improvement; and the acquisition, renovation, remodeling and
construction of any property for public use of a long-term or permanent nature,
including by a lease-purchase agreement.
   (h)   The term “Charter” means the Charter of Frederick County.
   (i)   The term “Council” means the County Council of Frederick County.
   (j)   The term "County" means Frederick County, Maryland.
   (k)   The term “Effective Date of the Charter” means the date provided in
Section
802 of this Charter.
   (l)   The term “Emergency” means:
      (1)   a situation that—
         (A)   requires immediate action to prevent, mitigate or respond to a
threat to public security or to the loss of life or property;
         (B)   has the appearance of being temporary and not of permanent
duration; and
         (C)   is unanticipated.
      (2)   The term “unanticipated” means that at least one of the following
traits characterizes the situation:
         (A)   Sudden, meaning quickly coming into being or not building up
over time;
         (B)   Urgent, meaning a pressing and compelling need requiring
immediate action; or
         (C)   Unforeseen, meaning not predicted or anticipated as an emerging
need.
   (m)   The term "Executive" means the County Executive of Frederick County,
Maryland.
   (n)   The term “Frederick County Government" means the officers, personnel,
departments, agencies, offices, boards, commissions, and other entities that
are subject collectively to the powers of local self-government and home rule
as are now or may be provided or necessarily implied by this Charter, Article
XI-A of the Maryland Constitution, and Article 25A of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
   (o)   The term “Fringe Benefits” means employment benefits that are
generally available to all salaried County employees and that do not
discriminate in favor of elected officials. Fringe Benefits may include group
life, health, hospitalization or medical insurance and retirement benefits.
   (p)   The term “Government” means the County Government of Frederick County.
   (q)   The terms "includes" or "including" mean, unless the context requires
otherwise, includes or including by way of illustration and not by way of
limitation.
   (r)   The term “may not” has a mandatory negative effect and establishes a
prohibition.
   (s)   The term "Operating Budget" means the plan to receive and expend funds
for charges incurred for operation, maintenance, interest, debt service
payments and other charges for the next fiscal year. It includes the plan to
raise and receive all manner of funds from all sources, including property
taxes, for current needs and for annual appropriations for current projects.
   (t)   The term “Salary” means the fixed amount of money paid annually to an
office holder for the duties performed.
   (u)   The term "State" means the State of Maryland.
ARTICLE 2.
County Council
201.   Composition
   There shall be a County Council of Frederick County, Maryland, composed of
seven council members.
202.   Powers
   All the legislative powers which the County may exercise under the Maryland
Constitution and laws of the State are vested in the Council, subject to those
powers retained by the people of the County as set forth in Section
308 of this Charter.
203.   Council to Act as a Body
   In all functions and deliberations, the Council shall act as a body. It
shall have no power to create standing committees or to delegate any of its
functions and duties to a smaller number of its members than the whole. The
Council may, however, appoint special ad hoc committees solely for the purpose
of inquiry and fact finding.
204.   Election
   (a)   The County shall be divided into five Council Districts, which shall
be designated as Council District 1, Council District 2, Council District 3,
Council District 4, and Council District 5. Until changed pursuant to Section
214 of this Charter, the boundaries of the districts shall be as provided in
subsection (f) of this section.
   (b)   From each of the five Council Districts, the voters shall nominate and
elect a council member who is a resident of the Council District.
   (c)   The voters of the entire County shall nominate and elect two council
members. Among the candidates so nominated, the two receiving the most votes
shall be elected.
   (d)   No candidate may run for office simultaneously under the provisions of
subsections (b) and (c) of this section.
   (e)   Beginning in 2014 and every four years thereafter, council members
shall be elected at the same time as members of the General Assembly are
elected in the manner provided by law.
   (f)   The composition of the five Council Districts is:
      (1)   Council District 1 consists of:
         (A)   Frederick County Election Districts 1, 3, 12, 14, 22 and 25;
         (B)   Frederick County Election District 7, Precincts 1 and 7;
         (C)   Frederick County Election District 23, Precinct 1;
         (D)   Frederick County Election District 24, Precincts 1 and 3.
      (2)   Council District 2 consists of:
         (A)   Frederick County Election District 7, Precincts 2, 3, 4, 5 and
6;
         (B)   Frederick County Election District 9, Precincts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7
and 9;
         (C)   Frederick County Election District 18, Precincts 1, 2 and 3.
      (3)   Council District 3 consists of:
         (A)   Frederick County Election District 2, Precincts 2, 4, 5, 8, 10,
13 and 17;
         (B)   Frederick County Election District 21, Precincts 2, 3, 4 and 8;
         (C)   Frederick County Election District 23, Precinct 2;
         (D)   Frederick County Election District 24, Precinct 2, 4, 5 and 6.
      (4)   Council District 4 consists of:
         (A)   Frederick County Election District 13, Precincts 1, 2 and 3;
         (B)   Frederick County Election District 2, Precincts 1, 3, 6, 7, 11,
14, 15, 16 and 18;
         (C)   Frederick County Election District 9, Precincts 6 and 8.
      (5)   Council District 5 consists of:
         (A)   Frederick County Election Districts 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 15, 16,
17, 19 and 20;
         (B)   Frederick County Election District 26, Precincts 1 and 2;
         (C)   Frederick County Election District 21, Precincts 1 and 7.
   (g)   The descriptions of the Council Districts in this section, including
all references to:
      (i)   election districts are to the geographical boundaries of the
election districts as they existed as of April 1, 2010; and
      (ii)   precincts are to the geographical boundaries of the precincts as
reviewed and certified by the local board of supervisors of elections or their
designees, before they were reported to the U.S. Bureau of the Census as part
of the 2010 Census Redistricting Data Program and as those precinct lines are
specifically indicated in the P.L. 94–171 data or shown on the P.L. 94–171
census block maps provided by the U.S. Bureau of the Census and as reviewed and
corrected by the Maryland Department of Planning.
(Ord. 21-06-006, 12-21-2021)
205.   Qualifications
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, each council
member shall be a citizen of the United States and, for at least one year
immediately preceding election or appointment, a resident and registered voter
of the County. A Council member elected or appointed to serve as a
representative of a Council District shall be a resident of the district for at
least one year prior to election or appointment.
   (b)   If a candidate for the office of County Council cannot have resided
and been a registered voter of the district in which he or she resides for at
least one year prior to election solely because the boundaries of the district
have changed as a result of redistricting as provided in Section
214 of this Charter, the candidate may be elected or appointed to represent the
district if he or she meets the following criteria:
      (1)   a citizen of the United States;
      (2)   a resident and registered voter of the County for at least one year
prior to election or appointment; and
      (3)   a resident and registered voter of the district for at least six
months.
   (c)   While serving as a council member, no council member may:
      (1)   Hold any other elected public office;
      (2)   Hold any other office of profit created by the Maryland
Constitution or laws of the State, pursuant to Article 35 of the Maryland
Declaration of Rights; or
      (3)   Be employed by a department or agency of the County government,
which is substantially controlled by the Executive or the Council.
206.   Term of Office
   (a)   A council member shall hold office for a term beginning at noon on the
first Monday of December next following the election of the council member and
ending at noon on the first Monday of December in the fourth year thereafter,
or until a successor is qualified.
   (b)   No council member may serve more than three consecutive terms.
   (c)   For purposes of the restriction imposed by subsection (b), a council
member who has been appointed to fill a vacancy and who has served two or more
years of that term shall be considered to have served one full term. An
appointed council member who serves less than a two-year term shall be
considered, solely for purposes of the subsection (b) restriction, not to have
served a term as a council member.
207.   Salary
   For the performance of public duties under this Charter, each council member
shall receive a Salary of $35,000 per annum. A council member may not accrue
annual leave or be entitled to any payment in lieu thereof. The Salary shall be
in full compensation for all services performed, but may not preclude
reasonable and necessary expenses as may be provided in the Budget. The Council
shall establish by ordinance a Compensation Review Commission every four years
to review the Council's Salary in accordance with the provisions of Article 25A
Subsection 5(AA) of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The Council may accept,
reduce or reject the Commission’s recommendation, but it may not increase any
recommended item.
(Ord. 21-03-003, 7-6-2021)
208.   Forfeiture of Office
   A council member shall immediately forfeit office upon:
      (1)   the council member ceasing to be a citizen of the United States, a
registered voter of the County, or a resident of the Council District to which
the council member was elected or appointed to represent;
      (2)   the council member being convicted of or pleading guilty to a
felony or a crime involving moral turpitude;
      (3)   the council member being granted probation before judgment for a
felony or a crime involving moral turpitude; or
      (4)   acceptance by a court of a plea of nolo contendere for a felony or
a crime involving moral turpitude.
209.   Vacancies
   (a)   A vacancy occurs when a council member, prior to the expiration of the
term for which elected, dies, resigns from office, or becomes disqualified to
hold office pursuant to Section
208 of this Charter.
   (b)   When a vacancy occurs, the remaining council members within forty-five
days shall appoint a person to serve for a term pursuant to subsection (f) or
(g) of this section, as applicable. The appointee shall be selected by a
majority vote of the remaining council members. The appointee shall meet the
same qualifications and residence requirements and, when succeeding a council
member who was elected as a member of a political party, the appointee, shall
be a member of the same political party as the council member vacating office
was in the most recent election for council member.
   (c)   If the vacating council member was last elected as a member of a
political party, the appointee shall be selected from a qualified list of three
persons submitted to the Council by the central committee of the same party.
The central committee must provide the list of three persons within 30 days of
the vacancy date. If no list is provided within 30 days, or if the vacating
council member was not a member of a political party when last elected, the
Council shall appoint a person it deems best qualified to hold office, provided
the appointee meets the qualifications and residency requirements provided in
subsection (b) of this section.
   (d)   If the Council fails to fill a vacancy pursuant to the provisions of
this section, the Executive shall appoint a person to fill the vacancy within
sixty days of the vacancy. If the County central committee submitted a list of
names pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the person appointed shall be
selected from the list. If no such list has been submitted, the Executive shall
appoint the person the Executive deems best qualified to hold office regardless
of the person’s party affiliation, if any, provided the appointee meets the
same qualifications and residence requirements as the person who vacated
office.
   (e)   All persons considered by the Council or County Executive for
appointment under either subsection (c) or (d) of this section, as applicable,
shall be presented to the public, including their names and qualifications. In
addition, the nominees shall be interviewed in public by either the Council or
County Executive, including the opportunity for public comment, pursuant to
either subsection (c) or (d) of this section, as applicable.
   (f)   If the vacancy occurs no later than 30 days prior to the candidate
filing deadline for the presidential primary election, a new member shall be
nominated and elected by qualified voters of the councilmanic district in which
the vacancy occurs, at the same time as the presidential general election and
in the manner provided by law. In the interim, until a new member is elected,
the vacancy shall be temporarily filled pursuant to subsection (c) or (d) of
this section. A member appointed under these conditions shall serve until the
first Monday of December, following the presidential general election, at which
time the winner of the presidential general election for the council seat shall
assume office and serve for the remainder of the vacating member’s term.
   (g)   If the vacancy occurs after 30 days prior to the candidate filing
deadline for the presidential primary election, the new member shall be
appointed pursuant to subsection (c) or (d) of this section, as applicable, and
serve the remainder of the vacating member’s term.
(Res. 18-20, 7-17-2018; Res. 20-20, 7-28-2020)
210.   Officers
   At the first scheduled meeting of the Council in December following an
election and biennially thereafter, the Council shall elect from among its
members a President and Vice President of the Council. The President, or in the
absence of the President, the Vice President, shall preside over meetings of
the Council. The Council may provide for the selection of other officers as the
Council may deem desirable for the exercise of its powers.
211.   Investigations by the Council
   The Council may investigate the affairs of the County and the conduct and
performance of any Agency. The Council may subpoena witnesses, administer
oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence for purposes of
this section. A subpoena may be issued to any current County employee, County
agency or department, or contractor doing business with the County upon the
affirmative vote of at least six council members.
212.    Non-interference
   (a)   Neither the Council nor any of its members shall appoint, dismiss, or
give directions to any individual employee of the Executive Branch of the
Government, except as may be provided by State law or this Charter.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, it shall be the duty
of the Executive to provide any information that is requested by the Council,
or its members, in writing for the purpose of introducing and evaluating
legislation or to engage in the review and monitoring of Government programs,
activities, and policy implementation.
(Res. 20-19, 7-28-2020)
213.   Council Assistance
   The Council may by resolution, at its discretion and subject to the
provisions of its budget or supplementary appropriation, employ administrative
employees or such legal, financial or other advisors as it deems necessary to
perform its functions.
214.    Redistricting
   (a)   The Council shall appoint by resolution a Redistricting Commission not
later than April 1 of the year following each decennial census date. The
central committee of each political party shall nominate three persons to serve
on the Commission if, at the time of nomination, at least twenty-five percent
of the total number of registered voters in the County are affiliated with the
political party. The Council shall appoint all such nominees as members of the
Commission as well as two or three additional members of the Commission, as the
case may be, who are unaffiliated with any political party for at least two
years prior to the date of appointment, to ensure that its total membership
equals an odd number. The Chair of the Commission shall be elected by and from
the Commission members. No person shall be eligible for appointment to the
Commission who holds elective office.
   (b)   By November 15 of the year following each decennial census date, the
Commission shall present to the Council a plan of Council Districts, together
with a report explaining it. Within thirty days of receiving the plan of the
Commission, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the plan. If within
ninety days after submission of the plan no other legislation reestablishing
the boundaries of the Council Districts has been enacted, the plan as submitted
shall become law.
   (c)   Any Council District established in accordance with this section shall
be compact, contiguous, substantially equal in population, and have common
interests as a result of geography, occupation, history, or existing political
boundaries.
   (d)   An ordinance establishing Council Districts shall be exempt from
referendum.
ARTICLE 3.
Legislative Process
301.   Legislative Powers
   In accordance with Section
202 of this Charter, the Council may enact public local laws for the peace,
good government, health, safety or welfare of the County and on all subjects
that have been delegated to the County under the Maryland Constitution and by
the laws of the State. The Council may repeal and amend the local laws for the
County heretofore enacted by the General Assembly as provided by law.
302.   Legislative Sessions
   Except during the month of November in the year in which council members are
elected, the Council may enact legislation on the first and third Tuesdays of
each month, and on any additional days the Council may determine necessary.
When the first or third Tuesday is a legal holiday, the next succeeding Tuesday
shall be a day for the enactment of legislation. In no event shall the Council
sit for more than forty-five days in a calendar year for the purpose of
enacting legislation.
303.   Non-legislative Sessions
   The Council may sit in non-legislative sessions at such other times and
places as it may determine. In such sessions, the Council may perform any
activity or engage any subject matter that is within its powers and duties to
perform or engage, other than the enactment or introduction of legislation. The
subject matter and activities in non-legislative sessions may include
conducting public hearings on legislative matters, fact-finding and inquiry,
proposing and adopting Bill amendments, as well as deliberating and debating
legislation and legislative policy.
304.   Legislative Procedure
   (a)   Four council members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
legislative business.
   (b)   Legislative sessions shall be open to the public, advertised in
advance, with such notice to include using electronic media such as the County
website, and shall comply with all requirements for open meetings provided by
law.
   (c)   The Council shall provide for the keeping of a journal, which shall
contain all the formal actions taken by the Council, whether legislative,
administrative or any other types of formal action. The journal shall include
all appointments, motions, orders, resolutions, introduction of bills, reports
and votes, but may not include transcripts of speeches, debates or other
statements or remarks. The journal shall be open to public inspection during
normal business hours. If the minutes of the Council meetings contain the same
material required to be contained in the journal, the collection of minutes
shall constitute the journal; otherwise the journal and minutes shall be
separate publications. Copies of the minutes of Council meetings shall be made
available to the public upon approval and shall appear on the County website or
otherwise be published using electronic media.
   (d)   Voting on legislation shall be by roll call, except on procedural
motions. The ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (e)   The Council may adopt and publish additional rules of legislative
procedure that may be desirable and not in conflict with this Charter.
305.   Enactment of Legislation
   (a)   The Council may enact no law except by written Bill.
   (b)   A Bill shall embrace one subject. The subject shall be described in
its title. No law may be enacted, revised, or amended by reference to its title
alone. The duty of the Council shall be to enact the same format and
arrangement of words as the legislation would read when it becomes law.
   (c)   A Bill may be introduced by one or more council members at a
legislative session. A Bill and each copy of the Bill shall bear the name of
each council member introducing the Bill and the date of introduction.
   (d)   On the date a Bill is introduced, the Council shall either reject the
Bill by an affirmative vote of at least five council members or the President
of the Council shall schedule a public hearing on the Bill. Within seventy-two
hours of its introduction, a copy of the Bill, with notice of the date, time,
and place of the public hearing, shall be publicized. Before a public hearing
on a Bill, the title and a fair summary of the Bill and the date, time, and
place of the public hearing shall be published at least once each week for two
successive weeks on the County website and in a newspaper of general
circulation in the County. If the Council determines that no such newspaper
exists in the County, the Council shall use whatever media it deems most suited
to satisfy the public notice requirements of this subsection. The President of
the Council may schedule more than one public hearing on a Bill, provided the
publication and notice requirements of this subsection are met for each
hearing.
   (e)   After a public hearing, the Council may enact a Bill into law, with or
without amendment, by an affirmative vote of at least four council members. In
the event a Bill is amended before enactment, and the amendment or amendments
constitute a change of substance, the Bill, as amended, may not be enacted into
law until a public hearing is held on the amendment and a fair summary of the
amendment and the date, time and place of a public hearing are posted on the
County website at least four days in advance of this public hearing.
   (f)   A Bill not enacted within ninety days of introduction is void. A Bill
not enacted prior to the month of November in any year in which council members
are elected to office is void.
(Res. 16-16, 7-19-2016)
306.   Executive Veto
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, within ten business days
after the passage of any legislation, the Council shall deliver the legislation
to the Executive for approval or veto. If the Executive takes no action to
approve or veto the legislation within ten business days after receipt, it
shall be deemed approved as if the Executive had approved it.
   (b)   If the Executive approves the legislation, it shall take effect as
provided in this Charter.
   (c)   If the Executive vetoes the legislation, the Executive shall return it
to the Council together with reasons for the veto stated in writing. Not later
than the next legislative session immediately following the receipt of the
vetoed legislation, the Council may override the veto by the affirmative vote
of five members of the Council.
   (d)   The Executive may not veto the Annual Budget and Appropriation
Ordinance or the ordinance appointing a Compensation Review Commission provided
in Section
207 of this Charter.
307.   Effective Date of Laws
   (a)   The Annual Budget and Appropriations Ordinance shall take effect on
the first day of the fiscal year to which it applies. All other laws, except
for expedited legislation, shall take effect sixty calendar days after
enactment, except in the event a law provides for a later effective date or is
referred to the voters under Section
308 of this Charter.
   (b)   Expedited legislation is legislation containing a section declaring
that it is necessary for the immediate protection of the public health, safety,
or welfare and has the same meaning as “emergency legislation” in Article XI-A,
Section 3 of the Maryland Constitution.
   (c)   Expedited legislation shall take effect on the date it is enacted
unless a different date is prescribed in the legislation.
(Res. 18-19, 7-17-2018)
308.   Referendum
   (a)   Except for the following, a law, or part of a law, enacted pursuant to
this Charter may be referred to the voters for approval upon the filing of a
petition signed by seven percent of the registered voters of the County:
      (1)   A law imposing a tax;
      (2)   A law appropriating funds for current expenses to maintain the
Government;
      (3)   A law prescribing Council Districts; and
      (4)   A law adopting a Compensation Review Commission.
   (b)   A petition to refer a law, or portion of a law, to the voters of the
County shall meet the requirements of State law and may consist of several
papers, but each paper shall contain the full and accurate text of the law, or
part of the law, that is subject to the petition. There shall be attached to
each paper of signatures filed with a petition an affidavit of the person
procuring those signatures. The affidavit shall state that the signatures were
affixed in the person's presence and that, based upon the person's best
knowledge and belief, every signature on the paper is genuine and bona fide and
that the signers are registered voters of the County at the address set
opposite or below their names.
   (c)   No later than fifty-nine days following the date a law is enacted, a
petition to refer the law, or portion of law, to the voters under this section
may be filed with the Board of Elections for the County.
   (d)   Whenever a petition complying with all the provisions of law and this
Charter is filed, the referred law, or the referred portion of law, other than
expedited legislation, may not take effect until thirty days after approval by
a majority of voters. Expedited legislation shall remain in effect from the
date it becomes law notwithstanding the filing of a petition for referendum,
but shall be repealed thirty days after its rejection by a majority of the
registered voters voting on the question.
(Res. 18-19, 7-17-2018)
   (e)   A law, or portion of a law, shall be submitted to the voters pursuant
to this section voting either at: (1) the next general election for members of
the United States Congress; or (2) a special election called by the Council,
which shall be held not less than thirty days and not more than ninety days
following the filing of a valid petition pursuant to this section. A special
election is prohibited whenever members of the United States Congress are to be
elected at a general election within one hundred eighty days of the filing of a
valid petition under this section.
309.   Publication of Laws
   The Council shall cause a fair summary of all laws enacted, amended, or
repealed under this Charter to be published promptly at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the County and on the County website or
otherwise be published using electronic media.
310.   Compilation of Laws
   At intervals not greater than every ten years, the Council shall cause all
local laws of the County which are of general application and continuing force
in the County to be codified. The codification shall be known as "The Code of
Frederick County, Maryland." The publication shall contain an index and
appropriate notes, citations, annotations, and appendices as the Council
determines.
ARTICLE 4
Executive
401.   Composition
   The executive branch of the County government shall comprise the County
Executive and all officers, agents, and employees under the supervision and
authority of the Executive.
402.   County Executive Powers and Duties
   There is a County Executive, who shall be the chief executive officer of the
County and shall faithfully execute the laws. All executive power vested in the
County by the Constitution and laws of Maryland and this Charter shall be
vested in the Executive. The Executive shall see that the affairs of the
executive branch are administered properly and efficiently, and that employees
of the executive branch faithfully perform their duties. The duties and
responsibilities of the Executive shall include:
   (a)   Supervising and directing offices, agencies and divisions of the
executive branch and ensuring that County employees as well as County boards
and commissions faithfully perform their duties;
   (b)   preparing and submitting to the Council the annual County Budget;
   (c)   preparing and submitting to the Council and the public within six
months after the close of the fiscal year, an annual report on the activities
and accomplishments of the County government, including a comprehensive annual
financial statement;
   (d)   providing the Council with any information the Executive deems
necessary or, as the Council in writing may request, information concerning the
executive branch which the Council may require for the exercise of its powers;
   (e)   recommending to the Council such measures for legislative action that
the Executive may consider to be in the best interests of the County; and
   (f)   signing or causing to be signed on the County's behalf all deeds,
contracts, and other instruments.
403.   Election of the County Executive
   Beginning in 2014 and every four years thereafter, the registered voters of
the entire County shall elect a County Executive in the manner provided by law
at the same time as members of the General Assembly are elected.
404.   Term of the County Executive
   (a)   The Executive shall hold office for a term beginning at noon on the
first Monday of December next following the election of the Executive as
provided in Section
403 of this Charter and ending at noon on the first Monday in December in the
fourth year thereafter, or until a successor is qualified.
   (b)   No Executive may serve more than two consecutive terms.
   (c)   For purposes of the restriction imposed by subsection (b) of this
section, an Executive who has been appointed to fill a vacancy and who has
served two or more years of that term shall be considered to have served one
full term. An appointed Executive who serves less than a two-year term shall be
considered, solely for purposes of the subsection (b) restriction, not to have
served a term as Executive.
405.   Qualifications of the County Executive
   (a)   The Executive shall be a citizen of the United States and, for at
least two years immediately preceding election or appointment, a resident and
registered voter of the County.
   (b)   The Executive shall devote full-time to the duties of the office. The
Executive may not participate in any private occupation for compensation.
During the term of office, the Executive may not hold any other office of
profit.
406.   Compensation of the County Executive
   (a)   Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the Executive shall receive
a Salary of $137,000. In addition to Salary, the Executive shall be entitled to
receive Allowances and Fringe Benefits as those terms are defined in this
Charter. The Executive may not accrue annual leave or be entitled to any
payment in lieu thereof.
   (b)   The Compensation Review Commission established pursuant to Section
207 of this Charter shall review the Executive's Salary and make
recommendations to the Council. The Council shall have the power to increase
the Salary by the affirmative vote of not less than four council members. To
reduce the Salary, the affirmative vote of not less than five council members
is required. In no event shall the Salary be reduced to a figure lower than
that provided in subsection (a) of this section except by amendment thereto.
The Salary of the Executive may not be increased or reduced during his or her
current term.
(Ord. 21-02-002, 7-6-2021)
407.   Forfeiture of Office by the Executive
   An Executive shall immediately forfeit office and the office shall be deemed
vacant upon:
      (1)   the Executive ceasing to be a citizen of the United States or a
registered voter of the County;
      (2)   the Executive being convicted of or pleading guilty to a felony or
a crime involving moral turpitude;
      (3)   the Executive being granted probation before judgment for a felony
or a crime involving moral turpitude; or
      (4)   acceptance by a court of a plea of nolo contendere for a felony or
a crime involving moral turpitude.
408.   Vacancy in the Office of County Executive
   (a)   A vacancy in the Office of the Executive shall exist upon the death or
resignation of the Executive, or upon forfeiture of office as provided in
Section
407 of this Charter. A majority of the council members shall appoint, within
forty-five days, a person to fill the vacancy and to serve a term pursuant to
subsection (f) or (g) of this section, as applicable.
   (b)   If the vacating County Executive was last elected as a member of a
political party, the appointee shall be selected from a qualified list of three
persons submitted to the Council by the central committee of the same party.
The central committee must provide the list of three persons within 30 days of
the vacancy date. If no list is provided within 30 days, or if the vacating
County Executive was not a member of a political party when last elected, the
Council shall appoint a person it deems best qualified to hold office, provided
the appointee meets the qualifications and residency requirements provided in
subsection (d) of this section.
   (c)   If the Council has not made an appointment within the forty-five-day
period provided in subsection (a) of this section, the Council shall appoint
within fifteen days thereafter, the Chief Administrator Officer.
   (d)   Any person appointed to fill a vacancy pursuant to this section,
except the Chief Administrative Officer, shall meet the qualifications provided
in Section
405 of this Charter.
   (e)   All persons considered by the Council for appointment under either
subsection (b) or (c) of this section, as applicable, shall be presented to the
public, including their names and qualifications. In addition, the nominees
shall be interviewed in public by the Council, including the opportunity for
public comment.
   (f)   If the vacancy occurs no later than 30 days prior to the candidate
filing deadline for the presidential primary election, a new County Executive
shall be nominated and elected by qualified voters at the same time as the
presidential general election and in the manner provided by law. In the
interim, until an Executive is elected, the vacancy shall be temporarily filled
pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of this section, as applicable. An Executive
appointed under these conditions shall serve until the first Monday of
December, following the presidential general election, at which time the winner
of the presidential general election for the Executive position shall assume
office and serve for the remainder of the vacating Executive's term.
   (g)   If the vacancy occurs after 30 days prior to the candidate filing
deadline for the presidential primary election, the new Executive shall be
appointed pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of this section, as applicable, and
serve the remainder of the vacating Executive's term.
(Res. 20-21, 7-28-2020)
409.   Temporary Absence
   In the event of a vacancy in the Office of the County Executive as provided
in Section
408 or the temporary absence of the Executive, the Chief Administrative Officer
shall perform the duties of the Executive.
410.   Chief Administrative Officer
   The Executive shall appoint a Chief Administrative Officer, subject to
confirmation by the Council. The Chief Administrative Officer shall be selected
on the basis of qualifications as a professional administrator, skill in
governmental budgeting and technical training for the duties of the office. The
Chief Administrative Officer shall be a resident of the County within six
months of appointment. The duties of the Chief Administrative Officer, which
shall include supervising the departments, agencies and offices under the
control of the Executive, advising the Executive on all administrative matters
and performing such other duties as may be assigned by the Executive or by this
Charter, shall be subject to the direction of the Executive. The Chief
Administrative Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the Executive.
411.   County Attorney
   (a)   The Executive shall appoint a County Attorney, subject to confirmation
by the Council. The County Attorney shall be the chief legal officer of the
County and conduct all the law business of the County. The County Attorney
shall be a legal advisor to the Executive, the Council, all County departments,
agencies, offices and other instrumentalities of the Government. The County
Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the Executive and the Council. The
County Attorney may be removed from office by either: (1) the Executive with
the consent of five (5) members of the Council; or (2) upon a vote of at least
six (6) Council members.
(Res. 18-21, 7-17-2018)
   (b)   The County Attorney, with the approval of the Executive, and as
provided in the Budget, may appoint assistants to serve as members of the legal
staff or employ special legal counsel. The County Attorney and the staff of the
office shall engage in no other law practice.
412.    Appointment and Removal of Department Heads and Others
   (a)   The Executive shall appoint an individual to head each principal
operating department, agency or office under the control of the Executive,
subject to confirmation of the Council. Individuals appointed under this
subsection shall serve at the pleasure of the Executive.
   (b)   Except as provided elsewhere in this Charter or prescribed by law,
after a public hearing on the matter, the Council may remove the appointed head
of a department, agency, or office upon the affirmative vote of five Council
members.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section or prescribed by
law, the provisions of this Charter or by ordinance, the Executive shall
appoint all members of boards and commissions. All members shall be subject to
confirmation by the Council. Individuals appointed under this subsection shall
serve at the pleasure of the Executive, unless otherwise provided by law, the
provisions of this Charter or by ordinance.
   (d)   The membership of boards and commissions that are established
exclusively to advise the Council shall be appointed and removed by the
Council, at the Council's discretion, unless such matters are prescribed by
law, the provisions of this Charter or by ordinance.
   (e)   If the Council fails to take action within thirty days upon an
appointment made by the Executive pursuant to this section, the appointment
shall become effective.
(Res. 24-24, 7-2-2024)
413.   Temporary Administrative Appointments
   When a vacancy occurs in the position of the Chief Administrative Officer or
the head of any principal operating department, agency or office under the
control of the Executive, the Executive shall appoint an acting Chief
Administrative Officer or acting head of the department, agency or office, as
the case may be, to serve for a period not exceeding six months. This limit may
be extended by the Council for a period of time not to exceed an additional
four months.
414.    Plan of Organization
   (a)   The Executive shall make an evaluation of the structure, organization,
functions, powers, and duties of each department, agency and office under the
Executive’s control within fourteen months of the Executive’s election.
   (b)   The Executive shall report the results of the evaluation to the
Council within the time frame established in subsection (a) of this section,
along with any recommendations that require legislative authorization and which
the Executive believes would increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the
County government. If recommendations are made pursuant to this subsection, the
Executive shall, along with the Executive’s report, include a plan for
implementing the recommendations.
   (c)   The Council shall consider the Executive’s recommendations that
require legislative authorization and the plan of implementation.
   (d)   At the discretion of the Executive, the Executive at any time may
alter, adjust, modify or in any manner change the structure, functions, powers
and duties of any department, agency or office under the Executive’s control if
the alteration, adjustment, modification or change does not require legislative
authorization.
ARTICLE 5.
Budget and Finance
501.   Establishment of Position of Director of Finance
   With the approval of the Council, the Executive shall appoint a person,
knowledgeable and experienced in financial matters, to serve as the Director of
Finance of the County. The duties of the Finance Director, which shall be
subject to the direction of the Executive, shall be those prescribed by the
Executive, by law or by this Charter. The Director of Finance shall serve at
the pleasure of the Executive.
502.   Fiscal Year and Tax Year
   The fiscal or budget year and the tax year of the Government begins on the
first day of July and ends on the thirtieth day of June of the succeeding year.
503.   Preparation of the County Budget
   (a)   Not later than April 15 of each year, the Executive shall prepare and
submit a proposed Budget to the Council for the ensuing fiscal year. The
proposed Budget shall present a complete financial plan for the Government
reflecting anticipated revenues from all sources, expenditures, and any surplus
or deficit in the general or special funds of the Government.
   (b)   During preparation of the Budget, the Executive shall hold at least
two public hearings to receive public comment. One hearing shall be held in
December to receive proposals for inclusion in the Budget. The other shall be
held in March to receive comments on budget requests. The Executive shall
provide sufficient notice of the public hearings and shall cause to be
published in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the County a
notice of the date, time and place of each public hearing. If the Executive
determines that no such newspaper exists in the County, the Executive shall use
whatever media it deems most suited to satisfy the public notice requirements
of this section. The Executive shall prepare a draft Budget and make it
available to the public prior to the March hearing date.
   (c)   The proposed Budget shall be reproduced and made available to the
public.
504.   Budget Message
   The budget message shall contain supporting summary tables and explain the
proposed Operating Budget, the Capital Budget, and the Capital Improvement
Program both in terms of finances and of work to be done. It shall outline the
proposed financial policies of the Government for the ensuing fiscal year and
describe the important features of the proposed Budget. It shall indicate any
major changes in financial policies and in expenditures, appropriations and
revenues as compared with the current fiscal year, and shall set forth the
reasons for the changes.
505.   Public Budget Hearing
   Upon submission of the proposed Budget, the Council shall cause to be
published in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the County, a
notice of the date, time and place of at least one public hearing on the Budget
by the Council. If the Council determines that no such newspaper exists in the
County, the Council shall use whatever media it deems most suited to satisfy
the public notice requirements of this Section. No final budget action may be
taken by the Council until after a public hearing has been held, and then only
in open, public session.
506.   Action on the Budget by the Council
   (a)   After a public hearing, the Council may decrease or delete any items
in the Budget, except those required by State law, by provisions for debt
service on obligations then outstanding or for estimated cash deficits. The
Council shall have no power to change the form of the Budget as submitted by
the Executive, to alter revenue estimates, or to increase any expenditure
recommended by the Executive, unless expressly provided in State law and except
to correct mathematical errors.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, any change in
the proposed Budget to decrease or delete an item in the Budget made pursuant
to subsection (a) of this section shall constitute a change of substance
requiring that a public hearing be held following the posting of a fair summary
of the change plus the date, time and place of the public hearing. This notice
must be posted on the County website at least two days in advance of the public
hearing.
   (c)   A decrease or deletion of one or more items in the Budget may not
constitute a change of substance in the proposed Budget if the decrease or
deletion constitutes less than a one percent change in the total Budget or less
than a fifty percent decrease in any one line item in the Budget.
   (d)   The adoption of the Budget shall be by the affirmative vote of not
less than four members of the Council in a law enacted not later than May 31,
which shall be known as the “Annual Budget and Appropriations Ordinance of
Frederick County.” If the Council fails to adopt the Budget by May 31 pursuant
to this subsection, the proposed Budget as submitted by the Executive shall
become law.
(Res. 16-17, 7-19-2016)
507.   Tax Levy and Balanced Budget
   After enacting the Annual Budget and Appropriations Ordinance, the Council
shall levy the amount of taxes required by the Budget to ensure that the Budget
is balanced so that proposed revenues equal proposed expenditures.
508.   Borrowing Limitations
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided by State law, the aggregate amount of
bonds and other evidences of indebtedness outstanding at any one time that
pledge the full faith and credit of the County may not exceed a total of three
percent of the assessable basis of real property of the County and nine percent
of the County's assessable basis of personal property and operating real
property described in § 8-109(c) of the Tax - Property Article.
   (b)   Except as may otherwise be provided by State law, the following may
not be computed or applied in establishing the debt limitations provided in
this section:
      (1)   Tax anticipation notes or other evidences of indebtedness having a
maturity not in excess of 12 months;
      (2)   Bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued or guaranteed by
the County payable primarily or exclusively from taxes levied in or on, or
other revenues of, special taxing areas or community development authorities;
and
      (3)   Bonds or other evidences of indebtedness issued for self-
liquidating and other projects payable primarily or exclusively from the
proceeds of assessments or charges for special benefits or services.
(Res. 20-18, 7-28-2020)
509.   Transfer of Appropriations
   (a)   The Executive may transfer unencumbered appropriations in the
Operating Budget within the same department, agency, or office and within the
same fund. On the recommendation of the Executive, the Council may transfer
unencumbered appropriations in the Operating Budget between departments,
agencies and offices within the same fund.
   (b)   A transfer may not be made between the Operating Budget and Capital
Budget appropriations. On the recommendation of the Executive, the Council may
transfer appropriations between Capital Projects within the same fund provided
the Council neither creates nor abandons any Capital Projects except in
accordance with Section
512 of this Charter.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, the Council may
provide by law for inter-fund cash borrowing in the same fiscal year to meet
temporary cash requirements. Nothing contained in this section may be construed
to prevent reimbursement among funds for services rendered.
510.   Supplemental Appropriations
   On the recommendation of the Executive, the Council may make supplemental
appropriations from any contingency appropriations in the Budget; from revenues
received from anticipated sources but in excess of budget estimates; or from
revenues received from sources not anticipated in the Budget. The Council shall
hold a public hearing on any supplemental appropriation to the general fund in
excess of $1,000,000.
(Res. 24-23, 7-2-2024)
511.   Emergency Appropriations
   To meet an Emergency, as that term is defined in this Charter, the Council
may make emergency appropriations from the sources provided in Section
510 of this Charter. To the extent unappropriated revenues are unavailable to
meet the Emergency, the Council by law may authorize the issuance of emergency
notes, which may be renewed from time to time. Emergency notes and renewals
issued pursuant to this section may not be paid later than the last day of the
next fiscal year succeeding that in which the emergency appropriation was made.
512.   Lapsed Appropriations
   Unless otherwise provided by law and except for grant appropriations or
grant funds deposited in special accounts dedicated to specific functions,
activities or purposes, all unexpended and unencumbered appropriations in the
Operating Budget at the end of the fiscal year shall revert into the treasury.
No appropriation for a Capital Project in the Capital Budget may revert until
the purpose for which the appropriation was made is accomplished or abandoned;
but any Capital Project shall be considered abandoned if three fiscal years
elapse without any expenditure from or encumbrance of the appropriation.
513.   Amendment to Capital Budget after Adoption of the Budget
   Upon recommendation of the Executive and after a public hearing and an
affirmative vote of at least four council members, the Council may amend the
Annual Budget and Appropriations Ordinance to provide funds for a Capital
Project not previously appearing in the Capital Budget for the fiscal year. The
amendment may not increase the total amount of appropriations for the fiscal
year, unless such increased appropriations shall be funded from revenues
received in excess of those budgeted or from unanticipated revenues not
previously budgeted in the Annual Budget and Appropriations Ordinance for the
fiscal year.
514.   Composition and Limitation upon County Funds
   (a)   All revenues and receipts from special services or benefit charges;
special taxes or assessments imposed upon special taxing areas for special or
particular services, purposes or benefits; funds held by the County as trustee
or agent; special grants; or bond proceeds shall be paid into and appropriated
from special funds created for such purposes and may not be used for any other
purpose except the purpose for which a fund was created. All other revenues and
receipts of the County from taxes, grants, State revenues and other receipts
shall be paid into and appropriated from the general fund, which is the primary
fund for the financing of current expenses for the conduct of Government
business.
   (b)   With the recommendation of the Executive, the Council, by the Annual
Budget and Appropriation Ordinance, or by other legislative act, may provide
for the establishment of working capital or revolving funds for the financing
of central stores, equipment pools, or other services common to the agencies of
the Government.
   (c)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, upon recommendation
of the Executive, the Council may establish a reserve fund for permanent public
improvements. The Annual Budget and Appropriation Ordinance may dedicate cash
surpluses, taxes, and other sources of revenue not otherwise appropriated to
this reserve fund.
   (d)   Nothing in this Charter may be construed to prevent the making of
contracts, leases, or other obligations that provide for the payment of funds
at a time beyond the end of the fiscal year in which these contracts are made,
provided the nature of these transactions reasonably requires the making of
these contracts, leases or other obligations. The Council shall authorize by
law any contract, lease, or other obligation in excess of $20,000 that would
obligate the County to appropriate funds in the Operating Budget for more than
a single fiscal year. The amount of $20,000 for such contracts, leases or
obligations may be revised by law from time to time, but no more frequently
than annually, and may not be less than $20,000.
ARTICLE 6.
Land Use
601.   Adoption of Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland
   (a)   It is the policy of Frederick County that the provisions of the Land
Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland that governed land use in the
County prior to the Effective Date of this Charter shall continue to apply as
if they have been codified in the Code of Public Local Laws of Frederick County
on the Effective Date of the Charter.
   (b)   By 2016 the provisions that were considered applicable to the County
on the Effective Date of the Charter shall be codified in the Code of Public
Local Laws of Frederick County.
   (c)   It is the policy of Frederick County that whenever the provisions of
the Land Use Article are revised by the Maryland General Assembly and the
revisions would, in the absence of the adoption of this Charter, impact and
affect land use in the County, the revised provisions are to be promptly
adopted by the County and codified in the Code of Public Local Laws of
Frederick County.
   (d)   Subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section shall continue to remain
in effect until this section is amended.
   (e)   This section is not intended, nor shall it be construed, to prohibit
the County from complying with any requirement of State law that conflicts with
the provisions of this section.
ARTICLE 7.
Miscellaneous
701.   Charter Amendments
   This Charter may be amended by the procedures provided in Article XI-A of
the Maryland Constitution.
702.   Termination of Charter
   (a)   This Charter may be terminated, and the County returned to the County
Commissioner form of government in effect prior to the adoption of this
Charter, using the same procedures provided in Section
701 of this Charter.
   (b)   Thirty days following the approval by the voters to terminate this
Charter, the Charter shall stand terminated. The council members then in office
shall become the Board of County Commissioners for the County and shall remain
in office until their successors are qualified for office.
   (c)   All laws, ordinances, and regulations in effect at the termination of
this Charter shall remain in force until changed by the action of the General
Assembly or the Board of County Commissioners, as provided by the Constitution
of Maryland and the public general laws of this State.
703.   Charter Review Commission
   (a)   A Charter Review Commission shall be appointed by the Council no later
than six months following the installation of newly elected council members
after the election of 2018. A Charter Review Commission may be appointed at
such other times as the Council, in its discretion, may determine but at least
once every 10 years beginning in 2018. The Charter Review Commission shall be
composed of seven registered voters of the County, including at least one
member from each Council District established pursuant to Section
204 of this Charter. No person shall be eligible for appointment to the
Commission who holds elective office. The chair of the Commission shall be
elected from and by the members of the Commission.
   (b)   The Commission shall review the provisions of this Charter and make
recommendations as to the necessity for deleting, adding, or amending its
contents. The Commission shall receive an appropriation sufficient to carry out
its duties and responsibilities. The members of the Commission may not be
entitled to compensation but shall be entitled to reimbursement for reasonable
expenses.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, the Commission
shall make its report to the Council at a public hearing within 12 months
following its creation.
   (d)   The Commission may be required to report to the Council earlier than
the deadline established in subsection (c) of this section, if the Council
establishes the report deadline at the time the Commission is created.
   (f)   Upon delivery of the Commission report, the Commission shall be deemed
dissolved and its work terminated.
704.   Independent Auditor
   The Council shall engage a certified public accountant to make annually an
independent post audit of all financial records and actions of the Government,
its offices, agents, and employees. The complete report of the audit shall be
presented to the Council and Executive and copies of the complete report,
including addenda, corrections to the report, and all correspondence relating
to the audit, shall be made available to the public at a cost not to exceed the
cost of reproduction.
705.   Right to Organize, Collectively Bargain, and Binding Arbitration for
Career Fire Fighters.
   (a)   Career fire fighters shall have the right to organize and bargain
collectively regarding wages, benefits, working conditions and/or terms and
conditions of employment through representative employee organizations of their
own choosing as provided by ordinance of the County Council.
   (b)   In addition to the rights granted in subsection (a) of this Section to
organize and bargain collectively, the County Council shall provide by
ordinance for binding arbitration with authorized representatives of the
appropriate employee bargaining unit in order to resolve labor disputes with
the County’s career fire fighters. The ordinance shall provide for the
appointment of a neutral arbitrator by the parties to the arbitration who shall
issue a binding decision to be implemented as part of the following year’s
budget process.
(Charter Referendum Petition Approved on November 6, 2018)
ARTICLE 8
Transitional Provisions
801.   Nature of This Article
   The provisions of this Article relate to the transition from the
commissioner form of government to the form of government provided by this
Charter. Whenever the provisions of this Article are inconsistent with the
previous provisions of this Charter, the provisions of this Article shall
control.
802.   Time Certain Articles Become Effective
   Except as expressly provided in this Article, the provisions of this Charter
shall become operative on the date the first County Executive and County
Council, elected pursuant to this Charter, take office, Monday, December 1,
2014.
803.   First Election
   (a)   In order to provide for the election of the first Executive in
November 2014, Section
403 {'{'}Election of the County Executive{'}'}, Section
404 {'{'}Term of the County Executive{'}'} and Section
405 {'{'}Qualifications of the County Executive{'}'} shall take effect on
January 1, 2013.
   (b)   In order to provide for the election of the first members of the
Council in November 2014, Section
204 {'{'}Election{'}'}, Section
205 {'{'}Qualifications{'}'} and Section
206 {'{'}Term of Office{'}'} shall take effect on January 1, 2013.
804.   Existing Laws
   The public local laws of the County and all rules, regulations, resolutions,
and ordinances enacted by the County Commissioners in force on the Effective
Date of the Charter shall continue in full force until repealed or amended. To
the extent that any of the public local laws of the County or rules,
regulations, resolutions, or ordinances, or any parts thereof, are inconsistent
with the provisions of this Charter, they are repealed.
805.   Reference in State Constitution and Laws to County Commissioners
   All references in the Constitution and laws of the State of Maryland to the
Frederick County Commissioners or to the Board of County Commissioners shall be
construed, at the Effective Date of the Charter, to refer to the Council and/or
the County Executive whenever the construction would be reasonable.
806.   Existing Officers and Employees
   All appointed officers and employees of the Government holding office at the
Effective Date of the Charter shall continue to be employed at their existing
compensation, subject, however, to the provisions of any relevant personnel
laws, rules, or regulations. Provisions relating to the qualifications for the
appointed offices provided in this Charter shall become effective whenever
vacancies occur in the appointed offices after the Effective Date of the
Charter.
807.   Existing Members of Boards and Commissions
   The members of all boards and commissions holding office at the Effective
Date of the Charter shall continue to hold the same office until completion of
their terms of office, unless removed in accordance with the provisions of this
Charter.
808.   Office of the County Commissioner Abolished
   At the Effective Date of the Charter, the Office of County Commissioner
shall cease to exist and all reference to the Office and the Board of County
Commissioners in the Maryland Constitution or in any law, ordinance, rule, or
regulation shall be construed to refer to the Office of Council Member or the
Council and/or the Office of the County Executive or the County Executive
whenever the construction would be reasonable.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af9691cbec4604828c677875c7c627f7b6eb5f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4567.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af9691cbec4604828c677875c7c627f7b6eb5f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4565.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af9691cbec4604828c677875c7c627f7b6eb5f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4563.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af9691cbec4604828c677875c7c627f7b6eb5f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4561.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af9691cbec4604828c677875c7c627f7b6eb5f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4559.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af9691cbec4604828c677875c7c627f7b6eb5f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4557.png]
 
PART I: FREDERICK COUNTY CODE
CHAPTER 1-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS (§§ 1-1-1 — 1-1-9)
Section
   
1-1-1   How Code designated and cited
   
1-1-2   Rules of construction and definitions
   
1-1-3   Code continuation of previous enactments
   
1-1-4   Catchlines of sections
   
1-1-5   Effect of repeal of ordinances
   
1-1-6   Severability of parts of Code
   
1-1-7   Amendment to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language
   
1-1-8   Supplementation of Code
   
1-1-9   Enforcement of county laws and regulations
§ 1-1-1. HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated “Frederick County Code, 2004,” and may be so
cited.
(1959 Code, § 1-1) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-1-2. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the rules and
definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction
would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the county governing body.
The rules of construction and definitions set out herein shall not be applied
to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions
excluding such construction, or where the subject matter or context of such
section may be repugnant thereto.
   (B)   In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any
provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter
than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the
greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
      (1)   Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such
meaning.
      (2)   Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the
plural includes the singular number.
   (C)   Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions
contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true
intent and meaning of the county governing body may be fully carried out.
   CODE. Except where otherwise specifically provided, the words “this Code”
shall mean the Frederick County Code, adopted in §
1-1-1.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed
by law for the doing of any act, the day of the act, event or default after
which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The
last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday,
a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event, the period runs until the end of
the next day, which is neither a  Saturday, nor a Sunday, nor a holiday. When
the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than 7 days, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays shall be excluded in the computation. A half
holiday shall be considered as other days and not as a holiday.
   COUNTY. The words “county” or “the county” mean Frederick County, in the
State of Maryland.
   COUNTY COUNCIL. The County Council of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY EXECUTIVE. The County Executive of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY GOVERNING BODY. The County Council and County Executive of Frederick
County, Maryland.
   COUNTY OFFICIALS, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. Whenever reference is made to
officials, boards, commissions, departments, and the like by title only, i.e.,
“administrative assistant,” “Planning Commission,” or any other such
designation, such reference shall be deemed to be officials, boards, and the
like of Frederick County, and powers and authority granted to them shall be
deemed to be grants of such powers and authority to their respective duly
designated subordinates.
   GENDER. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females, and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to
males.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving joint authority to 3 or more persons or
officers, give such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, unless
it is otherwise declared.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and  appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
includes the singular number.
   OATH. Includes affirmation.
   OR, AND. The word “or” may be read as “and” and the word “and” as “or,”
where the sense requires it.
   OWNER. Includes not only the owner of the whole, but any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of property.
   PERSON. Shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, corporations,
associations, organizations, trustees, agents, and bodies politic, or any
combination thereof, as well as to natural persons.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property except real property,
as defined herein.
   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes land, tenements and hereditaments.
   SHALL. The word “shall” is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write if
his name is written near the mark and witnessed by a person who writes his own
name as a witness.
   STATE. The words “the state” or “this state” shall mean the State of
Maryland.
   STREET. Shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads,
alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the county, and shall
embrace all parts thereof within the designated right-of-way. In those
instances where the public records are silent, the term shall embrace all of
the area between the off-street edge of the sidewalk or walkway on each side of
the street, including the grass plots or other divisional areas lying between
the sidewalk or walkway and street.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
(1959 Code, § 1-2) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-1-3. CODE CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS ENACTMENTS.
   The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the
same as those of the ordinances, rules and regulations existing at the time of
the adoption of this Code, shall be construed as a continuation thereof and not
as new enactments.
(1959 Code, § 1-5) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-1-4. CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type, italics,
or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as
any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted.
(1959 Code, § 1-3) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-1-5. EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
   (B)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance
repealed.
(Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-1-6. SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the county governing body that
the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any
of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
Code.
(1959 Code, § 1-4) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-1-7. AMENDMENT TO CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which
amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion
therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection
or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code
by omission from reprinted pages.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by
amending such provision by specific reference to the section of this Code in
substantially the following language: “That section                 of the Code
of Ordinances, is hereby amended to read as follows:  (Set out new provisions
in full)  .”
   (C)   When the county governing body desires to enact an ordinance of a
general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code,
which the county governing body desires to incorporate into the Code, a section
in substantially the following language should be made a part of the ordinance:
“Section                  . It is the intention of the county governing body
and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become
and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances, and the sections of this
ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention.”
   (D)   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to
be repealed should be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as
the case may be.
(Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-1-8. SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the county governing
body. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new
pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be
current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in
the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes
in such catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter,” “this article,” “this division,” etc., as the case may be, or
to “Sections                to              (inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the
ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
(Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-1-9. ENFORCEMENT OF COUNTY LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section implements the authority contained in Local
Government Article, Annotated Code of Maryland, to provide for the enforcement
of county laws and regulations by civil fines. (Md. Ann. Code, Local Government
Art. § 10-202)
   (B)   Applicability; nonexclusive remedy.
      (1)   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply unless
the Code or Regulations contain other specific enforcement provisions.
      (2)   Nonexclusive remedy. Nothing in this subtitle shall prevent an
enforcing agency or enforcement official from seeking other remedies provided
by law or regulations, such as injunctions or criminal prosecution.
   (C)   Authority of the County Attorney. The County Attorney is authorized to
prosecute all civil violations under this subtitle. The County Attorney or the
County Attorney's designees may institute proceedings on behalf of the county
in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce payment of the civil fines
imposed pursuant to this subtitle. The County Attorney may institute
proceedings to obtain other available legal remedies, including but not limited
to injunctive relief, actions for damages, etc.
   (D)   Definitions. Words and phrases used in this subtitle shall have their
usual meanings except as specified below:
      CIVIL INFRACTION. A violation of the County Code or of a regulation
adopted pursuant to the County Code, which is punishable by a civil fine.
      ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An individual in an agency or department authorized
to enforce its laws and regulations; generally the Department or agency head or
his or her designated representative; or the Sheriff of Frederick County and
the Sheriff's designees.
      ENFORCING AGENCY.  The Department or agency charged with enforcing a law
or regulation, or the Sheriff of Frederick County.
      PERSON.  An individual, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
association, or organization.
      REPEATED VIOLATION. A recurring violation of the same provision of the
County Code or regulation.
   (E)   Fines.
      (1)   Amount of fine. Unless another amount for a specific violation has
been established in the Code, the civil fine shall be within the range of the
amounts shown below:
 
Class of Offense Minimum Fine Maximum Fine
A                $500.00      $1,000.00
B                250.00       500.00
C                100.00       250.00
D                50.00        100.00
E                25.00        50.00
 
   (F)   Payment of fines. All fines are due and payable by the date indicated
in the citation. The fine shall be payable to the Treasurer of Frederick
County, and delivered to the office of the Enforcement Official, or the Office
of the County Attorney.
   (G)   Citations.
      (1)   Authority to serve. An enforcement official may serve a citation on
a person:
         (a)   Who the official believes is committing or has committed a civil
infraction; or
         (b)   On the basis of an affidavit that:
            (i)   Cites the facts of the alleged infraction; and
            (ii)   Is submitted to a designated enforcement official of the
county.
      (2)   Service.
         (a)   The citation shall be served on the defendant:
            (i)   In accordance with Maryland Rule 3-121; or
            (ii)   For real property-related violations, if an affidavit is
made that good faith efforts to serve the defendant under Maryland Rule 3-121
(a) have not succeeded, by:
               1.    Regular mail to the defendant's last known address; and
               2.    Posting the citation at the property where the civil
infraction has occurred or is occurring and, if located in the county, at the
defendant's residence or place of business.
         (b)   The enforcement official shall retain a copy of the citation.
      (3)   Contents. The citation shall contain:
         (a)   The enforcement official's certification:
            (i)   Attesting to the truth of the matter set forth in the
citation; or
            (ii)   That the citation is based on an affidavit;
         (b)   The name and address of the defendant;
         (c)   The nature of the civil infraction;
         (d)   The location and time that the civil infraction occurred;
         (e)   The amount of the fine assessed;
         (f)   The manner, location, and time in which the fine may be paid to
the county;
         (g)   Notice of the defendant's right to elect to stand trial; and
         (h)   Notice of the effect of failing to pay the fine or demand a
trial within the required time.
   (H)   Election to stand trial.
      (1)   Written notice. The defendant may elect to stand trial for the
civil infraction by providing written notice of intent to stand trial to the
enforcing agency at least 10 days before the payment date specified in the
citation.
      (2)   Scheduling procedure. 
         (a)   After receiving the written notice of intention to stand trial,
the enforcing agency shall forward a copy of the citation and notice to the
District Court having venue.
         (b)   After receiving the citation and notice, the District Court
shall:
            (i)   Schedule the case for trial; and
            (ii)   Notify the defendant of the trial date.
   (I)   Citation; failure to pay or elect to stand trial.
      (1)   In general. If the defendant does not pay the fine by the date of
payment set forth on the citation and does not send to the enforcing agency the
written notice of intent to stand trial:
         (a)   The defendant is liable for the fine;
         (b)   The enforcing agency may double the fine to an amount not
exceeding $1,000 and request adjudication of the case through the District
Court, including the filing of a demand for judgment on affidavit; and
         (c)   The District Court promptly shall schedule the case for trial
and summon the defendant to appear.
      (2)   Entry of judgment for failure to respond. If the county makes a
proper demand for judgment on affidavit and the defendant does not respond to a
summons issued under subsection (I)(c) of this section, the District Court
shall enter judgment against the defendant in favor of the county in the amount
then due.
   (J)   Summons; failure to pay or appear. If the defendant does not pay the
fine as provided in the citation and does not appear in District Court as
provided in the summons:
      (1)   The county may double the fine to an amount not exceeding $1,000;
and
      (2)   The court may enter judgment against the defendant in the amount
then due if the proper demand for judgment on affidavit has been made.
   (K)   Proceedings.
      (1)   In general. In a civil infraction proceeding:
         (a)   The District Court shall confirm that the defendant has received
a copy of and understands the charges;
         (b)   The defendant may enter a plea of guilty or not guilty;
         (c)   The District Court shall apply the evidentiary standards
provided by law or rule for the trial of a civil case;
         (d)   The defendant may:
            (i)    Cross-examine witnesses;
            (ii)   Produce evidence or witnesses on the defendant's own behalf;
            (iii)   Testify; and
            (iv)   Be represented by counsel of the defendant's choice and at
the defendant's expense; and
         (e)   The county has the burden to prove by clear and convincing
evidence that the defendant has committed the infraction.
      (2)   Verdict. The District Court may:
         (a)   Enter a verdict of guilty or not guilty; or
         (b)   Before entering a verdict, place the defendant on probation.
   (L)   Penalties. If the District Court finds that the defendant has
committed a civil infraction:
      (1)   (a)   The court shall order the defendant to pay the fine,
including any doubling of the fine, not exceeding the limit under subsection
(J)(1);
         (b)   The fine imposed is a judgment in favor of the county; and
         (c)   If the fine remains unpaid for 30 days after the judgment is
entered, the judgment is enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent
as other civil judgments for money unless the court has suspended or deferred
the payment of the fine as provided under item (2) of this section;
      (2)   The court may suspend or defer the payment of the fine under
conditions that the court sets;
      (3)   The defendant is liable for the costs of the court proceedings; and
      (4)   The court may order the defendant to abate the infraction or enter
an order authorizing the county to abate the infraction at the defendant's
expense.
   (M)   Abatement of infraction by county.
      (1)   Defendant to be billed for cost. If the county abates an infraction
under a District Court order, the county shall present the defendant with a
bill for the cost of abatement by:
         (a)   Regular mail to the defendant's last known address; or
         (b)   Any other means that are reasonably calculated to give notice of
the bill to the defendant.
      (2)   Judgment. If the defendant does not pay the bill within 30 days
after it is presented under subsection (A) of this section, on a motion of the
county, the District Court shall enter a judgment against the defendant for the
cost of the abatement.
   (N)   Fines, penalties, or forfeitures remitted to county. All fines,
penalties, or forfeitures collected by the District Court for a civil
infraction shall be remitted to the Treasurer of Frederick County.
   (O)   Contempt of court. If, without good cause, a defendant does not pay a
fine or cost imposed by the District Court, the Court may treat the failure as
contempt of court.
   (P)   Adjudication not a criminal conviction. Adjudication of a municipal
infraction is not a criminal conviction for any purpose.
   (Q)   Criminal citation. Where it appears there is an intentional violation
of the County Code has occurred, criminal action may be brought and a fine of
up to $1,000.00 and imprisonment not exceeding 6 months may be imposed.
(Bill No. 16-16, 10-4-2016)
CHAPTER 1-2: ADMINISTRATION
Statutory reference:
   Counties generally, see Md. Code Ann., Local Government Article
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-2-1 — 1-2-15)
Section
   
1-2-1   Pension for circuit judges
§ 1-2-1. PENSION FOR CIRCUIT JUDGES.
   (A)   The county shall pay any elected judge of the circuit court for the
sixth judicial circuit resident in the county, whose active service is or has
been terminated, and who is or hereafter becomes entitled to a pension from the
state under the provisions of any act of the General Assembly of Maryland, in
addition to any such pension by the state, a pension to be paid by the county.
Such pension shall be calculated on the amount of the county’s annual
supplemental compensation, which was paid or is being paid to such judge on the
date of the termination of his active service as a circuit court judge, and
such pension shall be in the amount of 3% of such final annual county
supplemental compensation multiplied by the number of years or fraction thereof
of active service by appointment as well as by election, up to a maximum number
of 20 years.
   (B)   In addition thereto, the spouse of every judge eligible for a pension
under this section and enabling law who dies in active service shall be paid
one-half of the pension to which such judge would have been entitled under this
section and enabling law on the date of his death if he would have terminated
his active service on such date. In order to be entitled to the pension
provided by this section and enabling law, a spouse of a judge who dies during
active service shall have been married to the judge for a period of not less
than 3 years prior to such judge’s death, and in the case of a judge not in
active service, not less than 3 years prior to the date of the termination of
active service. A spouse who is entitled to a pension under the provisions of
this section and enabling law shall be paid for the period of her natural life,
unless such spouse remarries, in which event the pension is to cease and
terminate.
   (C)   The county governing body shall levy annually upon the assessable
property of the county a tax sufficient to pay the pensions provided for in
this section and enabling law.
(1959 Code, § 30-8) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-2-2 – 1-2-15. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: PURCHASES (§§ 1-2-16 — 1-2-48)
Section
   
1-2-16   Definitions
   
1-2-17   Authority and applicability
   
1-2-18   Ethics
   
1-2-19   Signature authority
   
1-2-20   Powers and duties of Department of Procurement and Contracting
Director
   
1-2-21   Rules, regulations, and policies
   
1-2-22   Prerequisites for award of contracts
   
1-2-23   Exemptions
   
1-2-24   Specifications
   
1-2-25   Open market purchases - agency purchases, informal bids, written
informal bids
   
1-2-26   Formal solicitations
   
1-2-27   Alternative methods of procurement
   
1-2-28   Payment vouchers
   
1-2-29   Contract terms and extensions
   
1-2-30   Insurance
   
1-2-31   Bonds
   
1-2-32   Agreements
   
1-2-33   Contractor Responsibility Board
   
1-2-34   Limitations on award of contracts
   
1-2-35   Records retention
   
1-2-36   Hiring of illegal aliens prohibited for performance of county work
   
1-2-37   Surplus, obsolete and waste articles
Cross reference:
   Annual budget, see §§
1-8-21 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Competitive bidding generally, see Md. Ann. Code, Local Government Art. §
12-301
§ 1-2-16. DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   AGENCY. Any service area, division, department, board or commission of the
County, including all entities, however structured, that utilize the County's
financial system, except the County Board of Education and Frederick Community
College.
   AGENCY PURCHASE. An open market purchase of less than $10,000 and conducted
by the agency.
   AGREEMENT. The document resulting from a procurement and enforceable by law
between the County and one or more entities.
   AMENDMENT. An addition to, deletion from, correction or modification of a
solicitation or agreement.
   BEST VALUE. A competitive bid/quote process which permits the evaluation of
objective criteria in addition to price to determine the best overall value to
the County.
   BID. A formal price offer submitted by a prospective contractor to furnish
specific goods and/or services to the County in response to an Invitation for
Bids (IFB).
   BIDDER. An entity providing a response to a solicitation.
   BRAND NAME. A specific manufacturer, firm, or trademark desired or required
which may be utilized in a specification description limiting acceptable
responses to one (1) or more items by manufacturers' names or catalog numbers.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECT. Any public improvement in the capital budget
planned and budgeted by the County in advance.
   CATALOG PRICE. The price included in a catalog, price list, or schedule.
   CHANGE ORDER. Any written modification to an existing agreement authorizing
changes within the scope of work, additions or deletions to the work or an
adjustment to any other provision of the contract.
   CONSTRUCTION. The process of building, improving, altering or demolishing
improvements. CONSTRUCTION shall not include the operation, repair, or
maintenance of improvements.
   CONSULTANT. A contractor working in an advisory capacity that works
according to its own methods or methods set forth in a solicitation.
   CONTRACT. Any agreement enforceable by law between the County and contractor
(s), regardless of form or title.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person, company, firm, legal entity or vendor having a
contract or agreement with the County, including consultants.
   CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY BOARD (CRB). The group that reviews the work and
projects of contractors performing for the County, including consultants, to
address issues as they arise.
   COOPERATIVE PURCHASING. Procurement conducted by, or on behalf of, more than
one public procurement entity.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY COUNCIL. County Council of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY EXECUTIVE. County Executive of Frederick County, Maryland, or their
designee.
   DESIGN-BID-BUILD. A construction project delivery method in which the design
and construction of a project are bid sequentially and contracted for
separately with two individual contracts.
   DESIGN/BUILD. A construction project delivery method in which a contractor
submits one proposal to provide both the design and construction services for
the entire construction project.
   DESIGNEE. A duly authorized representative of a person holding a superior
position.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Procurement and Contracting unless otherwise
stated.
   DISCOUNT-FROM-LIST CONTRACTS. Contracts wherein award is determined by
applying a percentage discount from established catalog prices.
   ELECTRONIC. Electrical, digital, magnetic, optical, electromagnetic, or
similar technology.
   ENGINEERING SERVICES. Professional work in connection with the design or
construction of public or private utilities, structures, buildings, machines,
equipment, etc. by a certified and/or licensed engineer.
   EVALUATION PROCESS. A process led by P&C in which an evaluation team
determines award of a solicitation, including assessing and discussing the
proposals, interviewing contractors, soliciting best and final offers, and
assisting in the negotiation of best value for the County.
   EVALUATION TEAM. A group of individuals led by P&C selected to assist in
determination of award of a solicitation process.
   FORMAL SOLICITATIONS. The purchase of goods or services anticipated to be
greater than $50,000 conducted by P&C utilizing formal processes in writing and
requiring public notice.
   GOODS. Any tangible property other than services or real property.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Any addition to real property amounting to more than mere
repairs or partial replacement and intended to enhance its value or utility.
This term shall not include maintenance.
   INDEFINITE DELIVERY QUANTITY CONTRACT AGREEMENT (IDQ). A master agreement
utilized to establish standard terms, conditions and pricing for an indefinite
quantity of identified services or materials which the County will contract for
in the future via issuance of a task order, and which does not identify a
specific scope of work.
   INFORMAL BID. An open market purchase of less than $25,000 by obtaining not
less than three quotes and conducted by the agencies at the discretion of P&C.
   INFORMALITY. A minor or immaterial irregularity in a bid that is a matter of
form rather than of substance; a variation of a bid or proposal from the exact
requirements of the IFB or RFP, which can be corrected or waived without being
prejudicial to other  bidders, and has no material effect on the price,
quality, quantity, or delivery schedule of the goods, services, or construction
being procured.
   INVITATION FOR BIDS (IFB). A formal request to prospective contractors
soliciting bids for the purchase of goods or services.
   JOB-ORDER-CONTRACTING. A method of obtaining an indefinite quantity of not
specifically defined project services such as construction, preconstruction,
finance, maintenance, operations, design, etc., performed via task orders
issued during the course of the master agreement.
   KICKBACK. Any money, fee commission, credit, gift, gratuity, thing of value
or compensation of any kind that is provided directly or indirectly to any
contractor, contractor employee, subcontractor or subcontractor employee for
the purpose of improperly obtaining or rewarding favorable treatment in
connection with a contract or subcontract.
   LETTER OF INTEREST (LOI). A step in the procurement process to ascertain
interest in performing a specific job or service for the County wherein
contractors are solicited to express their interest in performing the services.
   MAINTENANCE. Acts of repair, replacement or other acts necessary to keep
property in proper condition and good working order. This term shall not
include improvements.
   MASTER CONTRACT. An agreement resulting from an indefinite delivery quantity
contract.
   NEGOTIATIONS. An exchange of information or any form of communication during
which the contractor  and the County may formalize an agreement or amendment to
an agreement for the purchase of goods or services.
   OCA. Office of the County Attorney.
   OFFEROR. See BIDDER.
   OPEN MARKET PURCHASE. A purchase of an amount less than $50,000, made by an
agency utilizing the P&C rules and regulations and not requiring formal public
notice.
   P&C. Procurement and Contracting Office.
   PAYMENT VOUCHER. A method of payment for certain approved transactions for
which there is no competitive purchasing function.
   PIGGYBACK. A procedure of procuring goods or services without formal
procedures via utilizing other public entity's award of solicitations,
contracts awarded by the State of Maryland, contracts awarded by local and
state government agencies, cooperative purchasing organizations, purchasing
associations, and federal government schedules such as General Services
Administration (GSA).
   PILOT PROGRAM. A small-scale or limited time experimental purchase of goods
or services conducted to determine the feasibility of use, processes, or
functions and move toward making a determination for future purchases while
limiting risk of large-scale involvement or cost.
   PRICING AGREEMENT. An agreement by which procurements are conducted by or on
behalf of more than one (1) governmental body.
   PROCUREMENT. The purchasing, renting, leasing or other acquisition of any
materials, services, professional services or construction. It shall also
include all functions that pertain to obtaining any supplies, services
including professional services or construction, including the description of
requirements, the selection and solicitation of sources and the preparation and
award of contract. It shall not include the buying, purchasing, renting or
leasing of real property, or any interest in real property.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. The furnishing of labor, time, effort or expertise by
a licensed or certified contractor with specialized knowledge acquired and
formalized by a postgraduate degree in a specialized field, including but not
limited to architects, auditors, doctors, engineers and lawyers.
   PROGRAM. A detailed framework of steps or activities specifically designed
to address a specific initiative of the County.
   PROPOSAL. The documents submitted in response to a solicitation.
   PROPOSAL REVISION. A change to a proposal made after the solicitation
closing date, at the request of or as allowed by the Director of P&C, as the
result of negotiation.
   PUBLIC NOTICE. Advertising notification to the public of solicitations
offered by the County, changes to solicitation, cancellation of solicitations,
etc. which allows a reasonable amount of time for potential bidders to gather
information and provide a response.
   PURCHASE ORDER. A County document which encumbers funds and is used to
authorize a purchase transaction with a contractor. Acceptance of a purchase
order by a contractor shall constitute a contract, or part of a contract.
   QUALIFICATIONS BASED SELECTION (QBS). A process for pre-qualifying or
selecting one (1) or more entities to provide professional design services
based on qualifications and experience designing similar work.
   QUALIFIED RELATIVE. A spouse, parent, or child.
   QUOTATION. A document containing cost information for goods and services
valued at $30,000 or less submitted in response to a solicitation.
   REQUEST FOR INFORMATION (RFI). A nonbinding solicitation method whereby the
County solicits input, comments, feedback or reactions from interested parties
for a possible future solicitation.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP). All documents, whether attached or incorporated
by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals wherein best value is
determined in an evaluation process by an evaluation team, and price may not be
a primary factor in determining award.
   REQUEST FOR QUOTATION (RFQ). An informal request on the open market to
prospective contractors soliciting pricing for goods and services valued at
$30,000 or less.
   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER or OFFEROR. Anindividual or entity that has submitted a
response to a solicitation which has proven that it is fully capable to meet
all of the requirements of a solicitation, that meets the criteria specified in
the solicitation, that has the capability in all respects to perform fully the
contract requirements, and that has the experience, integrity, reliability,
capacity, facilities, equipment, insurance, and credit to ensure good-faith
performance as determined by the Director of P&C. The Director of P&C may
utilize the expertise of agencies in making the determination of
responsibility.
   RESPONSIVE BIDDER or OFFEROR. An individual or entity that has submitted a
response to a solicitation that fully conforms to the requirements of the
solicitation response requirements in all material respects, including form and
substance as determined by the Director of P&C.
   SERVICES. The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor which does
not involve the delivery of a specific end product other than required
performance and reporting.
   SHORT LIST. A reduced list of offerors winnowed by application of uniform
criteria in an approved process, that has been deemed eligible to move forward
in an evaluation process by an evaluation team, and from which the successful
offeror will be chosen.
   SPECIFICATION. Detailed description of the physical or functional
characteristics of or the nature of the goods or services required and what a
bidder or offeror must be responsive to in order to be considered for award of
a contract.
   SUBCONTRACTOR. An individual or entity that performs work or provides
service to or for a contractor that has a contract with the County.
   SURPLUS. Goods owned by the County deemed no longer necessary or useful and
designated for disposal.
   TASK ORDER. A written statement of work defining a service or material with
a definite project, price and time of completion having been negotiated between
a contractor and the County on the basis of terms, conditions and pricing
awarded in an indefinite delivery quantity agreement (IDQ) which details the
specifics of a project.
   WRITTEN INFORMAL BID. An open market purchase of less than $50,000 by
obtaining not less than five quotes in writing and conducted by the agency at
the discretion of P&C.
(Ord. 09-29-533, 12-15-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 15-07, 8-18-
2015; Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-17. AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of this article is:
      (1)   To provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons
involved in the County's procurement processes, to maximize the purchasing
value of public funds, to codify and standardize the County's purchasing
procedures for the orderly and efficient administration thereof, to provide
safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity and to
foster effective, broad-based competition within the free enterprise system.
      (2)   To secure for the County taxpayers the advantages and economies
which will result from centralized control over the expenditures of County
funds for supplies, materials, equipment, public improvements, professional,
and contractual services by the application of modern, business-like
procurement and contracting methods and by better utilization of the articles
procured at public expense. (1959 Code, § 36-2)
      (3)   To memorialize the County’s intent that with respect to procurement
activities, the rules and regulations established by or promulgated under
authority of this article shall extend to all agencies as defined herein and
established a uniform and standard Procurement practice.
   (B)   Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the
following:
      (1)   Every expenditure of public funds by the County unless otherwise
exempted by the County, irrespective of their source, including federal
assistance monies;
      (2)   Disposal of surplus material; and
      (3)   Contracts where there is no expenditure of public monies or where
the County is offering something of value to the business community when the
County determines source selection and award of a contract.
   (C)   Requirement of good faith. The provisions of this article require all
parties involved in the development, performance, or administration of
purchasing contracts of the County to act in good faith.
   (D)   Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this
article:
      (1)   The sale or lease of County real property;
      (2)   Contracts for professional witnesses if the purpose of such
contracts is to provide for services or testimony relating to an existing or
potential judicial proceeding in which this County is or may become a party or
to contracts for special investigative services for law enforcement purposes;
      (3)   Goods and/or services specifically designated by law enforcement as
necessary for undercover, investigative work;
      (4)   Agreements negotiated by the County Attorney in settlement of
litigation or threatened litigation;
      (5)   The purchases of materials for resale in a concession operation
which shall be made in accordance with procedures prescribed by the Director of
P&C;
      (6)   Contracts for municipal improvement districts;
      (7)   Items identified as eligible for payment via payment voucher;
      (8)   Insurance proposals pursuant to the provisions of the most recently
adopted resolution; or
      (9)   Purchases made by the Office of Economic Development for public
relations purposes, subject to written approval by the Director of P&C.
   (E)   Agency authorization. The County Executive may authorize, in writing,
any agency to purchase or contract for certain specified supplies, materials,
equipment, capital improvement or contractual services independently of the
Director of P&C, but shall require that such purchases or contracts shall be
made in conformity with the applicable provisions of this article and shall
further require periodic reports from the agency on the purchases and contracts
made under such written authorization.
   (F)   Legal services. The procurement of legal advice or engagement of a law
firm to assist with County legal matters may only occur after receipt of
written authorization from the County Attorney.
   (G)   All purchases shall follow. All procurements are subject to the
requirements of the Frederick County Charter and Code and the rules and
regulations. Any procurement made contrary to the provisions herein is voidable
by the Director of P&C, with the approval of the County Executive, and the
County shall not be bound thereby. The head of the agency making such purchase
transaction shall be personally liable for the costs of such purchase or
contract and, if already paid for out of County funds, the amount thereof may
be recovered in the name of the County in an appropriate action therefore.
Known violations of the provisions set forth herein may result in disciplinary
action(s) as deemed appropriate by Human Resources.
   (H)   Splitting requirements. An agency may not split or divide into
increments the amount of needed services, supplies, materials, or equipment in
a manner that would then allow use of a different procurement method.
   (I)   Electronic authorization. Electronic media, including acceptance of
electronic signatures, is authorized and may be utilized in accordance with the
State of Maryland's applicability statute, regulatory and other guidance for
use of such media, provided the media provides for:
      (1)   Appropriate security to prevent unauthorized access to the
quotation, approval, and award processes; and
      (2)   Accurate retrieval or conversion of electronic forms of records and
information into a medium which permits inspection and copying.
(1959 Code, § 36-5)
(Ord. 09-29-533, 12-15-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-
2022)
§ 1-2-18. ETHICS.
   (A)   Conduct of P&C, including all employees, shall meet the highest
ethical standards in accordance with the following principles:
      (1)   To consider first the interest of the County in all transactions
and carry out its established policies.
      (2)   To buy without prejudice, seeking to obtain the maximum best value
for each dollar of expenditure.
      (3)   To strive consistently for knowledge of the materials and processes
of manufacture, and to establish practical methods for the conduct of the
office.
      (4)   To subscribe to and to work for honesty and truth in buying and
selling and to denounce all forms and manifestations of commercial bribery.
      (5)   To accord a prompt and courteous reception, so far as conditions
will permit, to all who call on a legitimate business mission.
      (6)   To respect the obligations of a caller and to require that
obligations to the caller and to the County be respected and be consistent with
good business practice.
      (7)   To counsel and assist fellow purchasing professionals in the
performance of their duties whenever occasion permits.
      (8)   To cooperate with all organizations and individuals engaged in
activities designed to enhance the development, standards, and integrity of the
public purchasing profession.
   (B)   County employees involved in the procurement of goods and services
shall:
      (1)   Engage in conduct, both professional and personal, which does not
in any way bring the County into disrepute.
      (2)   Accept no gratuities or gifts from bidders, offerors, or
contractors other than those declared nominal in value and which have been
sanctioned by the County.
      (3)   Disallow offers of hospitality, or those with vested interests, to
influence or be perceived to influence business decisions.
      (4)   Maintain the highest standard of integrity in all business
relationships.
      (5)   Not use their authority or position for their own financial or
personal gain or use their position to obtain a price consideration better than
that offered to the general public, unless it is one offered to all employees
separate from a solicitation or aware process.
      (6)   Strive for equal and transparent competition.
      (7)   Not allow an existing relationship with bidders, offerors, or
contractors to affect a negotiation with a competing contractor.
      (8)   Immediately report any instances of unethical or questionable
behavior by bidders, offerors, contractors, or County employees.
   (C)   Contractors and subcontractors.
      (1)   No contractor or subcontractor shall demand or receive from any of
its suppliers or its subcontractors, as an inducement for the award of a
subcontract or order, any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of
money, services or anything, present or promised, unless consideration of
substantially equal or greater value is exchanged.
      (2)   No subcontractor or supplier shall make or offer kickbacks.
      (3)   No person shall demand or receive any payment, loan, subscription,
advance, deposit of money, services or anything of value in return for an
agreement not to compete on contract.
      (4)   If a subcontractor or supplier makes a kickback or other prohibited
payment as described in this section, the amount thereof shall be conclusively
presumed to have been included in the price of the subcontract or order and
ultimately borne by the public body and shall be recoverable from both the
maker and recipient. Recovery from one offending party shall not preclude
recovery from other offending parties.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-19. SIGNATURE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Director of P&C is authorized to:
      (1)   Award bids for procurements in the amount of $100,000 or less;
      (2)   Execute documents binding on the County which are necessary or
incidental to procurements in the amount of $100,000 or less;
      (3)   Execute documents binding on the County which are necessary or
incidental to a settlement approved by the Contractor Responsibility Board
under §
1-2-33, in the amount of $100,000 or less;
      (4)   Approve purchases of vehicles and software as delegated by the
County Executive and which were approved in the budget for the then current
fiscal year; and
      (5)   Terminate contracts of $100,000 or less, when it is determined to
be in the best interest of the County.
   (B)   The County Executive is authorized to:
      (1)   Award bids for procurements in amounts in excess of $100,000, upon
the recommendation of the Director of P&C;
      (2)   Execute documents binding on the County which are necessary or
incidental to procurements in amounts in excess of $100,000, upon the
recommendation of the Director of P&C;
      (3)   Execute documents binding on the County which are necessary or
incidental to a settlement approved by the Contractor Responsibility Board
under §
1-2-33, in amounts in excess of $100,000;
      (4)   Specify which vehicles and software approved in the budget for the
then current fiscal year for which the authority to purchase is delegated to
the Director of P&C; and
      (5)   Terminate contracts in excess of $100,000, when it is determined to
be in the best interest of the County.
   (C)   The County Executive may delegate to any Division Director the
authority to execute and bind the County via a task order in any dollar amount
that does not exceed the estimated annual "not to exceed" dollar amount set
forth in a non-binding indefinite delivery quantity master agreement.
   (D)   The Council shall authorize by law any contract in excess of $20,000
that would obligate the County to appropriate funds in the Operating Budget for
more than a single fiscal year.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-20. POWERS AND DUTIES OF PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director of P&C serves as the purchasing official for the County,
is responsible for the procurement of all materials, services, professional
services and construction services for the County, as governed by the terms of
this article.
   (B)   The Director of PC&C or designee will, subject to the provisions of
this article:
      (1)   Purchase all supplies, materials, equipment and contractual
services required by the agencies and for all capital improvement projects of
the County, subject to the approval of the County Executive, when necessary.
      (2)   Negotiate contracts for professional services, subject to the
approval of the County Executive, when necessary.
      (3)   Use specifications established in accordance with this article when
applicable to purchase orders and contracts, and insure compliance with such
specifications through adequate inspection, including testing.
      (4)   Solicit information via the request for information process to gain
insight and information on goods, services, industry practices, industry
interest, service standards, etc. which may not be easily gleaned from County
employees and that may be utilized in a future solicitation or selection
process.
      (5)   Transfer to or between agencies or exchange, trade-in or sell those
supplies, materials and equipment, which are surplus, obsolete or unused.
      (6)   Develop, with the approval of the OCA as to legal sufficiency,
standard forms and conditions of solicitations, purchase orders and contracts.
Develop and prescribe the use by agencies of other forms required in carrying
out the provisions of this article and amend or eliminate any forms.
      (7)   Terminate contracts of $100,000 or less when the Director of P&C
determines that it is in the best interest of the County.
      (8)   Recommend termination of contracts in excess of $100,000 to the
County Executive when the Director of P&C determines that it is in the best
interest of the County.
   (C)   The Director of P&C will submit, as required by the County Executive,
a report on the work of the P&C in implementing the provisions of this article.
   (D)   The Director of P&C shall recommend revisions to these Code provisions
as needed and conduct a comprehensive review five (5) years from the date of
the most recent comprehensive update.
   (E)   The Director of P&C has the authority to cancel any solicitations.
      (1)   Any solicitation may be canceled, with all bids, proposals or
submissions being rejected in whole or in part as specified in the solicitation
when the Director of P&C has determined it to be in the best interest of the
County.
      (2)   Prior to a solicitation bid opening, a solicitation may be canceled
in whole or in part when the Director of P&C determines in writing that:
         (a)   The County no longer requires the materials, services, or
construction;
         (b)   The County can no longer reasonably expect to fund the
procurement;
         (c)   Proposed amendments to the solicitation would be of such
magnitude that a new solicitation is in the best interest of the County; or
         (d)   Any reason determined by the Director of P&C to be in the best
interest of the County.
      (3)   The Director will provide public notice of the cancellation.
      (4)   After bid opening, but prior to award, all bids, proposals or
submissions may be rejected in whole or in part when the Director of P&C
determines in writing that:
         (a)   The County no longer requires the materials, services, or
construction;
         (b)   Ambiguous or otherwise inadequate specifications or scopes of
work were part of the solicitation;
         (c)   The solicitation did not provide for consideration of all
factors of significance to the County;
         (d)   Prices exceed available funds and it would not be appropriate to
adjust quantities to come within available funds;
         (e)   All otherwise acceptable bids, statements of qualifications, or
proposals received are at clearly unreasonable prices;
         (f)   There is reason to believe that the bids, statements of
qualifications, or proposals may not have been independently arrived at in open
competition, may have been collusive, or may have been submitted in bad faith;
or
         (g)   Competition was insufficient or no bids, proposals, or
submissions were received.
   (G)   The Director of P&C will determine whether a bidder or offeror is
responsible by considering:
      (1)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder or offeror to
perform the contract or provide the services required;
      (2)   Whether the bidder or offeror can perform the contract or provide
the service promptly and within the time specified without delay or
interference;
      (3)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and
efficiency of the bidder or offeror;
      (4)   The quality of the bidder's or offeror's performance of previous
contracts or services;
      (5)   The previous and current compliance by the bidder or offeror with
laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service;
      (6)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder or offeror to perform the contract or provide the service;
      (7)   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the materials and
services to the particular use required;
      (8)   The ability of the bidder or offeror to provide future maintenance
and service for the use of the subject of the contract;
      (9)   Any other circumstances which may affect the bidder's or offeror's
performance of the contract; and
      (10)   The agency's research if it is called upon for assistance in
determination.
   (H)   No contract shall be awarded to any bidder or offeror who is in
default on the performance of any other contract with the County or in the
payment of any taxes, licenses, or other monies due the County or State.
   (I)   The Director of P&C shall be the sole contact for agreement
negotiation with contractors. No officer or employee of the County shall
contract directly or indirectly with any vendor or Contractor except with the
approval of the Director of P&C.
   (J)   The Director of P&C is authorized to accept early payment discounts as
the lowest price offered if it is determined that the County can meet the
discount terms.
   (K)   The Director of P&C will, when possible, avoid oral communications
with contractors and facilitate all interaction in writing so as to avoid
misunderstandings and to provide a historical background and audit file.
   (L)   The Director of P&C shall maintain an open record policy whereby
prices obtained through open competition and quotations are available to the
public after a purchase is made, upon written receipt of a request, pursuant to
the Public Information Act State Government Article Title 10, Subtitle 6,
Annotated Code of Maryland.
   (M)   The Director of P&C shall determine award methodology in the event
competition was insufficient or no bids, proposals, or submissions were
received.
   (N)   The Director of P&C may utilize a geographic distribution award
methodology whereby contract awards are made to different contractors for the
provision of goods or services in separate identifiable geographic areas of the
County when justified by the need for timely delivery, service, availability,
or price differential.
   (O)   The Director of P&C is responsible for assuring specification
conformance of purchased goods and services.
      (1)   The Director of P&C will inspect and test, or cause to be inspected
and tested, supplies, materials, and equipment, and the furnishing of
contractual services, and the construction of capital improvement projects, to
ensure their conformance with the specifications or fitness for use or
performance requirements set forth in the purchase order or contract.
      (2)   Agencies may be authorized to complete the inspection and testing
as deliveries are made or services performed.
      (3)   Chemical and physical tests of samples may be required by the
Director of P&C and an outside laboratory may be utilized for this purpose.
      (4)   The Director of P&C shall promulgate necessary rules and
regulations for inspection of deliveries.
   (P)   The Director of P&C will oversee purchases made by the Frederick
County Health Department. The Frederick County Health Department is authorized
to fulfill its procurement requirements by:
      (1)   Conducting procurement actions through the Frederick County
Government procurement process;
      (2)   Conducting procurement in-house as authorized in writing by the
Director of P&C; or
      (3)   Conducting all procurement following the State of Maryland
procurement regulations as delineated in COMAR, Title 21.
   (Q)   The Director of P&C will oversee purchases made by Citizens Care and
Rehabilitation Center and Montevue Assisted Living Facility.
   (R)   The Director of P&C will oversee the selection process for grant
awardees.
   (S)   The Director of P&C may assess liquidated damages in accordance with
solicitation or contract terms and conditions when necessary and permitted by
the solicitation and at the sole discretion of the Director of P&C.
   (T)   The Director of P&C has the sole authority to issue all County
Purchase Orders.
      (1)   No purchases shall be made without a purchase order or contract
except for the authorized use of procurement cards or as otherwise stated in
this article.
      (2)   Agency Directors will be personally responsible for the cost of all
purchases or expenses incurred in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of
the County Code and P&C Rules and Regulations.
      (3)   No notice of award will be signed, no open market purchase order
will be issued, or procurement card purchase made without prior verification
that an unencumbered account balance in excess of all unpaid obligations is
sufficient to pay the amount of the purchase order, contract award, or
procurement card purchase.
      (4)   The Budget Director is responsible for providing the Director of
P&C with a detailed budget and capital outlay listing for each County Agency.
      (5)   It is the responsibility of each Agency Director to monitor and
control expenditures made by their agency's employees via procurement cards.
   (U)   The P&C may participate in joint or cooperative purchase activities
with other public jurisdictions or agencies, including but not limited to the
municipalities within Frederick County, the Frederick County Board of
Education, and Frederick Community College, Metropolitan Washington Council of
Governments Cooperative Purchasing (MWCOG), Baltimore Regional Cooperative
Purchasing Committee (BRCPC), Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority
(NMWDA), etc. Volunteer Fire and Rescue companies that are recognized
participants in the Frederick County Fire and Rescue system may also
participate in such joint or cooperative purchases.
   (V)   Notwithstanding §
1-2-25, the Director of P&C may elect to manage any purchase not exceeding
$50,000 according to any of the procurement methods listed under §
1-2-26 or §
1-2-27.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-21. RULES, REGULATIONS, AND POLICIES.
   (A)   Rules and regulations. The Director of P&C may promulgate rules for
the implementation of this Article. Rules may include, but not be limited to,
provisions for:
      (1)   The handling of bids, including advertising, custody and
safeguarding, opening and tabulation, acceptance or rejection and re-
advertising.
      (2)   Procedures to determine:
         (a)   The lowest, responsive and responsible bidder; and
         (b)   Award recommendations based on best value when applicable.
      (3)   The procedure for securing from bidders and prospective bidders the
data necessary to determine whether or not the bidders are responsible and the
bids are responsive.
      (4)   The procedure for reporting receipt of supplies, materials,
equipment, and services, and for reporting progress on and completion of
capital improvements.
      (5)   The procedure for submission, examination, and approval of invoices
for supplies, materials, equipment and services delivered to any and all
agencies, and for progress and final payment on capital improvements.
      (6)   Such other matters as may be necessary to give effect to such rules
and to the provisions of this article. The Director of P&C shall submit such
rules to the County Executive for approval. The Director of P&C shall enforce
such rules. A copy of them shall be open to public inspection during regular
business hours.
   (B)   Policies. Policies outlining routines to be taken in the execution of
the rules and regulations shall be approved by the Chief Administrative Officer
on an as-needed basis and shall be updated no less than every five (5) years.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-22. PREREQUISITES FOR AWARD OF CONTRACTS.
   (A)   When a procurement contract is primarily for the use of a specific
agency of the County, the Director of the agency shall recommend the approval
of award to the Director of P&C who will reject, award or recommend award of
the contract. When more than one agency utilizes the contract, the Director of
P&C will determine which agency(ies) shall recommend.
   (B)   Where competitive sealed bids or proposals are required by this
article and only one bid or proposal is received, the Director of P&C shall
document the rationale for rejecting or awarding the bid or proposal and may
negotiate with the single responder to develop a contract.
   (C)   Where responsive bids are received from two or more responsible
bidders and all bid prices received exceed the amount of allocated funds, the
Director of P&C may: reduce or modify the scope of work and solicit revised
bids from the responsive and responsible bidders on the original solicitation;
or cancel the solicitation and rebid.
   (D)   The Director of P&C may not award any contract or finalize any
procurement unless the funds necessary to defray the cost of such procurement
are appropriated and available, except:
      (1)   In an emergency as defined in §
1-2-27(B) of this code; and
      (2)   Where revenue to pay the contractor will be provided through the
performance of the contract.
   (E)   Contracts for the acquisition of property, the construction of
improvements, or other expenditures which are to be financed by bonds or other
obligations may not take effect until the proceeds of the bonds or obligations
have been received and verified as available by the Finance Director.
Improvements to be paid for by special assessment funds are exempt from this
requirement.
(Ord. 09-29-533, 12-15-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-
2022)
§ 1-2-23. EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   An Agency Director may submit to the Director of P&C a written request
for an exemption from the rules and regulations solicitation requirements: to
purchase goods or services from other government entities or quasi-governmental
agencies; for a short-term Pilot Program; when specific expertise is required;
or to contract with a non-profit offering services to persons with disabilities
or special needs.
   (B)   An exemption from the rules and regulations may be approved or revoked
at the sole discretion of the Director of P&C. Agencies granted an exemption
will be required to provide periodic reports to the Director of P&C on the
purchases and performance under contracts executed pursuant to the exemption.
The reports shall provide the contractor's name, description of goods and
services provided, quantities received and total prices paid.
   (C)   If an exemption is granted, the agency will still be bound by all
applicable (non-exempted) provisions of the Frederick County Charter, Code and
the P&C Rules and Regulations.
   (D)   If the Director of P&C determines that the exemption is no longer
warranted or in the best interest of the County, the exemption may be revoked.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-24. SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Intent. All specifications shall be drafted so as to provide a
nonrestrictive, clear, and concise description of the material, service or
construction sought.
   (B)   Preparation.
      (1)   The Director of P&C will prepare written specifications detailing
the County's requirements for the materials, service or construction. The
Director of P&C may also request that an agency assist with the preparation of
specifications for the procurement.
      (2)   No person who, for compensation, prepares a specification on behalf
of the County shall submit a bid or proposal for that procurement or any
portion thereof, or disclose to any bidder or offeror information concerning
the procurement that is not available to the public. However, the Director of
P&C may permit such person to submit a bid or proposal for the procurement or
any portion thereof if the Director of P&C determines that the exclusion of the
person would limit the number of potential qualified bidders or offerors in a
manner contrary to the best interest of the County.
   (C)   Approval. Both the Agency Director and the Director of P&C will
approve the specification prior to public distribution. If the Agency Director
and the Director of P&C are unable to reach an agreement, the matter will be
referred to the Chief Administrative Officer for resolution.
   (D)   Brand name specification.
      (1)   A brand name specification may be used after the Director of P&C
has determined that sufficient sources for competition exist for the
procurement of the material and that the use of the brand name specification is
not intended to limit or restrict competition.
      (2)   A brand name specification may be used to describe the standard of
quality, performance, and other salient characteristics of a material in lieu
of a description of its physical or functional characteristics and, the
solicitation will state that the use of the brand name is for the purpose of
describing the standard desired and that the substitution of equivalent
materials is permitted.
      (3)   A brand name specification may be used as the sole brand acceptable
after the Director of P&C has determined that alternative products will result
in a higher overall cost to the County, will otherwise harm the County's
financial interests, or will impede the County's administrative functions or
delivery of services to the public.
      (4)   An agency requesting a brand name specification will provide
written evidence to support a brand name determination to the Director of P&C
for approval. Inconvenience of drafting specifications or developing
performance specifications will not be sufficient justification to the use of a
brand name specification.
   (E)   Specifications prepared by other than County personnel. The
requirements and intent of this section regarding nonrestrictive specifications
applies to specifications prepared by non County individuals and entities,
including, but not limited to, architects, engineers, designers, and
consultants for public contracts, or subcontractors. No individual or entity
that prepares specifications on behalf of the County may receive any direct or
indirect benefit from the utilization of those specifications.
(Ord. 09-29-533, 12-15-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-
2022)
§ 1-2-25. OPEN MARKET PURCHASES - AGENCY PURCHASES, INFORMAL BIDS, WRITTEN
INFORMAL BIDS.
   (A)   LEVEL I Purchases.
      (1)   LEVEL I - Agency purchase, an open market purchase by which an
agency may procure small amounts of goods and services totaling less than
$10,000, without requirement of a bidding process and may be conducted on the
open market by RFQ.
      (2)   If the total cost of a purchase will exceed $10,000, the purchase
may not be split in order to appear to be a Level I purchase.
   (B)   LEVEL II Purchases.
      (1)   LEVEL II - Informal bid, an open market purchase where an agency
procures goods or services totaling less than $25,000 by quote. Informal Bids
are conducted by the agency in the open market at the discretion of P&C.
      (2)   If the total amount of the expenditure for a service, commodity, or
for a class of commodities normally obtainable from the same source of supply
is estimated to be less than $25,000, or if the sale of personal property which
has become obsolete or unusable is estimated to be less than $25,000, it may
not be subject to the requirements of a formal solicitation conducted by P&C
unless determined necessary by the Director of P&C.
      (3)   All Level II open market transactions require solicitation of not
less than three (3) competitive quotes and shall be submitted for approval of
P&C. Copies of quotations or proposals collected by the agency in award of an
informal bid are subject to review and approval of P&C prior to purchase.
      (4)   The agency may solicit quotes from contractors by telephone or
electronic methods.
      (5)   Award will be made to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder
or offeror. A best value award may be utilized at the sole discretion of P&C.
   (C)   LEVEL III - written informal bids.
      (1)   LEVEL III - written informal bid, an open market purchase where an
agency procures goods or services totaling less than $50,000 by written RFQ.
Written informal bids are conducted by the agency in the open market at the
discretion of P&C but the method must be approved by P&C.
      (2)   If the total amount of the expenditure for a service, commodity, or
for a class of commodities normally obtainable from the same source of supply
is estimated to be less than $50,000, or if the sale of personal property which
has become obsolete or unusable is estimated to be less than $50,000, it is not
subject to the requirements of a formal solicitation conducted by P&C unless
determined to be necessary by the Director of P&C.
      (3)   All Level III open market transactions require solicitation of not
less than five (5) competitive written quotes and shall be submitted for
approval of P&C. Copies of quotations or proposals collected by the agency in
award of a written informal bid are subject to review and approval of P&C prior
to purchase.
      (4)   The agency may solicit quotes from contractors by telephone,
electronic, or written methods, but the contractor must provide its quote in
writing.
      (5)   Award will be made to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder
or offeror. A best value award may be utilized at the sole discretion of P&C.
      (6)   The Director of P&C may require the use of a more formal
procurement method for a purchase not exceeding $50,000 when it is determined
that the nature of the procurement requires additional support.
      (7)   If the total cost of purchase will exceed $50,000, the purchase may
not be split in order to be a Level III - written informal bid.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-26. FORMAL SOLICITATIONS.
   (A)   A procurement estimated to exceed $50,000 will be conducted by P&C
through a formal solicitation. This includes all goods and services, as well as
discount-from-list contracts or pricing-agreements.
   (B)   The formal solicitation process will contain specifications,
evaluation criteria, and contractual terms and conditions.
   (C)   Public notice of the initial posting of the solicitation and of all
addendums to the solicitation is required.
   (D)   Changes, additions, or modifications to the contents of a formal
solicitation, or the bid or proposal opening date, time, and location may only
be made by addendum.
   (E)   Bids or proposals not received by P&C before the time and date of
opening will be rejected. The P&C time clock will govern.
   (F)   Bids or proposals will be evaluated solely on the solicitation
requirements.
   (G)   To establish a list of qualified bidders, a prequalification process
may be conducted prior to the issuance of a solicitation. If a prequalification
process is used, only bids submitted by prequalified bidders will be considered
for award.
   (H)   An award may be based upon best value if evaluation criteria are
identified in the solicitation.
   (I)   Bids or proposals may be withdrawn prior to the public opening.
   (J)   Bids or proposals may be changed prior to the public opening by
submission of a written amendment on the bidder's letterhead.
   (K)   Contract awards of $100,000 or less shall be awarded by the Director
of P&C, while contract awards exceeding $100,000 shall be awarded by the County
Executive.
   (L)   The Council shall authorize by law any contract in excess of $20,000
that would obligate the County to appropriate funds in the Operating Budget for
more than a single fiscal year.
   (M)   The following types of formal solicitation may be utilized:
      (1)   Invitation for bid.
         (a)   After opening the competitive sealed bids, the award will be
made to the responsive and responsible bidder upon the lowest price per item,
lowest overall cost, or highest discount. Discounts based on less than net 30
may be considered for award at the discretion of the Director of P&C.
         (b)   Bids will be opened in public at the same time and a tabulation
of the totals made available for public inspection.
         (c)   Bids may be withdrawn after bid opening if a clerical error is
clearly evident or after receipt of evidence of a clerical error if the
Director of P&C allows the withdrawal of the bid.
         (d)   Errors may be corrected under the following circumstances:
            1.   Errors in the extension of unit prices in multiplication,
division, addition, or subtraction in a bid may be corrected by the Director of
P&C prior to award. The unit prices prevail and will not be changed.
            2.   After bid opening, a bidder may ask to correct errors in
extension of unit prices, multiplication, division, addition, or subtraction.
Unit prices prevail and will not be changed.
            3.   A voluntary reduction in price by the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder may be accepted after bid opening, provided the reduction is
not conditioned on, or does not result in, the modification or deletion of any
specifications or conditions contained in the invitation for bids.
      (2)   Request for proposals.
         (a)   An award will be made based upon best value after a competitive
sealed procurement process.
         (b)   Entities submitting proposals in response to the solicitation
will be identified in a list of respondents made available for public
inspection. Contents of proposals, including price, will not be made available
in any format until the award has been made. Price information for unsuccessful
bids will be considered proprietary and not be disclosed to the public.
         (c)   The following are eligible for award by competitive sealed
proposals:
            1.   Goods, services, and professional services at the discretion
of the Director of P&C;
            2.   Capital improvement projects when the Director of P&C
determines that the use of alternative project delivery methods would not
provide substantial benefit to the County;
            3.   Technology and software procurements at the discretion of the
Director of P&C; and
            4.    Job-order-contracting when the Director of P&C determines
that it would provide substantial benefit to the County.
         (d)   Request for proposals will be evaluated by an evaluation team
approved by the Director of P&C.
         (e)   Evaluation will be conducted by the evaluation team following a
confidential review and evaluation of each proposal and utilizing the criteria
set forth in the solicitation and addenda, which may include oral interview
discussions with all of the highest qualified offerors, requests for
clarification or proposal revisions, reference checks, and request for best and
final offers, etc.
         (f)   The evaluation team will determine a short list of offerors,
after which price submissions of the short-listed entities will be opened and
evaluated. Award will be recommended by the Evaluation Team unanimously based
on the offer that provides the best value to the County. Any non-unanimous
evaluation team results will be determined by the Director of P&C.
         (g)   The Director of P&C is authorized to negotiate the final price
and scope of work with the recommended awardee to obtain the best value for the
County and may allow proposal revisions during negotiation.
         (h)   At the sole discretion of the Director of P&C, a
prequalification process may be conducted prior to the issuance of a request
for proposals to establish a list of prequalified offerors. In the event a
prequalification process is used, the evaluation team will only consider
proposals submitted from the pre-qualified offerors.
      (3)   Qualification based selection for architectural and engineering
services.
         (a)   At the sole discretion of the Director of P&C, a qualification
based selection process may be utilized for preliminary and schematic phases,
design development phase, contract document phase, bidding phase, construction
phase, post-construction phase, commissioning services, or construction
observation services.
         (b)   Upon receipt of an agency's submittal of a comprehensive program
for the project which sets forth all of the information necessary to design the
proposed improvement and a projected timeline, the P&C will request statements
of qualification and letters of interest from prospective offerors.
         (c)   Upon receipt of the information requested from prospective
offerors, each submission will be reviewed by the evaluation team for inclusion
on the short list of qualified entities.
         (d)   Entities included on the short list are invited to respond to a
request for proposal and only proposals submitted by entities on the pre-
qualified short list will be evaluated for award.
      (4)   Indefinite delivery quantity:
         (a)   Indefinite delivery quantity agreements may be utilized at the
sole discretion of the Director of P&C for the purpose of obtaining bids or
proposals to provide materials and services routinely needed by one or more
agencies for different applications, to be provided on an as-needed basis.
         (b)   Indefinite delivery quantity bids or proposals will be solicited
by the appropriate procurement method as determined by P&C. Solicitations will
include a list of potential materials and services sought, typical types of
projects, and the explanation that the list is a representative sample of
materials, services, and projects which may be contracted for. The list will
not be considered as a limitation upon the type of projects for which a task
order may be executed, nor will it prohibit an agency from requesting that P&C
conduct a formal solicitation for similar services for a specific project.
         (c)   An award may be made to one or more bidders or offerors and a
master agreement executed. The master agreement establishes pricing and
standard terms and conditions required by the County applicable to future task
orders, but does not include a specific scope of work to be performed.
         (d)   Task orders consistent with the terms of the master agreement
may be executed in accordance with the authority set forth in this Article. The
task order will define a specific scope of work to be performed and the amount
of compensation to be paid determined under the compensation terms of the
master agreement and constitute a binding contract between the County and the
contractor. The agency may require competition among awarded bidders or
offerors when the scope of work is estimated to exceed $50,000 and the task
order will be issued to the bidder or offeror providing lowest pricing. If one
of several IDQ bidders or offerors possesses particular expertise in a field,
is familiar with a specific site or structure, or is better able to complete
the work in the required timeframe, a task order may be issued with or without
competition among awarded bidders or offerors, or to a bidder or offeror that
does not provide the lowest pricing.
         (e)   The total scope of a project to be performed pursuant to an IDQ
Agreement may not be split so that the cost of the task order is under $50,000.
         (f)   Indefinite delivery quantity agreement solicited by P&C on
behalf of one agency may be utilized by any agency.
   (N)   Construction services:
      (1)   Alternatives. Solicitations for construction services shall be
conducted in accordance with the requirements of § 1-2-26(M)(1) Invitation for
bid and may use alternative methodologies including but not limited to design-
bid-build, design-build, and job-order contracting at the discretion of the
Director of P&C.
      (2)   Capital improvement projects. If an alternate construction delivery
method has not been authorized for a capital improvement project, competitive
sealed bids will be secured and the contract awarded in accordance with the
requirements.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-27. ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF PROCUREMENT.
   (A)   Sole source.
      (1)   Sole source or single source procurement may be utilized only when
no reasonable alternative sources exist. A record of sole source procurements
will be maintained as a public record.
      (2)   When the County requires supplies, materials, or equipment which
are produced by only one manufacturer, the Director of P&C may specify one
manufacturer's make or brand in the solicitation and obtain competitive pricing
from the authorized dealers or distributors of the manufacturer. If the
manufacturer is the sole Bidder and sole source of supply, the Director of P&C
is authorized to negotiate an open market purchase order or contract with the
manufacturer at prices and on terms most advantageous to the County.
      (3)   When the County requires supplies, materials, or equipment which
are patented or proprietary and which are obtainable in two (2) or more equally
satisfactory and competitive makes, brands, or types, the Director of P&C will
identify all acceptable and competitive makes, brands, or types in the
solicitation. Unless a prequalification process has been completed or the item
has been "standardized" such lists will also include the phrase "or equal to".
      (4)   When the County requests an estimate for repair of equipment and
the cost to obtain the estimate is significant, the Director of P&C is
authorized to negotiate price, delivery, and terms for the repair to be
completed by the Contractor that provided the estimate, in lieu of expending
additional funds to obtain multiple estimates.
      (5)   The Director of P&C may accept bids which contain alternate or
additional makes, brands, or types. The bidder has the burden to prove to the
satisfaction of the County that the alternate or additional make, brand, or
type is equal in quality and performance to those listed in the solicitation.
      (6)   A contract may be awarded without competition when, after
conducting a good faith review of available sources or in the event competition
was insufficient or no bids, proposals, or submissions were received, or the
goods are used/refurbished, the Director of P&C determines in writing that
there is only one responsible source for the required material, service, or
construction item. If a sole source award is requested by an Agency, written
evidence to support a sole source award must accompany the request. The
Director of P&C may require that negotiations are conducted as to price,
delivery, and terms. The Director of P&C may require the submission of cost or
pricing data in connection with an award under this section.
      (7)   Miscellaneous exemptions - a contract for materials, professional
services, or services may be awarded without competition if the Director of P&C
determines in writing that one (1) or more of the following conditions exists:
         (a)   Although there exists more than one (1) responsible source, a
competitive process cannot reasonably be used or, if used, will result in a
substantially higher cost to the County, will otherwise injure the County's
financial interests, or will substantially impede the County's administrative
functions or the delivery of services to the public.
         (b)   A particular material or service is required to maintain
interchangeability or compatibility as a part of an existing integrated system.
         (c)   A particular material, professional service, or service is
required in order to standardize or maintain standardization for the purpose of
reducing financial investment or simplifying administration.
         (d)   The material is perishable.
         (e)   The material qualifies as an object of fine art.
         (f)   A particular material is required to match materials in use, so
as to produce visual harmony.
         (g)   The material, professional service, or service is the subject of
a change order.
         (h)   The contract is for electricity or utilities.
         (i)   The contract is with another governmental, quasi-governmental
agency, or Frederick County affiliated entity as determined at the sole
discretion of the Director of P&C.
         (j)   The contract is for high technology, online subscriptions, or
software purchases wherein competitive sealed bidding is not practicable or
advantageous to the County.
      (8)   A construction change order which authorizes a new scope of work
under a construction contract may be executed without competition when:
         (a)   The new scope of work is required for the completion of the
improvement under construction pursuant to a competitive bidding or competitive
proposal process;
         (b)   The new scope of work results from the discovery of differing or
unforeseen physical conditions at the site of the improvement under
construction and is required for the completion of the improvement under
construction; and
         (c)   An administrative finding has been made by the Director of P&C
that it would be in the County's best interest to negotiate with the on-site
contractor for the new scope of work.
      (9)   The requirements of any procurement using Federal or State of
Maryland bid processes or funds take precedence over the County's requirements.
   (B)   Emergency.
      (1)   An emergency will be deemed to exist when a threat to the health,
safety, or welfare exists, when a breakdown of equipment or of an essential
service occurs, or when unforeseen circumstances arise, which may include
delays by contractors, transportation delays or failures, or when a revenue
source may be compromised.
      (2)   Upon receipt of notice of an emergency situation, the Agency
Director(s) will take immediate action to mitigate or remediate the emergency
situation.
      (3)   Agency Directors are responsible for making all reasonable efforts
to avoid the need for emergency procurements.
      (4)   If an emergency occurs during regular business hours, the Agency
Director will immediately notify the Director of P&C, who will either purchase
the required commodity or service or authorize the Agency Director to do so.
      (5)   If an emergency occurs at times other than regular business hours,
the Agency Director may purchase the commodity or service required. The Agency
Director will, whenever possible, secure competitive telephone bids and
purchase from the lowest responsible bidder.
      (6)   The Agency Director must submit to the Director of P&C a complete
explanation of the circumstances of the emergency.
         (a)   If the emergency required expenditure(s) of less than $50,000,
the explanation may be provided via email from the Agency Director to the
Director of P&C.
         (b)   If the emergency required expenditure(s) of $50,000 or more, the
explanation shall be provided by a memorandum from the Agency Director to the
Director of P&C.
      (7)   The Director of P&C shall submit to the County Executive, as
required, a tabulation of all emergency purchases in the amount of $50,000 or
more, with an explanation of the circumstances of each emergency purchase.
   (C)   Riding a competitively bid solicitation.
      (1)   The County may ride or "piggyback" the competitively bid
solicitation of another jurisdiction or entity so long as the following
conditions exist:
      (2)   The solicitation must be active and not expired.
      (3)   The County's award must be in accordance with terms and conditions,
prices, time frames, and other criteria included in the solicitation. Changes
to terms and conditions are not allowable except those driven by locale,
application of Maryland law, public disclosure policy, or delivery costs.
Addition of items or like services required to meet the intended use by the
County are permitted if provided under the same discount pricing structure, and
shall be included in the County's Agreement.
         (a)   Determination of the eligibility to ride another jurisdiction's
contract and acceptance of the supporting price and documentation is at the
sole discretion of the Director of P&C.
         (b)   The supporting documentation supplied shall include the original
solicitation, the contractor's response, and indication that the County is
eligible to ride the contract.
   (D)   Cooperative purchasing.
      (1)   The County may participate in public cooperative purchasing when a
cooperative purchasing agreement between public entities has been executed
between the parties, or the parties are members of a cooperative purchasing
group or authority that permits cooperative use among its membership.
      (2)   The County may participate in or sponsor cooperative purchasing for
the procurement of goods, services, or construction.
      (3)   The County may choose to purchase, cooperatively utilize, and
provide personnel or other internal resources, as requested and deemed
necessary, to support the cooperative purchasing effort.
      (4)   Independent fire and rescue companies authorized to operate in the
County may participate through the County in piggyback, joint, or cooperative
purchases.
   (E)   Competitive negotiation.
      (1)   Procurement of goods, services, products for resale or
redistribution, distribution services, and competitive business arrangements
related to the establishment of strategic business plans or relationships of
any County utility or agency in a competitive market environment or failed
competitive procurement process are eligible for award by competitive
negotiation under this Section provided the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The Agency Director has identified potential qualified vendors
of the goods or services to be procured, and investigated and researched the
market for such goods or services, and provides detailed information and
justification in a memorandum to P&C.
         (b)   The Director of P&C concurs with the Agency Director's
memorandum and determines in writing that the use of competitive sealed bidding
or competitive sealed proposal processes are either not practicable or not
advantageous to the County; and
         (c)   A minimum of two (2) offerors are willing and able to provide
the goods, services, or products to be procured and to participate in a
competitive negotiation process.
      (2)   The Director of P&C, working with the Agency Director, may contact
identified offerors and may consider qualified offerors that have initiated
contact with the County, provided that the criteria for identifying offerors is
applied consistently.
      (3)   P&C shall be responsible for soliciting and receiving all offers.
      (4)   Each offeror participating in a competitive negotiation will be
accorded a fair and reasonable opportunity to present and explain the goods or
services to be provided.
      (5)   The basis for the final selection of a contractor under the
competitive negotiation process, and the final terms of the contract for the
goods or services to be procured will be subject to the review and approval of
the Director of P&C.
      (6)   Prior to the renewal or extension of any contract for goods or
services procured by competitive negotiations beyond the original term, the
Director of P&C will assess the contractor's performance and the benefits to
the County of continuing under the terms of the contract.
   (F)   Expedited procurements.
      (1)   The Director of P&C may authorize the use of an expedited
procurement when the amount of the procurement is estimated to exceed $50,000,
no emergency exists, and prompt procurement action best serves the public
interest, for example to avoid the loss of Federal or State funding or to avoid
adverse impact on the economic welfare or economic development of the County.
      (2)   Agencies are required to use all reasonable efforts to avoid the
need for expedited procurements.
      (3)   To the extent practicable, the procedures for competitive sealed
bidding and competitive sealed proposals shall be used for expedited
procurements.
      (4)   The Director of P&C will document in writing the circumstances that
cause there to be insufficient time for a standard competitive solicitation to
be completed.
   (G)   Reverse auction procurements.
      (1)   Bids may be solicited through an invitation for reverse auction
bids. The solicitation will include specifications and applicable evaluation
criteria.
      (2)   Notice of the invitation for reverse auction bids will be
electronically posted and the solicitation available for public inspection
prior to the date set forth therein for the close of the auction. The public
notice will identify the location of the internet website hosting the reverse
auction.
      (3)   The Director of P&C will document in writing a decision to allow
the correction of inadvertently erroneous bids before auction closing, the
withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids after auction closing, or the
cancellation of awards or contracts based on bid mistakes.
      (4)   The contract will be awarded to the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder whose bid conforms in all material respects to requirements
and criteria set forth in the solicitation.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-28. PAYMENT VOUCHERS.
   (A)   Utilization of payment vouchers bypasses formal procurement measures
and may only be used in instances wherein formal procurement measures are not
practicable at the discretion of the Director of P&C.
   (B)   Direct payment vouchers require the same approvals and signatures as a
requisition.
   (C)   The following transactions may be approved for payment via payment
voucher:
      (1)   Debt-related expenses;
      (2)   Mileage reimbursements;
      (3)   Storage expenses;
      (4)   Copies of records or transcripts;
      (5)   Child support payments;
      (6)   Housing assistance payments;
      (7)   Indigent medical payments, indigent burials, and medical insurance
refunds (personnel only);
      (8)   Memberships and subscriptions, legal advertisements in newspapers
and periodicals;
      (9)   Outside counsel and other legal services including paralegal
services, expert witnesses, court reporters, witness expenses, forensic
services, or payments issued to constitutional officers;
      (10)   Taxes, assessments, and related fees or tax deed application
expenses;
      (11)   Permits;
      (12)   Utility payments for utilities which cannot be competed;
      (13)   Deposits;
      (14)   Postage;
      (15)   Pre-approved interview and/or moving expenses (personnel only);
      (16)   Parking violations or towing expenses;
      (17)   Risk management claims settlements;
      (18)   Tuition, lab fees, books, or required course materials to approved
schools (registration forms required); and
      (19)   Other expenses for which formal procurement is not practicable as
approved by the Director of P&C.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-29. CONTRACT TERM AND EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   Every contract will state the term and the length of time which it
will be in effect.
   (B)   A contract may include provisions allowing for its extension or
renewal for a like period of time if determined by the Director of P&C to be in
the best interest of the County.
   (C)   The provisions allowing any extension or renewal will include an
objective method of determining the price(s) applicable to an extension or
renewal, and will be included in the solicitation.
   (D)   A contract funded through the Operating Budget, having a term of an
extension or renewal that extends beyond the County's current fiscal year must
include a provision stating that the County's obligations are contingent upon
the appropriation and availability of funding.
   (E)   Prior to the renewal or extension of any contract, the Director of P&C
may require that an assessment of the contractor's performance and the benefits
to the County be provided by the agency or investigated by a third party.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-30. INSURANCE.
   (A)   Contractors providing goods or services to the County must maintain
insurance for the term of the contract and any extensions or renewals of the
type and in the amounts required by the Director of P&C in consultation with
Risk Management.
   (B)   Prior to the execution of an agreement by the County, contractors must
provide current certificates of insurance evidencing the coverages required,
with the exception of emergency procurements under §
1-2-27(B). The certificates of insurance may be required to name Frederick
County, Maryland including its agents, servants, and employees, as additional
insureds.
   (C)   In the event any of the contractor's policies are cancelled before the
expiration date of the contract, or completion of the scope of work, the
contractor must provide immediate notice to the County and provide replacement
certificates of insurance before resuming the provision of goods or services
under the contract with the County.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-31. BONDS.
   (A)   The Director of P&C will determine the applicability and amount, if
any, of a bid bond, performance bond, or a payment bond; however bid, payment
and performance bonds will be required for all construction projects estimated
to cost $100,000 or more.
   (B)   For the procurement of goods, services, or construction projects
estimated to cost less than $100,000, bonds may be required in an amount as
deemed appropriate by the Director of P&C to protect the interests of the
County in securing the provision of the goods, services, and construction.
   (C)   Bonds shall be in the form prescribed by the Director of P&C and as
approved by the OCA.
   (D)   No contract for the acquisition of property or the construction of
improvements or other expenditures which is to be financed by bonds or other
obligations shall be effective until the proceeds of the bonds or obligations
have been received and verified by the Finance Director.
   (E)   When a successful bidder or offeror fails to execute a contract after
the stipulated time, the bid deposit or bid bond may be forfeited and retained
as liquidated damages, and not as a penalty for failure to execute the
contract.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-32. AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   A written agreement between the County and a contractor must be
executed prior to the provision of services which exceed the $50,000 formal
threshold whenever possible, with the exception of Emergency services provided
under §
1-2-27(B).
   (B)   The Director of P&C may require written agreements between the County
and a contractor prior to the provision of goods or services not exceeding the
formal threshold as deemed necessary.
   (C)   When possible, the County will use the standard agreement forms
approved by the OCA to contract with the awarded contractor.
   (D)   The Director of P&C with the assistance of the OCA will be the
negotiator of the final terms and conditions and pricing in an agreement.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-33. CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY BOARD.
   (A)   The Contractor Responsibility Board (CRB) will investigate and provide
settlement recommendations for matters concerning the adequacy or quality of
services rendered or performance by contractors or consultants primarily on
competitively bid or capital improvement projects.
   (B)   The CRB members include: the Director of P&C as Chairperson, the Chief
Administrative Officer, the Chief Financial Officer, a representative of the
County Attorney's Office, and the Director of any additional interested Agency,
as well as any Division Directors appointed by the Director of P&C.
   (C)   Matters related to contractor or consultant liability, protest,
allegations of errors or omissions, change order issues, or dissatisfaction
with the adequacy or quality of services rendered may be referred to the CRB
for resolution.
   (D)   The Chief Administrative Officer may designate issues arising from
professional services contracts or capital improvement projects for
consideration and settlement recommendation by the CRB.
   (E)   Settlement recommendations from the CRB will be documented in the file
in writing and, if applicable, in a change order executed in accordance with
the change order policy.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-34. LIMITATION ON AWARD OF CONTRACTS.
   (A)   The County may not award or enter into contracts with:
      (1)   A County Council Member or the County Executive;
      (2)   A business entity in which a County Council Member or the County
Executive has a direct financial interest;
      (3)   A business entity in which a County Council Member or the County
Executive is an officer, director, trustee, or partner;
      (4)   A qualified relative of a County Council Member or the County
Executive;
      (5)   A business entity in which a qualified relative or a County Council
Member of the County Executive has a direct financial interest; or
      (6)   A business entity in which a qualified relative of a County Council
Member or the County Executive is an officer, director, trustee, or partner.
   (B)   The County may not enter into a contract with:
      (1)   A bidder or offeror who is in default on the performance of any
other contract with the County or in the payment of any taxes, licenses, or
other monies due the County.
      (2)   A bidder or offeror located in Maryland that is either not
registered to do business in Maryland or not in good standing with the Maryland
Secretary of State.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-35. RECORDS RETENTION.
   (A)   The official records for all formal procurements conducted by P&C are
maintained in P&C and may be stored by electronic methods. Records of purchases
may also be maintained by the agency for such period of time and under such
conditions as determined by the Director of P&C.
   (B)   Records for formal procurements, excluding construction contracts,
shall be maintained for a period of seven (7) years after completion,
cancellation, or termination of the contract.
   (C)   Records for construction contracts shall be maintained for a period of
twelve (12) years after completion, cancellation, or termination of the
contract.
   (D)   The Director of P&C shall develop and issue minimum standard formats
and procedures for contract administration records.
(Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-2-36. HIRING OF ILLEGAL ALIENS PROHIBITED FOR PERFORMANCE OF COUNTY WORK.
   (A)   The Ccounty does not knowingly hire illegal aliens through direct
employment or through its vendors, contractors, or their suppliers or
subcontractors. The County expects its vendors, contractors and their
subcontractors and suppliers to comply with all applicable federal, state and
local laws, rules and regulations concerning lawful entitlement to work in
Frederick County, the State of Maryland and in the United States of America.
Therefore, the following shall be a requirement of all contracts for services
entered into by the County:
   "The contractor warrants and, if requested, shall certify in writing that
the contractor and its subcontractors do not, and shall not employ under this
contract, an illegal alien or any individual while knowing the illegal alien or
individual is not authorized to work within the United States of America or
without otherwise complying with all requirements of the federal immigration
and nationality laws, including verification and record keeping requirements."
   (B)   Compliance with the contractual requirement that contractors hire only
individuals lawfully entitled to work in the United States of America is
material to the County. Breach of this material contractual obligation could
result in contract termination in addition to, and not in lieu of, any and all
other remedies available to the County and any and all other damages for which
a contractor might be liable. Nothing herein shall require the County to elect
to terminate a contract for default to the exclusion of any other remedy.
(Ord. 09-29-533, 12-15-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-
2022)
§ 1-2-37. SURPLUS, OBSOLETE AND WASTE ARTICLES.
   (A)   All agencies shall submit to the Director of P&C, at such times and in
such form as prescribed, reports showing stocks of all supplies, materials, and
equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or
scrapped.
   (B)   The Director of P&C shall have authority to transfer such supplies,
materials and equipment to another or other agencies in lieu of filling
requisitions for the purchase of new and additional stock of the same or
similar articles.
   (C)   The Director of P&C shall have authority to sell all such supplies,
materials and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become
unsuitable for County use or to exchange or trade in such articles in part of
full payment for new supplies, materials or equipment of a similar nature.
(1959 Code, § 36-18)
(Ord. 09-29-533, 12-15-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-20, 10-25-
2022)
§§ 1-2-38 – 1-2-48. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: DEPARTMENT OF PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS (§§ 1-2-49 — 1-2-59)
Section
   
1-2-49   Created
   
1-2-50   Territorial jurisdiction
   
1-2-51   Director and other employees
   
1-2-52   Applications
Cross references:
   Functions of Department of Permits and Inspections under Building Code, see
§
1-6-18A;
   Functions of Department of Permits and Inspections under Electrical Code,
see §§
1-7-39 et seq.;
   Functions of Department of Permits and Inspections relative to unsafe
buildings, see §§
2-4-17 et seq.
§ 1-2-49. CREATED.
   There is hereby created a Department of Permits and Inspections.
(1959 Code, § 45-1) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-50. TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
   The territorial jurisdiction of the County Department of Permits and
Inspection shall extend over the county but not including the incorporated
towns in the county, except as such incorporated areas may desire to be
included. Such inclusion shall be done by filing with the county a certified
copy of the ordinance or resolution adopting the service of the county for
permits and inspections.
(1959 Code, § 45-1) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-51. DIRECTOR AND OTHER EMPLOYEES.
   There shall be appointed by the County Executive or designee, a Director of
the Department of Permits and Inspections who shall answer to the County
Executive under the county classified system. He shall have under him a Chief
Plumbing Inspector and such other assistant inspectors and supporting staff as
may be needed.
(1959 Code, § 45-2) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Plumbing inspector, see §
1-14-19
§ 1-2-52. APPLICATIONS.
   All applications pertaining to construction, alterations, addition, repair,
removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings
and structures located in the county shall be processed through the Department
of Permits and Inspections. The form and content of such application shall be
set by the Director with cooperation of all departments and agencies of the
county.
(1959 Code, § 45-3) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-2-53 – 1-2-59. RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICES (§§ 1-2-60 — 1-2-69.2)
Section
   
1-2-60   Role, responsibilities and rights of a volunteer fire, rescue or
ambulance corporation
   
1-2-61   Division of Fire and Rescue Services established
   
1-2-62   Director of Fire and Rescue Services
   
1-2-62.1   Director of Volunteer Fire and Rescue Services
   
1-2-63   Fire and Rescue Advisory Board
   
1-2-64   Fire and rescue chain of command
   
1-2-65   Qualifications of officers
   
1-2-66   Minimum response criteria – fire or rescue services
   
1-2-67   Fire, rescue, ambulance or first responder minimum standards
   
1-2-68   Failure to comply with minimum standards
   
1-2-69   Definitions
   
1-2-69.1   County Fire Prevention Code
   
1-2-69.2   Ambulance transport fee program
Cross references:
   Fire, rescue and ambulance services, see
Ch.
2-8;
   Special taxing districts, see §§
1-8-151 et seq.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 89-49-580, adopted August 15, 1989, added § 1-2-60 to the code. At the
discretion of the editor and for purposes of classification, the new section
has been included as new Art. IV, §
1-2-60. Ord. 13-01-629, passed 1-8-2013, renumbered § 1-2-60 as §
1-2-66.
§ 1-2-60. ROLE, RESPONSIBILITIES AND RIGHTS OF A VOLUNTEER FIRE, RESCUE OR
AMBULANCE CORPORATION.
   (A)   A volunteer fire, rescue or ambulance company authorized by the county
under §
2-8-1 that operates as a component of the Frederick County fire and rescue
system shall maintain its corporate and operational status in accordance with
the requirements of
Chapter 2-8, §
2-8-1 and §
2-8-2 of the Code of Frederick County, Maryland, as amended.
   (B)   A volunteer fire, rescue or ambulance company shall:
      (1)   Provide emergency and non-emergency services within its designated
primary service area.
      (2)   Respond in support of neighboring communities, Frederick County as
a whole and jurisdictions with which a reciprocal mutual response agreement
exists with Frederick County, Maryland.
   (C)   A volunteer fire, rescue or ambulance company shall operate in
compliance with fire-rescue policies, procedures, rules and regulations that
apply system-wide.
   (D)   A volunteer fire, rescue or ambulance company established by the
county shall:
      (1)   Manage its corporate administrative affairs.
      (2)   Be governed internally by duly elected or appointed officers.
      (3)   Have the right to raise and expend monies in accordance with
applicable laws, regulations and company policies that govern such activities.
      (4)   Manage the company's internal budget.
      (5)   Control the expenditure of volunteer company funds.
      (6)   Control the expenditure of county provided funding in accordance
with established county policies.
      (7)   Have the right to own real property, fixed and mobile equipment.
      (8)   Manage its volunteer members.
   (E)   A volunteer fire, rescue or ambulance company chief that is
operationally authorized under the integrated chain of command shall have
primary responsibility and commensurate authority to manage the day-to-day
operations of the company in accordance with county policies, procedures, rules
and regulations, as well as station level policies and procedures specific to
the individual company, provided such station level policies and procedures are
not in conflict with applicable county policy and procedures.
(Ord. 13-01-629, 1-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-14, 9-20-
2016)
§ 1-2-61. DIVISION OF FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established a division of the county government
which shall be known as the "Division of Fire and Rescue Services."
      (2)   This division shall consist of both career and volunteer members
and shall be responsible for the full scope of fire prevention, fire
suppression, hazardous materials, emergency medical services and other related
public safety functions provided to Frederick County and its municipalities.
   (B)   The individual volunteer fire and rescue organizations which are
authorized to operate within the county under
Chapter 2-8, §
2-8-1, shall operate as organizational components of the Division of Fire and
Rescue Services.
(Ord. 13-01-629, 1-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-14, 9-20-
2016)
§ 1-2-62. DIRECTOR OF FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICES.
   (A)   There shall be the position of Director of Fire and Rescue Services,
who shall serve as Director of the Frederick County fire and rescue system and
who will hold the rank of Chief of the Frederick County Division of Fire and
Rescue Services.
   (B)   Subject to confirmation by the County Council, the Director of Fire
and Rescue Services shall be appointed by the County Executive and shall have
overall responsibility and full authority for all operations and administration
of the division and its career and volunteer organizational units with the
advice and cooperation of the Fire and Rescue Advisory Board.
   (C)   The authority of the Director of Fire and Rescue Services shall not be
asserted in a manner that is in conflict with the administrative affairs of the
volunteer fire, rescue or ambulance corporations, as outlined in §
1-2-60(D) of the Frederick County Code.
   (D)   The Director of Fire and Rescue Services shall perform the duties and
carry out the responsibilities set forth in the established position
description, as authorized by the county as may be amended.
   (E)   The Director of Fire and Rescue Services shall be directly responsible
to the Chief Administrative Officer and serve at the pleasure of the County
Executive.
   (F)   The Director of Fire and Rescue Services shall work in conjunction
with the Fire and Rescue Advisory Board established in Article IV, §
1-2-63, of the Code of Ordinances of Frederick County, Maryland, as amended,
with the advice and cooperation of the Fire and Rescue Advisory Board on issues
affecting the fire and rescue system stakeholders.
   (G)   The Director of Fire and Rescue Services shall be responsible to
enforce the rules, regulations, policies and procedures of the Frederick County
Division of Fire and Rescue Services and its organizational components.
   (H)   The Director of Fire and Rescue Services may be empowered by the
county to carry out any responsibility of the county governing body as provided
in Article IV of the Code of Ordinances of Frederick County, Maryland, as
amended or Part II, Chapter 2-8 of the Code of Public Laws of Frederick County,
Maryland 1979, as amended.
(Ord. 13-01-629, 1-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-14, 9-20-
2016)
§ 1-2-62.1 DIRECTOR OF VOLUNTEER FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICES.
   (A)   There shall be the position of Director of Volunteer Fire and Rescue
Services, who shall serve as Chief of the Volunteer Services section of the
Frederick County Division of Fire and Rescue Services.
   (B)   Subject to the confirmation by the County Council, the Director of
Volunteer Fire and Rescue Services shall be appointed by the County Executive
after consultation with the Executive Committee of the Frederick County
Volunteer Fire and Rescue Association, Inc. (FCVFRA).
   (C)   The Director of Volunteer Fire and Rescue Services shall serve at the
pleasure of the County Executive.
   (D)   The Director of Volunteer Fire and Rescue Services shall hold the rank
of Deputy Chief within the uniformed chain of command and derive authority from
and work in conjunction with the Director and Chief of the Division of Fire and
Rescue Services.
   (E)   The Director of Volunteer Fire and Rescue Services shall maintain a
direct relationship with the FCVFRA and serve as the conduit between the
FCVFRA, the Division of Fire and Rescue Services, and the County Government.
(Bill No. 16-14, 9-20-2016)
§ 1-2-63. FIRE AND RESCUE ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   To ensure that fire and rescue system stakeholders have a voice in the
management of fire and rescue services, a Fire and Rescue Advisory Board is
established.
   (B)   The Fire and Rescue Advisory Board consists of career and citizen
representatives; and (1) volunteer representatives elected by the member
companies in each battalion, to serve in a capacity to review and provide
cooperation to the Director on issues related to the delivery of fire and
rescue services in Frederick County, to be appointed by the County Executive,
subject to confirmation by the County Council; (2) the liaison to the County
Executive; (3) the jurisdictional medical director for Frederick County,
Maryland; and (4) the President of the Frederick County Volunteer Fire and
Rescue Association, Inc.; (5) the president of the Career Firefighters
Association of Frederick County, Maryland, Inc. IAFF Local 3666 and (6) the
Director of the Division of Fire and Rescue Services, as non-voting members.
   (C)   The role, responsibilities, composition, appointed terms and
administration of the Fire and Rescue Advisory Board shall be in accordance
with the Fire and Rescue Advisory Board charter and by-laws adopted by the
county governing body.
(Ord. 13-01-629, 1-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-14, 9-20-
2016)
§ 1-2-64. FIRE AND RESCUE CHAIN OF COMMAND.
   (A)   There shall be one integrated chain of command for career personnel of
the Division of Fire and Rescue Services and the volunteer fire, rescue and
ambulance companies.
   (B)   A volunteer and career officer shall derive operational authority from
the County Executive through the Director of the Division of Fire and Rescue
Services.
   (C)   Volunteer personnel shall meet the minimum qualifications referred to
in §
1-2-65, to be operationally certified at the appropriate rank.
   (D)   An operationally authorized officer has the authority commensurate
with the officer's position and shall be afforded appropriate respect at all
times by career and volunteer personnel of subordinate rank.
   (E)   The authority of officers shall be in accordance with county
ordinance, division policies and standard operating procedures.
(Ord. 13-01-629, 1-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-14, 9-20-
2016)
§ 1-2-65. QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Qualifications for operational certification at each rank for career
and volunteer personnel shall be in accordance with policies as established by
the Director of Fire and Rescue Services, with the advice and cooperation of
the Fire and Rescue Advisory Board.
   (B)   Volunteer officers with administrative authority internal to the
volunteer fire and rescue corporation may be elected or appointed by a
volunteer fire, rescue or ambulance corporation.
   (C)   The operational authority of volunteer administrative officers shall
be commensurate with their level of operational certification under established
officer qualifications.
(Ord. 13-01-629, 1-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-14, 9-20-
2016)
§ 1-2-66. MINIMUM RESPONSE CRITERIA – FIRE OR RESCUE SERVICES.
   (A)   Due to the diversity of demographics and density of communities across
Frederick County, each authorized Fire, Rescue and Ambulance company will be
classified as an urban company, suburban company, or rural company for the
purpose of evaluating compliance with minimum response criteria.
   (B)   The Director of Fire and Rescue Services, in consultation with the
Fire and Rescue Advisory Board, shall determine the designation for each
authorized volunteer Fire, Rescue and Ambulance company.
   (C)   Each authorized Fire, Rescue or Ambulance company must meet the
following minimum response criteria:
      (1)   Urban Fire, Rescue or Ambulance companies must respond within 4
minutes from the time of first dispatch for an emergency incident for at least
99% of the dispatches received during each calendar month.
      (2)   Suburban Fire, Rescue or Ambulance companies must respond within 6
minutes from the time of first dispatch for an emergency incident for at least
90% of the dispatches received during each calendar month.
      (3)   Rural Fire, Rescue or Ambulance companies must respond within 8
minutes from the time of first dispatch for an emergency incident for at least
80% of the dispatches received during each calendar month.
   (D)   The County Executive may consider the minimum response criteria
separately for weekdays, weeknights, and weekends. The failure of a Fire,
Rescue, or Ambulance company to achieve the minimum response criteria
established in subsection (C) above during any of the separate time periods
(weekdays, weeknights, or weekends) shall constitute a failure to meet these
response standards.
   (E)   The County Executive shall establish procedures to handle a failure to
achieve minimum response criteria. Notwithstanding the establishment of these
procedures, the county governing body may establish a special taxing district
pursuant to §
2-8-6 of the Frederick County Code for any failure to meet the minimum response
criteria established in subsections (C) and (D).
(Ord. 89-49-580, 8-15-1989; Ord. 13-01-629, 1-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 16-14, 9-20-2016)
§ 1-2-67. FIRE, RESCUE, AMBULANCE OR FIRST RESPONDER MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   As minimum standards, each fire, rescue, ambulance, truck, first
responder company, or special operations team shall:
      (1)   Maintain an active company/team membership of a sufficient number
of active operational volunteer members necessary to meet the minimum response
criteria pursuant to §
1-2-66, including at least 3 active operational officers as determined by
established officer qualification standards;
      (2)   Maintain an adequate means of receiving an alarm and alerting the
company membership;
      (3)   Complete and file incident reports and maintain records of each
response in the manner required by the Director of Fire and Rescue Services;
and
      (4)   Comply at all times with the applicable minimum standards contained
in subsections (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section for the service being
offered.
   (B)   As minimum standards to conduct fire operations, each fire company
shall at all times have:
      (1)   Five active operational volunteer members trained to drive and
properly operate the company's primary fire attack pumper, and who are in
accordance with County Fire and Rescue standards;
      (2)   Ten active operational volunteer members who:
         (a)   Have successfully completed required firefighter certification
training as conducted by the Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute (MFRI),
Frederick County or its equivalent;
         (b)   Have successfully completed other technical training and/or
certifications required by established County standards;
         (c)   Have successfully completed the required medical/physical
examination, as prescribed by the Director of Fire and Rescue Services; and
         (d)   Have successfully passed the annual "Fit Test" for use of
respiratory protective equipment, as prescribed by the Director of Fire and
Rescue Services.
      (3)   A heated fire station of adequate size and construction for the
housing of the apparatus and equipment required to meet the standards.
Volunteer owned and operated stations that house County employed career
personnel shall maintain the basic necessities required for an employee
workplace. Including but not limited to; potable water, food storage and food
preparation facilities, restroom facilities, a break/lounge area, shower and
locker facilities, sleeping facilities equipped with built-in fire detection
and suppression systems, and a facility that is structurally sound and hazard
free.
      (4)   A motorized pumper which is:
         (a)   In good operating condition;
         (b)   Of at least 1,000-gallon-per- minute pumping capacity;
         (c)   Listed by the Maryland Rating Bureau;
         (d)   Registered as an emergency vehicle with the Maryland Motor
Vehicle Administration; and
         (e)   Annually inspected and certified by the Fire and Rescue
Standards Committee as meeting the current minimum equipment standards and a
satisfactory pump test.
   (C)   As minimum standards to conduct rescue operations, each rescue company
shall at all times have:
      (1)   Ten active operational volunteer members who:
         (a)   Have successfully completed the course in rescue or truck
operations as offered by the Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute (MFRI),
Frederick County or its equivalent;
         (b)   Have successfully completed other technical training and/or
certifications required by established County standards;
         (c)   Have successfully completed the required medical/physical
examination, as prescribed by the Director of Fire and Rescue Services; and
         (d)   Have successfully passed the annual "Fit Test" for use of
respiratory protective equipment, as prescribed by the Director of Fire and
Rescue Services.
      (2)   A heated station of adequate size and construction for the housing
of the apparatus and equipment required to meet the standards. Volunteer owned
and operated stations that house County employed career personnel shall
maintain the basic necessities required for an employee workplace. Including
but not limited to: potable water, food storage and food preparation
facilities, restroom facilities, a break/lounge area, shower and locker
facilities, sleeping facilities equipped with built-in fire detection and
suppression systems, and a facility that is structurally sound and hazard free.
      (3)   A motorized piece of apparatus of minimum one-and-one-half-ton
capacity which is:
         (a)   In good operating condition;
         (b)   Registered as an emergency vehicle with the Maryland Motor
Vehicle Administration; and
         (c)   Annually inspected and certified by the Fire and Rescue
Standards Committee or the Emergency Medical Service (EMS) Committee as meeting
the current minimum equipment standards and pump test.
   (D)   As minimum standards to conduct ambulance operations, each ambulance
company shall at all times have:
      (1)   Ten active operational volunteer members who:
         (a)   Have successfully completed the basic emergency medical
technician course as certified by the Maryland Institute of Emergency Medical
Services;
         (b)   Have successfully completed other technical training and/or
certifications required by established County standards;
         (c)   Have successfully completed the required medical/physical
examination, as prescribed by the Director of Fire and Rescue Services; and
         (d)   Have successfully passed the annual "Fit Test" for use of
respiratory protective equipment, as prescribed by the Director of Fire and
Rescue Services.
      (2)   A heated ambulance station of adequate size and construction for
the housing of the apparatus and equipment required to meet the standards.
Volunteer owned and operated stations that house County employed career
personnel shall maintain the basic necessities required for an employee
workplace. Including but not limited to; potable water, food storage and food
preparation facilities, restroom facilities, a break/lounge area, shower and
locker facilities, sleeping facilities equipped with built-in fire detection
and suppression systems, and a facility that is structurally sound and hazard
free.
      (3)   An ambulance which is:
         (a)   In good operating condition; and
         (b)   Adequately equipped with medical equipment and supplies and
registered as an emergency vehicle with the Maryland Motor Vehicle
Administration; and
         (c)   Annually inspected and certified by the EMS Committee as meeting
the current minimum equipment and supplies standard.
   (E)   As minimum standards to operate a first responder special unit, each
first responder special unit company shall at all times have:
      (1)   Ten trained active operational volunteer first responder members
who:
         (a)   Have successfully completed the basic medical first responder
course as certified by the Maryland Institute of Emergency Medical Services;
         (b)   Have successfully completed other technical training and/or
certifications required by established County standards;
         (c)   Have successfully completed the required medical/physical
examination, as prescribed by the Director of Fire and Rescue Services; and
         (d)   Have successfully passed the annual "Fit Test" for use of
respiratory protective equipment, as prescribed by the Director of Fire and
Rescue Services.
      (2)   A heated station of adequate size and construction for the housing
of the apparatus and equipment required to meet the standards. Volunteer owned
and operated stations that house County employed career personnel shall
maintain the basic necessities required for an employee workplace. Including
but not limited to: potable water, food storage and food preparation
facilities, restroom facilities, a break/lounge area, shower and locker
facilities, sleeping facilities equipped with built-in fire detection and
suppression systems, and a facility that is structurally sound and hazard free.
      (3)   A first responder special unit which is:
         (a)   In good working condition;
         (b)   Adequately equipped with medical equipment and supplies;
         (c)   Registered as an emergency vehicle with the Maryland Motor
Vehicle Administration; and
         (d)   Annually inspected and certified by the EMS Committee as meeting
the current minimum equipment and supplies standards.
   (F)   As minimum standards to conduct truck operations, each truck company
shall at all times have:
      (1)   Ten active operational volunteer members who:
         (a)   Have successfully completed the course in truck operations by
the Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute (MFRI), Frederick County or its
equivalent;
         (b)   Have successfully completed other technical training and/or
certifications required by established County standards;
         (c)   Have successfully completed the required medical/physical
examination, as prescribed by the Director of Fire and Rescue Services; and
         (d)   Have successfully passed the annual "Fit Test" for use of
respiratory protective equipment, as prescribed by the Director of Fire and
Rescue Services.
      (2)   A heated station of adequate size and construction for the housing
of the apparatus and equipment required to meet the standards. Volunteer owned
and operated stations that house County employed career personnel shall
maintain the basic necessities required for an employee workplace. Including
but not limited to; potable water, food storage and food preparation
facilities, restroom facilities, a break/lounge area, shower and locker
facilities, sleeping facilities equipped with built-in fire detection and
suppression systems, and a facility that is structurally sound and hazard free.
      (3)   A motorized piece of aerial apparatus with a minimum of 100 feet of
aerial ladder reach and a 500 pound tip load rating which is:
         (a)   In good operating condition;
         (b)   Registered as an emergency vehicle with the Maryland Motor
Vehicle Administration; and
         (c)   Annually inspected and certified by the Fire and Rescue
Standards Committee or the EMS Committee as meeting the current minimum
equipment standards, aerial ladder test certification and pump test, if
applicable.
   (G)   As minimum standards to operate as a "Special Operations Team", each
special operations team shall maintain the following at all times:
      (1)   Approval of the Director of Fire and Rescue Services to operate as
a County authorized specialized response team. Such approval shall be
considered in consultation with the Fire and Rescue Advisory Board.
      (2)   A sufficient number of active operational volunteer members that
have and maintain the required training and certifications for each special
operations function to ensure the operational responsibilities of the special
operations team can be carried out on a reliable response basis, and as
determined by the Director of Fire and Rescue Services.
      (3)   Have successfully completed other technical training and/or
certifications required by established County standards.
      (4)   Have successfully completed the required medical/physical
examination, as prescribed by the Director of Fire and Rescue Services.
      (5)   Have successfully passed the annual "Fit Test" for use of
respiratory protective equipment, as prescribed by the Director of Fire and
Rescue Services.
   (H)   Biennial verification of compliance with all applicable standards
specified in §§
1-2-66 and §§
1-2-67 shall be the responsibility of the Director of Fire and Rescue Services,
in consultation with the Fire and Rescue Advisory Board.
      (1)   Verification of compliance shall be required biennially, but may be
required at anytime if the Fire and Rescue Advisory Board or Director of Fire
and Rescue Services has reason to believe a volunteer corporation fails to meet
minimum standards.
      (2)   A formal process for biennial standards verification shall be
administered by the Director of Fire and Rescue Services, in consultation with
the Fire and Rescue Advisory Board.
(Ord. 93-15-079, 7-20-1993; Ord. 13-01-629, 1-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 16-14, 9-20-2016; Bill No. 21-08, 6-20-2021)
§ 1-2-68. FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   Any fire, rescue, ambulance, truck, first responder company, or
special operations team that fails to meet the minimum standards established in
§
1-2-66 or
1-2-67 shall suspend operations immediately after receipt of notification that
the County Executive has directed the cessation of operations.
   (B)   Upon written request by a company/team suspended under subsection (A),
the Director of Fire and Rescue Services in conjunction with the Fire and
Rescue Advisory Board, shall promptly hold a hearing on the suspension. At the
hearing, the company/team shall have the burden of establishing compliance with
all of the minimum standards established in §
1-2-66 or
1-2-67. Following the hearing, the Director of Fire and Rescue Services and the
Fire and Rescue Advisory Board shall provide their findings and recommendations
to the County Executive.
   (C)   If a fire, rescue, ambulance, truck, first responder company or
special operations team fails to meet the minimum standards established in §
1-2-66 or
1-2-67, the County Executive may suspend or terminate the company and
immediately reassign the company's service area.
   (D)   The County Executive may reinstate any suspended company/team upon
receipt of proof satisfactory to the County Executive that the company fully
complies with all of the minimum standards established in §
1-2-66 or
1-2-67.
   (E)   Notification required under this section may be made in any manner
reasonably calculated to give notice to the company. Delivery of the notice to
the company station is sufficient notice under this section.
   (F)   The County Executive may require inspections to ensure compliance with
these minimum standards at any reasonable time. Nothing shall be interpreted as
preventing the County Executive from requiring a fire, rescue, ambulance,
truck, first responder company, or special operations team to successfully
complete additional inspections at any reasonable time even though the company
has been previously certified as meeting standards in an annual inspection.
   (G)   The Director of Fire and Rescue Services, upon the recommendation of
the Fire and Rescue Standards Committee or the EMS Committee, may place any
piece of equipment out of service for failure to meet the current standards.
The Director shall, by the next work day, provide written notification to the
County Executive of any such actions to place equipment out of service. Once
the piece of equipment meets the current standard, the Director shall return
the piece of equipment to service. The Director shall, within 1 working day,
notify the County Executive of the return of the equipment to service.
(Ord. 93-15-079, 7-20-1993; Ord. 13-01-629, 1-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 16-14, 9-20-2016)
§ 1-2-69. DEFINITIONS.
   The following words have the meaning indicated.
   ACTIVE OPERATIONAL VOLUNTEER MEMBER. A person who meets the training,
certification, medical, physical and SCBA Fit Test requirements set forth by
the Director of Fire and Rescue Services and the Frederick County Code, as
amended.
   ASSOCIATION. The Frederick County Volunteer Fire and Rescue Association,
Inc.(Ord. 93-15-079, 7-20-1993; Ord. 13-01-629, 1-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-
13-2014; Bill No. 16-14, 9-20-2016; Bill No. 21-08, 6-20-2021)
§ 1-2-69.1. COUNTY FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted the Frederick County Fire Prevention Code. The
purpose and intent of this code is to prescribe minimum requirements and
controls to safeguard life, property or public welfare from the hazard of fire,
panic and explosion from the storage, handling or use of substances, materials
or devices and from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in
the use or occupancy of buildings, structures, sheds, tents, lots or premises.
   (B)   The Maryland State Fire Prevention Code, Code of Maryland Regulations,
Title 29, Subtitle 06, Chapter 01, including all subsequent revisions, is
hereby adopted as the Frederick County Fire Prevention Code.
   (C)   The County Fire Prevention Code shall apply within the entire
territory of Frederick County, including within the municipalities.
   (D)   (1)   Building and construction plans for all buildings shall be
submitted to the Frederick County Permits Department for plan review unless the
buildings are to be used wholly as dwelling houses containing no more than 2
families.
      (2)   Shop drawings, hydraulic calculations and cut sheets for all fire
protection/detection/ notification systems and devices shall be submitted to
the County Fire Protection Engineer for plan review prior to construction or
installation.
   (E)   No use and occupancy permits shall be issued until the Frederick
County Division of Fire and Rescue Services has certified that either no plan
review or inspection under the Frederick County Fire Prevention Code is
required or, following an appropriate plan review, the structure has complied
with all provisions of the Frederick County Fire Prevention Code.
   (F)   The county governing body shall, by resolution, establish and
administer a fee schedule for conducting inspections and plan reviews to ensure
compliance with the County Fire Prevention Code.
   (G)   This subsection shall apply to all structures and buildings, including
1- and 2-family dwellings, within the county.
      (1)   All new and existing buildings, structures or properties shall have
approved address numbers placed in a position at the front entrance, which is
to be plainly visible from the sidewalk (if any), the street or road fronting
the property and the opposite side of the street, day or night.
      (2)   If the address number cannot be posted on a building, structure or
property in a manner that makes it clearly visible from the street, then the
address number shall be displayed on the building or structure and at the end
of each driveway nearest the street or ingress/egress easement providing access
to the building, structure or property. Display of a street address at the
corner of a driveway shall be such that clear identification can be made of the
location of the building, structure or property to which the address is
assigned from either direction. Directional address signs with at least 3-inch
high numbers shall be posted on the property directing people to the building,
structure or property if the building, structure or property is not clearly
visible when traveling on the property.
      (3) The numbers shall be posted within 3 feet of the main entrance
thereto unless the structure is more than 75 feet from the street or not
visible from the street. In such cases, the remote address signs shall also be
posted within 10 feet of the street and within 5 feet of either side of the
driveway to the building, structure, or property and visible from either
direction of travel along the main roadway. Remote address signs shall be at
least 6 inches wide and 18 inches long, with 3-inch high reflective numbers.
      (4)   Address numbers shall be posted separate of the mailbox.
      (5)   Address numbers shall contrast with the background.
      (6)   Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters (e.g.,
12122A). Numbers shall not be spelled out (e.g. twelve thousand one hundred
twenty-two).
      (7)   Primary address numerals displayed on a building or structure shall
be at least the size identified below and clearly legible:
         (a)   One and 2-family dwellings — 4 inches high;
         (b)   Multi-family residential structures — 6 inches high;
         (c)   Commercial and industrial properties — 8 inches high.
      (8)   Numbers shall be posted in an area not subject to coverage by
vegetation (limbs, vines, and the like). Posting areas shall be maintained
regularly to ensure that numbers are visible.
      (9)   If more than 2 structures are addressed on a road or driveway, each
driveway shall be posted (with a directional arrow if needed) with its own
address number.
         (10)   A certificate of occupancy for any structure erected, altered,
or repaired shall be withheld until the permanent and proper numbers have been
affixed to such structure in accordance with the requirements of this section.
         (11)   No zoning or building permit shall be issued for any
addressable structure until the owner or developer has procured the official
premises address of such structure from the county and such address is
presented to the Department of Permits and Inspections.
         (12)   Addresses shall be posted in a timely manner. Addresses shall
be temporarily posted for any addressable structure or property under
construction as soon as work on the property commences and prior to the first
building inspection. Addresses shall be permanently posted in accordance with
this section prior to the final building inspection.
         (13)   If numbers designating the address of a 1- or 2-family dwelling
residence on February 1, 2005 were at least 3 inches high, those numbers comply
with the size requirement of this section as long as they remain in place.
         (14)   Where a structure or dwelling unit shares a common entry or
driveway, numbers must designate the addresses in sequence.
         (15)   Non-residential properties shall have the address or address
range incorporated into any new or modified monumental property signage. In any
case, the numbers or alphabet letters shall not be less than 6 inches in
height, visible from either direction of travel and must be clearly visible
from the street. The street name may be incorporated into the posting to
further aid in premise identification.
         (16)   In cases where conditions (shadows, overgrown vegetation,
building location, and the like) adversely affect the legibility of numbers,
the Division of Fire and Rescue Services has the authority to prescribe larger
numbers.
         (17)   It shall be the responsibility of each and every property
owner, trustee, lessee, agent and occupant of each residence, multi-family
residential building, business, commercial or industrial structure to purchase,
post and maintain address numbers as required under this policy at all times.
         (18)   When a street sign is replaced or a new sign installed, the
county must cause the address range of each street sign to be displayed on each
street sign the county erects or maintains.
         (19)   When a street sign is replaced or a new sign installed, the
owner, developer, property manager or homeowners association (HOA) must cause
the address range of each street sign to be displayed on each street sign the
owner, developer, property manager or homeowners association (HOA) erects or
maintains.
         (20)   Address numbers at least 6 inches in height shall be installed
on the rear access doors to all commercial establishments. Those doors which
are located inside of a mall, office building or similar space with assigned
suite numbers shall have their suite numbers posted with numerals or alphabet
letters at least 2½ inches tall.
         (21)   Apartment or condominium numbers for individual units within a
housing complex shall be displayed on, above, or to the side of the doorway of
each unit and shall not be less than 2½ in height.
   (H)   Residential sprinkler systems.
      (1)   The requirement for fire sprinkler systems shall apply to all
building permits for new residential occupancies including, but not limited to,
1- and 2-family residential construction, mobile homes, modular homes or
manufactured homes. This requirement shall not apply to the rebuilding,
refurbishment, renovation, addition or alteration of a residence in existence
as of the effective date of this section unless such existing structure is
destroyed and replaced by a new principal structure.
      (2)   The requirement for interior sprinkler systems shall not apply to
accessory or non-habitable structures (e.g., detached carports or garages,
greenhouses, and sheds).
      (3)   Fire sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained in all new
residential occupancies in accordance with the most recent version of the
applicable fire sprinkler standard as promulgated by the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA), and as modified and adopted by the Frederick
County Fire Prevention code, as amended from time to time.
      (4)   For residential occupancies served by an individual well, this
subsection shall only apply to building permits requested on or after October
1, 2006.
      (5)   This requirement for fire sprinkler systems shall not apply if the
applicant for the building permit establishes that the county or municipality
(whichever is applicable) approved the public water improvement plans for the
property on or before July 20, 2006. This subsection (H)(5) shall be effective
from July 20, 2006 until July 1, 2007 and shall be of no further legal effect
after July 1, 2007.
   (I)   Multiple-line telephone systems - Direct dial (Kari's Law).
      (1)   "Multiple-line telephone system" defined. -- In this section,
"multiple-line telephone system" means a system that:
         (a)   Consists of common control units, telephone sets, control
hardware and software, and adjunct systems, including network and premises-
based systems; and
         (b)   Is designed to aggregate more than one incoming voice
communication channel for use by more than one telephone.
      (2)   A person that installs or operates a multiple-line telephone system
shall ensure that the system is connected to the public switched telephone
network in such a way that when an individual using the system dials 9-1-1, the
call connects to the public safety answering point without requiring the user
to dial any other number or set of numbers.
   (J)   Civil fire code infractions.
      (1)   Pursuant to §
2-2-29 of this code, any violation of the provisions of this section is a civil
infraction and shall be called a civil fire code infraction. If after
investigation, a civil fire code infraction is believed to exist, the Frederick
County Fire Marshal or his or her representative shall deliver a citation or a
warning to the person or persons responsible for the infraction.
      (2)   The citation or warning, as provided for in this section, shall be
in writing and shall contain the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the person charged (or warned);
         (b)   The nature of the violation;
         (c)   The location of the violation;
         (d)   The date(s) of the violation;
         (e)   The amount of the fine to be assessed (or possible of
assessment);
         (f)   The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid;
         (g)   The person's right to stand trial for the violation (if
applicable); and
         (h)   A certification by the Fire Marshal or authorized designee
attesting to the truth of the matters set forth.
      (3)   (a)   A fine is hereby imposed upon any person responsible for a
civil fire code infraction for each violation as follows:
            1.   For a violation of subsection (G) (premises identification),
$25;
            2.   For a violation of subsection (I) (Kari's Law), $200;
            3.   For obstructing a fire department access road/fire lane/fire
hydrant, $250;
            4.   For a violation of any other provision of this section, $500.
         (b)   All fines shall be payable to the county, in the office of the
Fire Marshal, which shall remit same on a daily basis to the County Treasurer.
Each day such violation is permitted to exist shall be considered a separate
infraction.
      (4)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
offense by filing with the Fire Marshal a notice of intention to stand trial.
The notice shall be given at least 5 days before the date of payment of the
fine as set forth in the citation. On receipt of the notice of intention to
stand trial, the Fire Marshal shall forward to the District Court for Frederick
County, Maryland, a copy of the citation and the notice of intention to stand
trial. On receipt of the citation, the District Court shall schedule the case
for trial and notify the defendant of the trial date. All fines, penalties or
forfeitures collected by the District Court for fire code infractions shall be
remitted to the county, through the Frederick County Treasurer.
      (5)   If a person who receives a citation for an infraction fails to pay
the fine by the date of payment set forth on the citation and fails to file a
notice of intention to stand trial, a formal notice of the infraction shall be
sent to the person’s last known address. If the citation is not satisfied
within 15 days from the date of the notice, the person is liable for a fine
double that as provided above for each infraction. If after 35 days, the
citation is not satisfied, the Fire Marshal may request adjudication of the
case through the District Court. The District Court shall schedule the case for
trial and summon the defendant to appear.
      (6)   Adjudication of an infraction under this section is not a criminal
conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities ordinarily imposed
by a criminal conviction.
      (7)   In a proceeding before the District Court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Ann. Code, Local Government Article, Title 6. However, the
County Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute fire code infractions under
this section.
      (8)   If a person is found by the District Court to have committed a
civil fire code infraction, he or she shall be liable for the costs of the
proceedings in the District Court.
      (9)   Depending on the circumstances of each case and after consultation
with the county attorney, the fire marshal has the discretionary authority to
reduce or suspend all or a portion of the fine.
      (10)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit or prevent the
fire marshal or authorized agent, or anyone else, from seeking other legal
remedies, such as injunctions or criminal prosecution.
      (11)   The fines specified in this section can be modified at any time by
resolution of the county governing body, after a duly advertised public
hearing.
(Ord. 94-03-098, 4-19-1994; Ord. 05-01-362, 1-18-2005; Ord. 06-26-422, 7-20-
2006; Ord. 06-28-424, 9-26-2006; Ord. 13-01-629, 1-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-
13-2014; Bill No. 21-02, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 1-2-69.2. AMBULANCE TRANSPORT FEE PROGRAM.
   (A)   There is hereby created an ambulance transport fee program under which
a person transported by ambulance will be billed a user fee.
   (B)   A person transported by ambulance is obligated to pay a fee in the
amount established by the county governing body by separate resolution, as
amended from time to time.
   (C)   A subscription club is offered. Membership benefit of the subscription
club is waiver of any insurance co-pay or any user fee responsibility if there
is no insurance coverage.
   (D)   The County Executive, or the County Executive’s designee, will be
responsible for administering the ambulance transport fee program and the
subscription club.
   (E)   Monies collected for user fees and subscription club membership fees
will be distributed in accordance with rules and regulations established by the
county with the advice of the Frederick County Volunteer Fire and Rescue
Association, Inc.
   (F)   The county shall establish rules and regulations for administering the
ambulance transport fee program and the subscription club with the advice of
the Frederick County Volunteer Fire and Rescue Association, Inc.
(Ord. 02-11-307, 5-30-2002; Ord. 13-01-629, 1-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
ARTICLE V: SENIOR SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD OF
FREDERICK COUNTY AND DEPARTMENT ON AGING (§§ 1-2-70 — 1-2-73.1)
Section
Division 1. Senior Services Advisory Board of Frederick County
   
1-2-70   Creation; purpose
   
1-2-70.1   Abolishment of the former Commission on Aging
   
1-2-71.1   Appointments; members
   
1-2-71.2   Ex officio members
   
1-2-72   Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
   
1-2-73   Powers and duties
Division 2. Department of Aging
   
1-2-73.1   Creation, purpose, powers
DIVISION 1. SENIOR SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD OF FREDERICK COUNTY
§ 1-2-70. CREATION; PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Senior Services Advisory Board of Frederick County is hereby
created.
   (B)   The Senior Services Advisory Board of Frederick County advises the
Frederick County Executive, County Council and the Director of the Senior
Services Division on the Division's delivery of a comprehensive and coordinated
plan of services and activities for older individuals.
(1959 Code, § 30-23) (Ord. 02-18-314, 8-6-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014;
Bill No. 18-23, 10-16-2018)
Statutory reference:
   State Department of Aging, see Md. Code Ann., Health Services Article, Title
10
§ 1-2-70.1. ABOLISHMENT OF THE FORMER COMMISSION ON AGING.
   The Frederick County Commission on Aging is hereby abolished.
(Bill No. 18-23, 10-16-2018)
§ 1-2-71.1. APPOINTMENTS; MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Senior Services Advisory Board of Frederick County shall consist
of 11 members who shall be residents of Frederick County and registered voters
in the County.
   (B)   Membership should reflect the diversity of Frederick County residents,
including older minority individuals and older individuals residing in rural
areas who are participants or who are eligible to participate in County
programs assisted by grants issued under 42 USC, Chapter 35, Subchapter III,
Programs for Older Americans.
   (C)   Family caregivers of older individuals, representatives of older
individuals, service providers, representatives of the business community,
providers of health care to veterans and persons who have demonstrated an
interest in the issues of older individuals are also eligible for appointment.
   (D)   At least 50% of the members must be 60 years of age or older.
   (E)   No more than 20% of the members shall be providers of services to
older individuals, adults with disabilities or veterans.
   (F)   Eligibility for appointment as a service provider will be determined
based on standards adopted by the Senior Services Division.
   (G)   In order to ensure representation of the entire County, each Council
District shall have at least 1 representative.
   (H)   Members will be appointed by the County Executive, subject to
confirmation by the County Council. Members serving on the Commission on Aging
when that Commission is abolished will automatically become members of the
Senior Services Advisory Board for the remainder of their existing terms in
office without the need for appointment or confirmation.
   (I)   Members will serve for a 3-year term without compensation. Of the
initial 11 members, 3 shall be appointed for a term that expires in 1 year, 4
shall be appointed for a term that expires in 2 years and 4 shall be appointed
for a term that expires in 3 years.
   (J)   Members may be reappointed, but may not serve more than 2 full 3-year
terms.
   (K)   Vacancies occurring at any time should be filled for the remainder of
the unexpired term with a person with the same or similar background of the
member being replaced.
(1959 Code, § 30-23, 30-24) (Ord. 02-18-314, 8-6-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 18-23, 10-16-2018)
§ 1-2-71.2. EX OFFICIO MEMBERS.
   Ex officio non-voting members shall include the Director and selected staff
members of the Senior Services Division, the Director of the County Department
of Social Services, the County Health Department Health Officer and elected
officials from the county or municipalities in the county.
(Ord. 02-18-314, 8-6-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 18-23, 10-16-
2018)
§ 1-2-72. CHAIRPERSON AND VICE-CHAIRPERSON.
   The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Senior Services Advisory Board
of Frederick County shall be elected by the members.
(1959 Code, § 30-24, 30-25A) (Res. 77-14, 9-13-1977; Ord. 02-18-314, 8-6-2002;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 18-23, 10-16-2018)
§ 1-2-73. POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Senior Services Advisory Board of Frederick County shall serve as an
advisory council to the Senior Services Division as defined in the Older
Americans Act of 1965, 42 USC § 3026(a)(6)(D), as amended, and advise the
Director of the Senior Services Division on issues and decisions related to the
services of the Division. The Board may also make recommendations for action to
the County Executive and County Council.
(1959 Code, § 30-25) (Ord. 02-18-314, 8-6-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014;
Bill No. 18-23, 10-16-2018)
DIVISION 2. DEPARTMENT OF AGING
§ 1-2-73.1. CREATION, PURPOSE, POWERS.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Frederick County Department of Aging
which has the responsibility of administering programs and activities as
approved by the county.
   (B)   The Frederick County Department of Aging is an area agency on aging as
defined in Md. Code Ann., Health Services Article § 10-101 and is the local
agency designated by the Maryland Department of Aging, pursuant to the Federal
Older Americans Act of 1965, (as amended) within a planning and service area,
to administer the delivery of a comprehensive and coordinated plan of social
and other services and activities for the elderly.
   (C)   The Department shall have the authority and responsibility to create,
implement, administer and cease programs and activities as approved by the
county. The Department shall act pursuant to state and federal laws that direct
and fund services and activities for the elderly. The Director shall meet
regularly with the Frederick County Commission on Aging keeping the members
informed of programs and progress of the Department of Aging, coordinating
activities as appropriate and receiving suggestions from the Commission.
(Ord. 02-18-314, 8-6-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE VI: FREDERICK COUNTY COMMISSION FOR WOMEN (§§ 1-2-74 — 1-2-90)
Section
   
1-2-74   Creation, purpose powers
   
1-2-75   Appointments, members
   
1-2-76   Terms, reappointments, vacancies
   
1-2-77   Executive committee, President
   
1-2-78   Meetings, attendance
   
1-2-79   Budget, funding
   
1-2-80   Compensation
§ 1-2-74. CREATION, PURPOSE, POWERS.
   (A)   There shall be a Frederick County Commission For Women.
   (B)   The Frederick County Commission For Women shall serve the following
purposes:
      (1)   To provide a central agency for the collection and referral of
activities and services of interest to women;
      (2)   To promote a positive image of women by recognizing their
accomplishments;
      (3)   To advocate for the county’s constituency to the legislature, the
judiciary, the executive, the media, and the public;
      (4)   To identify, study, evaluate, and eradicate, as an advocate,
discrimination against all women;
      (5)   To develop and implement programs that will expand women’s
educational and employment opportunities;
      (6)   To strengthen home life by directing attention to critical problems
confronting women;
      (7)   To educate women in the processes of seeking leadership roles;
      (8)   To encourage women to seek political office, either elective or
appointive;
      (9)   To recommend such procedures, programs, or legislation as it may
deem necessary and proper to promote and ensure equal rights and opportunities
for all persons, regardless of their gender;
      (10)   To advise and counsel the residents of Frederick County and all
government agencies on all matters involving the needs of women and especially
those matters relating to discrimination or prejudice on account of gender;
      (11)   To establish priorities and produce a prioritized annual plan;
      (12)   To appoint committees to assist in carrying out any of the
functions and duties of the Commission;
      (13)   To establish, implement, and amend, as necessary, bylaws for the
operation of the Commission.
   (C)   The Commission shall cooperate with other Frederick County departments
and agencies, and other Frederick County departments and agencies shall
cooperate with the Commission.
(Ord. 92-15-050, 7-21-1992; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-75. APPOINTMENTS, MEMBERS.
   (A)   Subject to confirmation by the County Council, the Frederick County
Commission For Women shall consist of 15 members appointed by the County
Executive.
      (1)   The incumbent members of the Frederick County Commission For Women,
as well as the Human Relations Commission, are encouraged to seek out
applicants for vacancies on the Frederick County Commission For Women.
      (2)   The Commission may make recommendations to the County Executive for
appointments to the Commission.
   (B)   The majority of members shall represent diverse interests in the
community. The members shall be registered voters in Frederick County.
(Ord. 92-15-050, 7-21-1992; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-76. TERMS, REAPPOINTMENTS, VACANCIES.
   (A)   The term of office of each of the members shall be for a period of 3
years.
   (B)   Of the initial 15 members, 5 shall be appointed for a term that
expires in 1 year, 5 shall be appointed for a term that expires in 2 years, and
5 shall be appointed for a term that expires in 3 years.
   (C)   Members may be reappointed, but may not serve more than 2 full
consecutive 3-year terms.
   (D)   Vacancies shall be filled on the same basis as the original
appointments for the unexpired terms. Members shall continue in office until
their successors are appointed and qualified.
(Ord. 92-15-050, 7-21-1992; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-77. EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, PRESIDENT.
   (A)   There shall be an executive committee of 5 members, including the
President.
   (B)   The Executive Committee and President shall be elected at the first
meeting each year by the members of the Frederick County Commission For Women
and shall serve for a 1-year term, but may not serve in excess of 3 consecutive
terms.
   (C)   Vacancies shall be filled on the same basis, by election.
(Ord. 92-15-050, 7-21-1992; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-78. MEETINGS, ATTENDANCE.
   (A)   The Frederick County Commission For Women shall meet monthly at a
Frederick County location which is open to the public and accessible to the
handicapped.
   (B)   The annual schedule for Commission meetings shall be established by
the Commission at the first annual meeting. A calendar of meeting dates shall
be provided to the county governing body at the earliest possible date.
   (C)   Meeting notices shall be part of the public record and shall be
publicized.
   (D)   Special meetings may be called as needed by a majority of the members
in office or of the Executive Committee with 3 business days notice by
telephone.
   (E)   A majority of the members in office shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of regular business.
   (F)   Any member of the Frederick County Commission For Women who shall fail
to attend at least 50% of the meetings during any period of 12 consecutive
months shall be considered to have resigned, and the President shall forward
the member’s name to the County Executive. Subject to confirmation by the
County Council, the County Executive shall appoint a replacement.
(Ord. 92-15-050, 7-21-1992; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-79. BUDGET, FUNDING.
   (A)   The Frederick County Commission For Women shall prepare and submit to
the county an annual budget to include the recommended appropriation for its
own operation.
   (B)   The county governing body shall determine whether to budget funds for
the operation of the Frederick County Commission For Women.
   (C)   To administer the programs developed by the Frederick County
Commission For Women, it shall secure, in addition to budgeted appropriations,
financial assistance and support from governmental and private institutions.
   (D)   Staff coordination and secretarial services shall be provided by the
citizens services administration as deemed by the County Executive.
(Ord. 92-15-050, 7-21-1992; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-80. COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Frederick County Commission For Women shall receive no
compensation for their services as such, but may be reimbursed for expenses
actually and necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties
within the amount made available by appropriation for such purposes.
(Ord. 92-15-050, 7-21-1992; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-2-81 – 1-2-90. RESERVED.
ARTICLE VII: FREDERICK COUNTY HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION (§§ 1-2-91 — 1-2-100)
Section
   
1-2-91   Establishment
   
1-2-92   Human Relations Department
   
1-2-93   Discrimination contrary to public policy and unlawful
   
1-2-94   Powers and responsibilities of Human Relations Commission
   
1-2-95   Remedial relief
Cross reference:
   Human Relations Commission, see §
2-2-68
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 89-48-579, adopted August 1, 1989, repealed §§ 1-2-91 and 1-2-92, and
enacted §§ 1-2-91 through 1-2-94 in lieu thereof, to read as herein set forth.
The former sections pertained to the human relations council and were derived
from Code 1959, § 30-19. In order to add the provisions of Ord. 92-15-050 as
Art. VI, former Art. VI was redesigned Art. VII, with the section numbers
remaining the same.
§ 1-2-91. ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Frederick County Human Relations Commission is hereby established.
(Ord. 89-48-579, 8-1-1989; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-92. HUMAN RELATIONS DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Frederick County Human Relations Department is hereby established
as a department within Frederick County government.
   (B)   The Human Relations Department shall have an Executive Director and
such other employees as the County Executive may approve.
(Ord. 89-48-579, 8-1-1989; Ord. 05-26-387, 10-11-2005; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-2-93. DISCRIMINATION CONTRARY TO PUBLIC POLICY AND UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   Discrimination based upon race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
age, marital status, disability, familial status, gender identity, sexual
orientation, or source of income is contrary to the public policy of Frederick
County.
   (B)   Discrimination based upon the following is unlawful in Frederick
County:
      (1)   Race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, marital status,
gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in employment, housing, or
public accommodations,
      (2)   Familial status in housing or employment, and
      (3)   Source of income in housing.
   (C)   “Discrimination” means any act that is unlawful under Federal or State
law based upon race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, marital
status, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability. “Discrimination”
also means acts that are unlawful under Federal or State law based upon
familial status in housing or employment or source of income in housing.
   (D)   “Disability” has the same meaning as the term “physical or mental
handicap” in Article V of Chapter 2-2 of the County Code.
   (E)   “Gender identity” has the same meaning as defined in Md. Code Ann.,
State Government Article, § 20-101.
   (F)   “Sexual orientation” has the same meaning as defined in Md. Code Ann.,
State Government Article, § 20-101.
(Ord. 89-48-579, 8-1-1989; Ord. 09-09-513, 4-21-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 19-07, 6-18-2019)
§ 1-2-94. POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Frederick County Human Relations Commission shall have all of the
powers and responsibilities allowed under §
2-2-68 of the Frederick County Code.
   (B)   The specific functions and duties of the Frederick County Human
Relations Commission and Frederick County Human Relations Department shall be
established by resolution of the county governing body.
(Ord. 89-48-579, 8-1-1989; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-95. REMEDIAL RELIEF.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in subsections (2), (3), and (4) of this
division, the Human Relations Commission is authorized to provide remedial
relief, including equitable relief and monetary damages.
      (2)   The Human Relations Commission is not authorized by this section
to:
         (a)   Award attorney’s fees;
         (b)   Assess penalties or fines;
         (c)   Create a private cause of action; or
         (d)   Award damages for humiliation or pain and suffering.
      (3)   In employment cases, the Human Relations Commission has powers or
jurisdiction over only employers with 15 or more employees.
      (4)   In public accommodations cases and housing cases, the Human
Relations Commission shall not have powers or jurisdiction in excess of or in
conflict with the powers and jurisdiction described in Md. Code Ann., State
Government Article, Title 20.
   (B)   Subpoenas, decisions, and orders of the Human Relations Commission may
be enforced in the Circuit Court for Frederick County.
   (C)   The Human Relations Department or other party may appeal a decision or
order of the Human Relations Commission to the Circuit Court for Frederick
County in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 200 of the Maryland Rules.
   (D)   The Human Relations Commission may be a party to an appeal made to the
Circuit Court for Frederick County.
   (E)   In employment cases, an award of monetary damages:
      (1)   May not exceed a 36-month period; and
      (2)   Shall be reduced by any earnings received during that period or any
amounts earnable during that period with reasonable diligence by the employee
discriminated against.
   (F)   In public accommodations cases and housing cases, an award of relief
is restricted to actual monetary damages and equitable relief.
(Ord. 03-20-343, 12-16-2003; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-2-96 – 1-2-100. RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII: GAMING (§§ 1-2-101 — 1-2-120)
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
1-2-101   Purpose, application and operation
   
1-2-102   Definitions
   
1-2-103   Game generally
   
1-2-104   Permit procedure
Division 2. Specific Gaming Provisions
   
1-2-105   Bingo
   
1-2-106   Raffles
   
1-2-107   Tip jars and punchboards
   
1-2-108   Gaming events other than bingo, raffles, tip jars, punchboards
   
1-2-109   Volunteer fire, rescue, ambulance or auxiliary groups
   
1-2-110   Distributor licenses
   
1-2-111   Penalties
   
1-2-112   Appeals
   
1-2-113   Board of Gaming Appeals
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 1-2-101. PURPOSE, APPLICATION, AND OPERATION.
   (A)   The following provisions regulate and control gaming within Frederick
County. The purpose of these provisions includes the protection of the public.
   (B)   All types of gaming not specifically allowed within these provisions
of state law are prohibited.
   (C)   The provisions of this article shall apply to all permitted gaming
activities in Frederick County.
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-2-102. DEFINITIONS.
   All terms used in this article shall have their ordinary meaning unless
specially defined herein.
   AMATEUR ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. An organization organized and operated to
promote nonprofessional sports or athletics.
   BONA FIDE. True, correct, and genuine; in referring to an organization this
requires an actual and  primary purpose of carrying out 1 or more of the types
of purposes, or activities, specified within this article or under state law.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization, institution, association, society,
or corporation that holds itself out to be a benevolent, education,
philanthropic, humane, patriotic or religious organization and solicits or
obtains contributions for charitable purposes. It does not include a political
party, political committee, political club, or an agency of the state
government or of a political subdivision.
   CIVIC ORGANIZATION. A not-for-profit organization organized and operated
exclusively for the promotion of social welfare. An organization is operated
exclusively for the promotion of social welfare if it is primarily engaged in
promoting in  some way the common good and general welfare of the people of the
community. A civic organization is operated primarily for the purpose of
bringing about civic betterments and social improvements.
   CONVICTION. A finding by a trier of fact of guilt, a guilty plea, or an
accepted nolo contendere plea. Probation before judgment does not constitute a
conviction.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY COUNCIL. County Council of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY EXECUTIVE. County Executive of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY GOVERNING BODY. The County Council and County Executive of Frederick
County, Maryland.
   DIRECTOR OF PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS. The Frederick County Director of
Permits and Inspections and any employee of the Department of Permits and
Inspections designated by the Director to perform any act incident to these
gaming provisions.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Individual or entity providing tip jars, punchboards, chance
games, boards, tables, or other gaming devices.
   EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION. Entity or association concerned with or working to
advance education, including, but not limited to, P.T.A.’s, band boosters,
parent organizations, and student organizations.
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Any organization that:
         (a)   Is conducted solely for the benefit of its members and its
beneficiaries;
         (b)   Is operated on a lodge system with a ritualistic activity; and
         (c)   Has a representative form of government;
      (2)   Includes a sororal organization; and
      (3)   Does not include:
         (a)   Any college or high school fraternity or sorority; or
         (b)   Any other fraternal or sororal organization the membership of
which is restricted wholly or largely to students or graduates of an
educational institution or a professional school.
   GAMING DEVICE. Any game of chance played for money or prizes. Includes, but
is not limited to, tip jar, punchboard, chance book, wheel of fortune,
paddlewheel, or any other device or item where chance controls the results.
Does not include bingo.
   GAMING EVENT. Any bazaar, carnival, raffle, tip jar, punchboard, or other
game of chance.
   HOSPITAL. An institution that:
      (1)   Has a group of at least 5 physicians who are organized as a medical
staff for the institution;
      (2)   Maintains facilities to provide, under the supervision of the
medical staff, diagnostic and treatment services for 2 or more unrelated
individuals; and
      (3)   Admits or retains the individuals for overnight care.
   ISSUING AGENCY/ISSUER. Entity designated by the county to issue, approve,
and review permits and licenses.
   LEGAL RESIDENT.
      (1)   PERSON. Individual residing in Frederick County.
      (2)   CORPORATION or OTHER ENTITY. More than doing business in the
county. Having a substantial and significant place of business within the
county. Includes any volunteer fire, rescue or ambulance company which has a
first due response area in Frederick County or which owns property in Frederick
County.
   MEMBERS. Individuals belonging to 1 or more of the organizations who satisfy
all requirements for acceptances as a full member of the organization.
Honorary members will not satisfy definitional requirements. In general,
members must exist on membership rolls for a minimum of 6 months prior to the
event to be eligible to participate in gambling endeavors. However, short-term
members will satisfy membership requirements where special circumstances exist.
(For example, a bona fide charitable organization which has only been in
existence for less than 6 months.)
   OFFICE. A place of business within the county. More than a mere presence
indicated by a post office  box or telephone number. Actual, active working
space, staffed at least part-time.
   OPERATOR. Individual or entity conducting or operating the gaming event.
   ORGANIZATION. Any bona fide, membership controlled group with a nonprofit
status.
   PATRIOTIC ORGANIZATION. An organization operated and organized to promote or
demonstrate love and devotion to one’s country.
   PROCEEDS. All receipts received as a result of a tip jar or punchboard minus
only:
      (1)   Winnings paid to players; and
      (2)   The cost of the tip jar or punchboard itself.
   RAFFLE. A purchased chance entitling the bearer to the right to a prize if
the bearer’s chance is  randomly selected as a winner.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. An organization operated and organized to promote
any church, religious society or congregation of any sect, order or
denomination.
   VOLUNTEER FIRE, RESCUE, AMBULANCE OR AUXILIARY GROUPS. Community entities
providing volunteer services within Frederick County for fire and rescue
protection or any entity attached to fire and rescue or a related service
entity.
   WAR VETERANS’ ORGANIZATION. An organization whose membership consists
primarily of persons who have served in the armed forces of the United States
during a period of war (including the Korean and Vietnam conflicts) and their
spouses, widows or widowers. The primary purpose of the organization must be 1
or more of the following:
      (1)   To provide service or assistance to veterans, members of the armed
forces or their spouses or dependents;
      (2)   To promote the social welfare of the community;
      (3)   To perpetuate the memory of deceased veterans and members of the
armed forces;
      (4)   To conduct charitable, educational or patriotic services; or
      (5)   To provide social and recreational activities for its members.
   50/50 GAME. A drawing entirely conducted at a single meeting or event of an
organization from a finite number of chances or tickets which are sold only at
the meeting or event and where the proceeds from the sale of the chances or
tickets are evenly split between the winner(s) and the organization sponsoring
the game.
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-2-103. GAME GENERALLY.
   The following provisions apply to all permits, all bingo games, and all
types of gaming events and devices. Additional requirements applying to bingo
and to individual types of gaming events or devices are found in subsequent
sections.
   (A)   Unless specifically allowed in these provisions or in state law, all
gaming is forbidden in Frederick County.
   (B)   Provided all legal requirements are met, bingo games and the following
gaming events are permitted under these gaming laws:
      (1)   Raffles;
      (2)   Tip jars;
      (3)   Punchboards;
      (4)   Wheels of fortune;
      (5)   Chance books;
      (6)   Paddle wheels;
      (7)   Door prizes and 50/50 games (no permit required).
   (C)   The organization receiving the money or other receipts from a gaming
event or bingo game must use the money or other receipts for the organization’s
benefit or other charitable purpose in Frederick County.
   (D)   No individual may personally benefit from an event except as provided
for operators of tip jars/ punchboards described in §
1-2-107(E)(2) and except for prizes awarded to participants.
   (E)   Persons, organizations, or operators are ineligible to apply for or
posses a permit if the organization or any individual directly responsible for
the operation of the gaming event or bingo game has been:
      (1)   Convicted of a felony; or
      (2)   Convicted of a misdemeanor in any way related to gaming or gambling
within 5 years of the application submission.
   (F)   Only religious, fraternal, civic, war veterans, hospital, amateur
athletic, patriotic, educational, or charitable organization, or a county
volunteer fire, rescue, or ambulance company or its auxiliary may conduct
gaming events under these provisions except for a licensed food and beverage
establishment authorized to conduct tip jars or punchboards under §
1-2-107.
   (G)   All records regarding all bingo games and gaming events must be made
available for inspection by the Director of Permits and Inspections and by law
enforcement agents.
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-2-104. PERMIT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   No gaming event or bingo game may be operated in Frederick County
until the appropriate permit has been obtained. A permit is required for any
gaming event where gaming devices are used involving bets or exchanges of money
or anything of value. A permit must be obtained for gaming events held at a
carnival if the events meet the criteria outlined in this article.
   (B)   To obtain a permit to conduct a bingo game or a gaming event, the
organization and operator, if applicable, must:
      (1)   Jointly submit an application on a county form to the Director of
Permits and Inspections accompanied by the appropriate issuance fee;
      (2)   Demonstrate that it is a bona fide religious, fraternal, civic, war
veterans’, hospital, amateur athletic, patriotic, educational, or charitable
organization, or a county volunteer fire, rescue, or ambulance company or its
auxiliary. Evidence of the bona fide nature of the organization may include,
but is not limited to, the nonprofit qualification as accepted by the I.R.S.
under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(1), (3), (4), (5), (7), (8), (10), or (19) or (d);
      (3)   Swear to an affidavit establishing that the organization and
individuals directly responsible for the conduct of the activity have not been
convicted of a gaming related misdemeanor within 5 years of the application
submission or of a felony; and
      (4)   Identify the beneficiary of the event.
   (C)   The Director of Permits and Inspections will review the application
and grant or deny the permit.
      (1)   Before issuing a permit, the Director of Permits and Inspections
shall determine if the applicants meet the requirements of this article and may
refer the application to the Sheriff for a determination on whether an
applicant qualifies as a bona fide organization.
      (2)   The application and the actions of the Director of Permits and
Inspections are matters of public record.
   (D)   If granted, the permit will entitle the organization and operator to
conduct a bingo game or gaming event according to the terms of the permit and
all applicable law.
   (E)   If denied, the organization or operator may appeal the decision as
provided in §
1-2-112 of this article.
   (F)   The burden of proof for all permit issues shall rest with the
applicant.
   (G)   Permits are not transferable.
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
DIVISION 2. SPECIFIC GAMING PROVISIONS
§ 1-2-105. BINGO.
   (A)   An organization, as defined in §
1-2-102(S), may operate a bingo game in Frederick County for the benefit of the
organization or other charitable purpose.
   (B)   Only legal residents of Frederick County may operate a bingo game in
Frederick County. Persons operating the game must be volunteers not compensated
for their efforts. However, for the Frederick County Fair only, the Frederick
County Agricultural Association may sell or lease the right or concession to
operate bingo to any person regardless of residence.
   (C)   Permit:
      (1)   Before conducting a bingo game in Frederick County, the operator
and organization must submit an application as described in §
1-2-104 and the appropriate fee to the Department of Permits and Inspections;
      (2)   The operator and organization must establish that the operator of
the bingo game is a Frederick County resident, unless the exception for the
Frederick County Fair applies. The following may provide adequate
demonstrations of residence:
         (a)   A voter registration card;
         (b)   A Maryland driver’s license;
         (c)   Real property tax records; or
         (d)   Incorporation articles listing place of business as Frederick
County or a principal place of business in Frederick County. A mere mailing
address within the county is insufficient to establish evidence of residence.
   (D)   The annual permit issuance fee for bingo games in Frederick County
shall be $50.
   (E)    No bingo prize may have a fair market value in excess of $5,000.
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 03-15-338, 10-7-
2003; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-106. RAFFLES.
   (A)   An organization may hold a raffle for its own benefit in compliance
with this article and all other applicable law, provided that:
      (1)   No individual may personally benefit from a raffle except for
prizes awarded to participants;
      (2)   Only 1 major prize may be awarded at each raffle;
      (3)   During each calendar year, an organization may hold or receive the
proceeds from only 4 raffles where the major prize has the fair market value of
more than $5,000.
   (B)   Before conducting a raffle, an organization must obtain a permit as
described in §
1-2-104. Permits shall be valid for 1 calendar year.
   (C)   The permit issuance fee for raffles to be conducted in Frederick
County shall be $50 per calendar year. The Director of Permits and Inspections
shall waive this fee for a raffle if the applicant files and signs a written
statement certifying that all money received from the raffle will be paid to or
directly benefit the county. The applicant receiving such a fee waiver must
file a report with the Department of Permits and Inspections accounting for all
money received from the raffle.
   (D)   Each organization receiving a raffle permit shall file an annual
report showing for the calendar year the number of raffles held and the fair
market value of the major prize awarded for each raffle. This annual report
shall be filed with the Department of Permits and Inspections by February 15 of
the succeeding year.
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 03-15-338, 10-7-
2003; Ord. 13-17-645, 9-12-2013; Ord. 14-14-669, 9-4-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-
13-2014)
§ 1-2-107. TIP JARS AND PUNCHBOARDS.
   (A)   In Frederick County, a tip jar or punchboard may be operated for the
benefit of an organization only by:
      (1)   Uncompensated members of an organization located within the county;
or
      (2)   An establishment or proprietor licensed to serve food and alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises.
   (B)   Before a tip jar or punchboard is operated, the operator and the
organization must jointly apply for and obtain a permit as described in §
1-2-104.
   (C)   The issuance fee for a tip jar and punchboard permit shall be:
      (1)   $165 for a 1-year permit if the tip jar or punchboard will be
operated solely by the organization for its own behalf on its own premises or
premises owned by another organization;
      (2)   According to the following schedule if §
1-2-107(C)(1) does not apply:
         (a)   $750 for a 1-year permit;
         (b)   $175 for a 3 month permit;
         (c)   $110 for a carnival permit, event not to exceed 10 days;
         (d)   $75 for a single-occurrence permit, event not to exceed 3 days.
   (D)   An issuance fee also shall be due on each bag sold for tip jar use and
on each punchboard.
      (1)   The fee shall be as follows:
         (a)   $2 per bag or punchboard if the projected profit from the tip
jar or punchboard is from $0 to $100;
         (b)   If the projected profit from the tip jar or punchboard is over
$100, the fee shall be $2 per bag or punchboard for each $100 (or fraction
thereof) of projected profit from the tip jar or punchboard.
      (2)   The distributor shall pay the county the fee for each sale of a tip
jar bag or punchboard to operators or organizations for use within Frederick
County during a calendar month.
      (3)   Each distributor shall submit the appropriate fee to the Department
of Permits and Inspections along with the monthly reports required in §
1-2-110(F).
      (4)   The fee shall be submitted by check or money order identifying the
distributor by name and license number.
      (5)   A distributor’s failure to timely pay this fee shall constitute a
violation of the gaming laws subjecting the distributor to each of the
penalties provided in §
1-2-111.
   (E)   (1)   The organization must receive a minimum of 70% of the proceeds
from a tip jar or punchboard. The operator may receive from the proceeds its
expenses, but only up to 30% of the proceeds.
      (2)   Permissible expenses for which the operator may be reimbursed are:
         (a)   Permit fee;
         (b)   Wages of the person conducting the tip jar or punchboard;
         (c)   Cost of producing the required monthly reports;
         (d)   Cost of purchasing the tip jar/punchboard.
   (F)   The operator must submit monthly reports to the Director of Permits
and Inspections within 45 days after the end of each month detailing the number
of bags purchased during that calendar month, the number of bags used,
proceeds, payouts, expenses, and amounts paid to the organization in the format
required by the Director of Permits and Inspections.
   (G)   If the organization is not the operator, the organization shall submit
an annual report detailing the funds received from the operator on a monthly
basis from tip jars and punchboards. The report shall be submitted to the
Director of Permits and Inspections by February 15 for the preceding calendar
year in the form required by the Director of Permits and Inspections.
   (H)   All tip jars and punchboards must be obtained only from a distributor
licensed by the county to distribute gaming devices.
   (I)   The permit must be displayed conspicuously with the tip jar or
punchboard.
   (J)   An organization may not have or be a signatory on more than 3 permits
to operate tip jars or punchboards off its premises.
   (K)   A tip jar or punchboard may not be played by anyone under 18 years of
age. Operators are responsible for ensuring that all players meet the minimum
age requirement.
   (L)   All records regarding punchboards or tip jars must be made available
for inspection by the Director of Permits and Inspections and by law
enforcement agents.
   (M)   More than 1 tip jar or punchboard may be operated at the same
location, but a separate permit is required for each different location at
which a punchboard or tip jar is operated.
   (N)   The cost of the tip jar or punchboard itself may be paid either by the
operator or the organization.
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 03-15-338, 10-7-
2003; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-108. GAMING EVENTS OTHER THAN BINGO, RAFFLES, TIP JARS, PUNCHBOARDS.
   (A)   An organization may hold a gaming event, other than a bingo game,
raffle, tip jar, or punchboard, for its own benefit in compliance with this
article and all other applicable law, provided that:
      (1)   Only 1 major prize may be awarded at each gaming event;
      (2)   During each calendar year, an organization may hold or receive the
proceeds from only 4 events where the major prize has the fair market value of
$5,000 or more.
   (B)   Before conducting any gaming event, the organization must obtain a
permit as described in §
1-2-104.
   (C)   The annual permit issuance fee for a gaming event other than a bingo
game, raffle, tip jar, or punchboard shall be $50.
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 03-15-338, 10-7-
2003; Ord. 14-14-669, 9-4-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-109. VOLUNTEER FIRE, RESCUE, AMBULANCE, OR AUXILIARY GROUPS.
   (A)   A volunteer fire, rescue, ambulance or auxiliary group (as defined in
§
1-2-102) is subject to the fee schedule provided in this section
notwithstanding any other provision of this article.
   (B)   A volunteer fire rescue, ambulance, or auxiliary group shall pay $100
for an annual gaming permit entitling it to operate for its own benefit:
      (1)   Bingo games;
      (2)   Tip jars and punchboards in conjunction with bingo games;
      (3)   Raffles;
      (4)   Any gaming event as specified in §
1-2-108;
      (5)   Any or all of the above for a 1 week period once annually in
conjunction with a volunteer fireman’s carnival.
   (C)   Any permit issued under this section during 1992 shall be valid until
December 31, 1993. Permits issued after January 1, 1993, shall be valid for a
calendar year.
   (D)   Tip jars and punchboards not operated by the organization but for its
benefit shall be subject to the issuance fee established in §
1-2-107(C)(2).
   (E)   The issuance fee provided in §
1-2-107(D) shall be due on all tip jar bags and punchboards used by a volunteer
fire, rescue, ambulance or auxiliary group.
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 13-17-645, 9-12-
2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-110. DISTRIBUTOR LICENSES.
   (A)   Only a distributor licensed by the county may sell tip jars or
punchboards for use in Frederick County.
   (B)   A distributor is ineligible to apply for or possess a license if the
applicant or any of the applicant’s officers, directors, or employees directly
responsible for the distribution of tip jars or punchboards has been:
      (1)   Convicted of a felony; or
      (2)   Convicted of a misdemeanor in any way related to gambling or gaming
within 5 years of the submission of the license application.
   (C)   To obtain a distributor’s license, a person must annually submit the
appropriate application to the county agency along with the license fee. The
applicant must also establish that it maintains an office in Frederick County.
   (D)   The annual license fee for a distributor shall be $2,000.
   (E)   Each distributor must maintain records for at least 5 years showing
all sales, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The names and addresses of the purchasers;
      (2)   Date of the sale; and
      (3)   Serial numbers of the tip jars or punchboards sold.
   (F)   Each distributor shall submit monthly reports and the appropriate
issuance fee to the Director of Permits and Inspections within 45 days after
the end of each month.
      (1)   The reports shall detail the number of bags sold, the name and
address of each purchaser of each bag, the date of sale, and the serial numbers
of each bag sold.
      (2)   The issuance fee will be determined as described in §
1-2-107(D).
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 03-15-338, 10-7-
2003; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-111. PENALTIES.
   (A)   A violation of the provisions of §§
1-2-101 through
1-2-110 or any gaming law is subject to 1 or more of the following actions:
      (1)   A fine of up to $500;
      (2)   A suspension of the offender’s permit or license;
      (3)   Revocation of the offender’s permit or license;
      (4)   The denial of a new permit to the offender for a period of up to 3
years following the offense.
   (B)   A permit or license may be denied, suspended, or revoked if an
applicant makes a materially false statement on or fraudulently completes or
submits a permit or license application or any other document submitted to the
county related to gaming.
   (C)   The Director of Permits and Inspections has the authority to cite all
gaming law violations, other than criminal violations, and impose the penalties
established in this section.
      (1)   For violations cited by the Director of Permits and Inspections,
the permit or license holder shall have 30 days from the date of notification
of the violation to request a hearing on the violation before the Board of
Gaming Appeals.
      (2)   If an appeal is filed with the Board of Gaming Appeals, all
penalties will be stayed pending resolution of the appeal unless the Director
of Permits and Inspections makes a specific written finding that danger to the
public health, safety or welfare will occur during the pendency of the appeal,
in which event the penalty may be imposed pending resolution of the appeal.
   (D)   If applicable, the Director of Permits and Inspections shall notify
the County Board of License Commissioners of a violation of the provisions of
§§
1-2-101 through
1-2-110 for the Board's consideration under Md. Code Ann., Art. 2B, § 10-103(B)
(9).
   (E)   Any person who knowingly violates any provision of §§
1-2-101 through
1-2-110 is guilty of a criminal misdemeanor and on conviction subject to a fine
not to exceed $1,000, or imprisonment not to exceed 6 months, or both.
   (F)   Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense subject to any or
all penalties imposed in this section.
   (G)   The penalties imposed in this section are in addition to all others
imposed by law.
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-2-112. APPEALS.
   Any applicant may appeal the denial or revocation of a license or permit to
the Board of Gaming Appeals.
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-2-113. BOARD OF GAMING APPEALS.
   (A)   There shall be a Board of Gaming Appeals.
   (B)   Subject to confirmation by the County Council, the County Executive
shall appoint the 3 members of the Board of Gaming Appeals.
   (C)   Composition and tenure:
      (1)   Each member will serve a 3 year term;
      (2)   Of the initial appointees, 1 member will serve 1 year, the second
will serve 2 years, and the third will serve the full 3-year term;
      (3)   Each member shall be eligible to serve only 2 consecutive 3-year
terms;
      (4)   Each member shall serve until a successor is appointed;
      (5)   Members of the Board of Gaming Appeals shall receive no
compensation for their services but may receive reimbursement for expenses
actually and necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties
within the amount appropriated for such purposes;
      (6)   Two members of the Board of Gaming Appeals shall constitute a
quorum.
   (D)   The Board of Gaming Appeals may adopt reasonable rules and regulations
to govern its procedures.
(Ord. 92-21-056, 9-22-1992; Ord. 93-02-066, 1-19-1993; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§§ 1-2-114 – 1-2-120. RESERVED.
ARTICLE IX: COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND BINDING ARBITRATION WITH EMPLOYEES
IN THE FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICES DIVISION (§§ 1-2-121 — 1-2-130)
Section
   
1-2-121   Definitions
   
1-2-122   Collective bargaining
   
1-2-123   Employee rights
   
1-2-124   Management rights
   
1-2-125   Certification of exclusive representative
   
1-2-126   Negotiation and authorized subjects
   
1-2-127   Negotiation committee
   
1-2-128   Impasse procedure
§ 1-2-121. DEFINITIONS.
   The words used in this article shall have their normal accepted meanings
except as set forth below.
   CERTIFICATION. The procedure whereby an employee organization is officially
recognized as the employees’ exclusive bargaining representative.
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. The process of meeting at reasonable times and places
and negotiating in good faith on authorized subjects as defined under this
article. This article does not compel either party to agree to a proposal or to
make a concession.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY COUNCIL. County Council of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY EXECUTIVE. County Executive of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY GOVERNING BODY. County Council and County Executive of Frederick
County, Maryland.
   EMPLOYEE. A sworn, regular, nonexemptemployee at or below the rank of
captain within the Frederick County Division of Fire and Rescue Services.
   EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION. A labor or other organization in which employees
participate and that has representing employees as one of its primary purposes.
   EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE. The employee organization certified by the county
to represent and bargain for eligible employees over wages and benefits.
   IMPASSE. The failure of the County Executive and the exclusive
representative to reach a collective bargaining agreement despite good faith
efforts to do so.
   STRIKE. Any concerted action to impede the full and proper performance of
employment duties in order to induce, influence, coerce, or enforce demands for
a change in wages, hours, terms, or other conditions of employment, including a
total or partial:
      (1)   Refusal or failure to report to work;
      (2)   Refusal or failure to perform employment duties;
      (3)   Withdrawal from work;
      (4)   Work stoppage; or
      (5)   Work slowdown.
(Ord. 06-06-402, 3-7-2006; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 20-01, passed
2-18-2020)
§ 1-2-122. COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.
   (A)   Authorized. The County Executive shall engage in negotiations with
regard to the authorized subjects of negotiation as defined in § 1- 2-126 with
the employee organization recognized as the exclusive representative of the
employees.
   (B)   Memorandum of understanding.
      (1)   Collective bargaining with the exclusive representative may include
a memorandum of understanding concerning the authorized subjects of negotiation
a defined in § 1-2- 126.
      (2)   Any memorandum of understandingexecuted by the County Executive is
not effective unless ratified in accordance with procedures adopted by the
exclusive representative.
   (C)   Agreement subject to funding by the county.  The County Council
retains the right to approve or disapprove, in whole or in part, any additional
funding required as the result of a negotiated agreement reached by the County
Executive with the exclusive representative.
   (D)   Strikes prohibited; penalties.
      (1)   An employee shall not engage in, induce, or initiate a strike.
      (2)   In the event of a violation of this subsection, the county will
take whatever action it deems necessary to protect the public, including,
without limitation, suspension of certification or any privilege acquired as
the result of the certification; revocation of the right of an employee
organization to represent employees; discipline, including termination of
employment, of employees engaged in such illegal conduct; or application for
relief in an appropriate court of law.
(Ord. 06-06-402, 3-7-2006; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 20-01, passed
2-18-2020)
§ 1-2-123. EMPLOYEE RIGHTS.
   (A)   Employees may form, join, and assist employee organizations for the
purpose of bargaining collectively on authorized subjects of negotiation
through a representative of their own choosing.
   (B)   Employees also have the right to refrain from the activities described
in paragraph (A).
(Ord. 06-06-402, 3-7-2006; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 20-01, passed
2-18-2020)
§ 1-2-124. MANAGEMENT RIGHTS.
   (A)   The county's obligations under this article and any memorandum of
understanding made under it do not impair or affect its exclusive rights and
responsibilities to:
      (1)   Determine the overall budget and mission of the county and any
agency of county government;
      (2)   Maintain and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
operations;
      (3)   Determine the services to be rendered and the operations to be
performed;
      (4)   Determine the overall organizational structure, methods, processes,
means, job classifications, and personnel by which operations are conducted,
and the location of facilities;
      (5)   Direct, supervise, and discipline employees in accordance with
county policies;
      (6)   Hire, select, and establish the standards governing promotion of
employees, and classify positions;
      (7)   Relieve employees from duties because of lack of work or funds, or
when the county determines continued work would be inefficient or
nonproductive;
      (8)   Take actions to carry out the mission of government in emergency
situations;
      (9)   Transfer, assign, and schedule employees to meet daily operational
needs;
      (10)   Determine the size, and composition of the work force;
      (11)   Set system performance standards;
      (12)   Establish employee performance standards and evaluate employees;
      (13)    Make and implement systems for awarding outstanding service
increments, extraordinary performance awards, and other merit awards;
      (14)   Introduce new or improved technology, research, development, and
services;
      (15)   Control and regulate the purchase of, use of, disposal of,
machinery, equipment, supplies, tools, other property and facilities and,
capital assets used in the delivery of fire and rescue services in Frederick
County;
      (16)   Maintain internal security standards;
      (17)   Create, alter, combine, contract out, or abolish any job
classification, department, operation, unit, or other division or service;
      (18)   Suspend, discharge, or otherwise discipline employees; and
      (19)   Issue and enforce rules, policies, and regulations necessary to
carry out these and all other managerial functions which are not inconsistent
with this article, federal or state law, or the terms of a memorandum of
understanding.
   (B)   Exemption. This article does not limit the discretion of the county to
voluntarily discuss with the exclusive representative any matter concerning the
county's exercise of any right specified in this section. If any matter is
discussed it is not subject to negotiation.
   (C)   Incorporation. The management rights specified in this section must be
incorporated by reference in every memorandum of understanding or other
agreement reached between the county and the employee organization.
   (D)   Volunteers. Any memorandum of understanding shall not restrain or
restrict a person from serving as an active member or officer of a volunteer
fire department, fire company, rescue squad, ambulance company, or other
volunteer organization that provides fire and rescue services.
(Ord. 06-06-402, 3-7-2006; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 20-01, passed
2-18-2020)
§ 1-2-125. CERTIFICATION OF EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE.
   (A)   Submission of petition. The County Executive may certify an employee
organization as the employees’ exclusive representative if the County Executive
receives a petition for the employee organization to be recognized by the
county, which petition is signed by at least 51% of the employees indicating
their desire to be exclusively represented by the petitioner for the purpose of
collective bargaining. If the petition submitted by the employee organization
is signed by less than 51%, but at least 30%, of the employees indicating their
desire to be exclusively represented by the petitioner for the purpose of
collective bargaining, the County Executive shall conduct an election in
accordance with subsections (B)(2) and (B)(3).
   (B)    Acceptance by the county.
      (1)   If the County Executive does not challenge the validity of the
petition within 30 days following receipt of the petition, the employee
organization will be deemed certified as the exclusive representative.
      (2)   If the County Executive challenges the petition’s validity, or if
the petition is signed by less than 51%, but at least 30%, of the employees
indicating their desire to be exclusively represented by the petitioner for the
purpose of collective bargaining, the petitioner may ask the American
Arbitration Association to appoint a third party neutral to conduct an election
and certify whether the employee organization has been selected as the
exclusive representative by a majority of the votes cast in the election.
      (3)   The county shall pay the costs of the American Arbitration
Association when the election is held as the result of the county’s challenge
to a petition’s validity. When an election is held because the petition
contains the signatures of less than 51%, but at least 30%, of the employees,
the exclusive representative shall pay the costs of the American Arbitration
Association.
(Ord. 06-06-402, 3-7-2006; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-2-126. NEGOTIATION AND AUTHORIZED SUBJECTS.
   (A)   Meetings with exclusive representative. The county’s negotiation
committee appointed under §
1-2-127 and the exclusive representative shall meet and negotiate in good faith
with respect to the authorized subjects of negotiation, but such negotiations
may not compel either the county or the exclusive representative to agree to a
proposal or require the making of a concession.
   (B)   Number of participants. During any collective bargaining, each party
is allowed to have an equal number of representatives participate in the
negotiations.
   (C)   Time limit on negotiation. Negotiation with the exclusive
representative will begin on or after October 1 of each year. The county is not
required to negotiate collectively with the exclusive representative if the
exclusive representative is not certified by October 1. Any negotiations with
the exclusive representative must be completed each year by the following
December 31.
   (D)   Subjects of negotiation.  Should the employee organization be
certified as the exclusive bargaining representative, items that may be
collectively bargained are:
      (1)   Wages;
      (2)    Benefits including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Deferred compensation plan;
         (b)   Dental insurance;
         (c)   Health insurance;
         (d)   Holidays;
         (e)   Life insurance;
         (f)   Paid leave;
         (g)   Retirement or pension plan; and
         (h)   Tuition assistance.
      (3)   Working conditions; and
      (4)   Terms and/or conditions of employment.
   (E)   Nonnegotiable subjects.The rights reserved exclusively to the county
under §
1-2-124 of this article are not negotiable.
(Ord. 06-06-402, 3-7-2006; Ord. 07-30-470, 9-25-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 16-06, 3-8-2016; Bill No. 20-01, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 1-2-127. NEGOTIATION COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Appointment of committee. The Chief Administrative Officer may form a
committee to engage in collective bargaining with the exclusive representative.
   (B)   Supervision. The Chief Administrative Officer will oversee the work of
any committee.
(Ord. 06-06-402, 3-7-2006; Ord. 07-30-470, 9-25-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-2-128. IMPASSE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Impasse procedure.
      (1)   If the county and the exclusive representative are unable to reach
a negotiated agreement by December 31, an impasse will be deemed to exist in
the negotiations with the exclusive representative. At any time during the
negotiations either party may declare an impasse.
      (2)   Within three business days after such impasse, the county and the
exclusive representative involved shall apply to the American Arbitration
Association for a list of nine neutral labor arbitrators who are members of the
National Academy of Arbitrators, who are familiar with impasse disputes and
interest arbitration, who maintain a residence within 150 miles of Frederick,
Maryland;
      (3)   Pursuant to an application made under subsection (A)(2), instruct
the American Arbitration Association to provide a list of neutral arbitrators
within five business days, and ensure that all of the arbitrators on the list
provided are available to conduct hearings and to issue a final written award
by March 1;
         (a)   The parties shall alternately strike names and keep track of the
order of the strikes until there is only one member remaining;
         (b)   The party striking first shall be agreed to or determined by a
coin toss; and
         (c)   The last remaining arbitrator shall be deemed to be selected by
the parties and shall arbitrate the dispute.
      (4)   The arbitrator shall be informed of his or her selection as soon as
possible. If for any reason the selected arbitrator is unable or unwilling to
serve or meet the deadlines contained in this section, the parties shall
immediately notify the last previous strike from the arbitration panel of his
or her selection. The process shall continue, if necessary, until a member of
the arbitration panel available to serve and meet the deadlines is selected.
      (5)   Within five business days after selection of the arbitrator, the
parties will provide a written memorandum that states all of the issues upon
which they agree.
      (6)   Within five business days after receipt of the submissions provided
for in subsection (A)(5) above, the parties will simultaneously exchange their
respective "final offers" that contain all of the proposed issues for a
memorandum of understanding between the county and the exclusive
representative, including a proposed term of the memorandum of understanding of
not less than one fiscal year and not more than three fiscal years.
      (7)   The arbitrator shall schedule a hearing in Frederick County to
begin as soon as possible after the exchange of final offers, but in no event
more than 30 calendar days after the exchange of final offers. The hearing
shall not be open to the public and shall be conducted consistent with the
procedural rules and regulations of the American Arbitration Association. Each
party shall be responsible for the costs of their own attorney(s) and expert
witness(es), if any.
      (8)   The arbitrator shall have full authority to hear and decide all
issues in dispute regarding the parties' respective final offers, including
matters of procedure and the scope of the arbitration.
      (9)   If the impasse is not resolved prior to the conclusion of the
hearing the arbitrator shall prepare a written report, which shall include the
arbitrator's separate decision as to each disputed subject area of bargaining
as to whether he or she adopts the county or the exclusive representative's
final offer as to each subject area of bargaining.
      (10)   In determining whether to include in the memorandum of
understanding the final offer of the county or the exclusive representative,
the arbitrator shall consider the factors described in subsection (B) below.
   (B)   Arbitrator - factors to consider.
      (1)   In determining which final offer is the more reasonable, the
arbitrator must first evaluate and give the highest priority to the ability of
the county to pay for additional short-term and long-term expenditures,
including those which would result from adoption of each parties' respective
final offer, by considering:
         (a)   The interest, needs, and welfare of county residents and
taxpayers;
         (b)   The limits on the county's ability to raise taxes under state
law and the county charter;
         (c)   The general fund revenue estimates for the ensuing fiscal year,
exclusive of those revenues sufficient to fund the County Executive's proposed
capital budget, transfers to other funds, legally mandated operating expenses,
and debt service;
         (d)   The added burden on county taxpayers, if any, resulting from
increases in revenues needed to fund a final offer;
         (e)   The county's ability to continue to provide the current standard
of all public services, including state and county mandated expenditures;
         (f)   The potential impact of adoption of each parties' respective
final offer on the county's credit rating; and
         (g)   The previously agreed-on issues as provided in subsection (A)
(4).
      (2)   After evaluating the ability of the county to pay under subsection
(B)(1), the arbitrator may only consider:
         (a)   Past collective bargaining agreements between the parties,
including the past bargaining history that led to each agreement;
         (b)   Overall compensation presently received by the employees in the
bargaining unit, inclusive of wages, vacations, holidays, excused leaves,
insurance and pensions, medical and hospitalization benefits, and all other
economic benefits received;
         (c)   Wages, hours, benefits and conditions of employment of similar
employees of other public employers in comparable jurisdictions as defined in
subsection (B)(3) below;
         (d)   Wages, hours, benefits, and conditions of employment of other
county employees and the potential effect of the arbitrator's selection of each
parties' respective final offer on other employees of the county;
         (e)   The special nature of the work performed by the employees in the
bargaining unit, including hazards of employment, physical requirements,
educational qualifications, job training and skills, shift assignments and the
demands placed upon such employees as compared to other county employees;
         (f)   The continuity and stability of employment of the members of the
bargaining unit, including application and vacancy statistics for positions in
the bargaining unit; and
         (g)   Increases or decreases in the cost of living in Frederick
County.
      (3)   In determining the comparability of other jurisdictions, the
arbitrator shall compare the following characteristics of the proposed
comparable jurisdiction with those same characteristics for Frederick County:
         (a)   Geographic size;
         (b)   Distance between the county and the proposed comparable
jurisdiction;
         (c)    Population;
         (d)   Population density;
         (e)   Average household income of residents;
         (f)   Average property value;
         (g)   Gains and losses of assessed property values;
         (h)   Size and composition of fire department;
         (i)   Fire incident rate;
         (j)   General fund revenue and expenditures;
         (k)   Assessable tax base; and
         (l)   Cost of living data.
      (4)   The arbitrator must base the selection of the more reasonable
respective final offer of the parties on the contents of the offer and the
integration of any previously agreed-on items with the disputed items. In
making a decision, the arbitrator must not consider or receive any evidence or
argument concerning offers of settlement not contained in the final offers
submitted to the arbitrator, or any other information concerning the collective
bargaining leading to impasse. The arbitrator must neither compromise nor alter
the final offer that he or she selects.
      (5)   The final offer selected by the arbitrator, integrated with any
items previously agreed on, is the final agreement between the parties, need
not be ratified by any party, and has the force and effect of an agreement
voluntarily entered into and ratified under §
1-2-122(B)(2).
   (C)   Executive action.
      (1)   The arbitrator shall submit his or her decision to the county and
the exclusive representative within 20 calendar days after the conclusion of
the hearing or the date established for the submission of post-hearing briefs,
whichever is later, but in no event later than March 1. The report and proposed
memorandum of understanding shall be binding upon the County Executive and the
exclusive representative, including the individual employees in the bargaining
unit. The County Executive shall submit to the County Council in a timely
manner all provisions of the new memorandum of understanding adopted by the
arbitrator which require an appropriation of funds or enactment, repeal, or
modification of county law, and shall make a good faith effort to have such
provisions implemented by Council action as a part of the following year's
budget process.
      (2)   The County Executive shall undertake all administrative and
executive action necessary to submit a proposed budget to carry out the
decision issued by the arbitrator.
      (3)   The submission of a proposed budget to the County Council fulfills
the obligations of the County Executive under this article.
      (4)   This subsection may not be interpreted or construed to require the
County Executive to be bound by, or to submit a budgetary request and
legislation to implement any decision of an arbitrator that is contrary to:
         (a)   State law;
         (b)   Provisions of the county charter governing public employment and
fiscal procedures; or
         (c)   Those rights that are exclusive to the county pursuant to §
1-2-124 of this article.
   (D)   Council action. The County Council is not bound by the arbitrator's
decision made under this section and may act upon the submitted budget to
implement the arbitrator's decision under this section in accordance with
applicable law. The County Council retains the right to approve or disapprove,
in whole or in part, any additional funding required as the result of the
arbitrator's decision.
   (E)   Continuing negotiations.
      (1)   The parties are strongly encouraged to reach an agreement on all
issues whenever possible.
      (2)   On or before March 10, the County Council may indicate its
intention to appropriate funds for or otherwise implement the agreement of the
parties or the arbitrator's decision, whichever is applicable, or its intention
not to do so, and state its reasons for any intent to reject any part of the
agreement or arbitrator's decision. If the Council indicates its intention to
reject any part, it shall designate a representative to meet with the parties
and present the Council's views in their further negotiations. The parties
shall thereafter meet as promptly as possible and attempt to negotiate an
agreement acceptable to the Council. The results of the negotiations shall be
submitted to the Council on or before March 15.
      (3)   This section may not be construed to interfere with any efforts the
parties may undertake to reach a negotiated agreement concerning any disputes
at any time.
   (F)   Duration of agreement. An arbitrator's award may be for more than one
fiscal year; however, the County Council shall only vote on proposed
legislation to implement such award one year at a time.
   (G)   Construction of section. This section shall be the exclusive procedure
for resolving disputes between the parties unless the parties mutually agree to
use another or an additional dispute resolution procedure during any period of
negotiations.
   (H)   Extension of memorandum of understanding.
      (1)   If the impasse resolution procedures provided for in this section
have been invoked and the current memorandum of understanding expires without
the implementation of a new memorandum of understanding, the county may not,
without the written approval of the exclusive representative, make any changes
in the wages or terms and conditions of employment between the expiration of
the current memorandum of understanding and the effective date of the successor
memorandum of understanding, except that the county may make changes to its
health benefits. In addition, the county may implement changes to other
benefits as required by applicable benefit plan documents; and
      (2)   The implementation of this subsection may not violate the
provisions of the county charter and may be effective for no longer than one
year.
   (I)   Costs. Fees, costs, and expenses of the arbitrator shall be shared
equally by the county and the exclusive representative.
   (J)   Waiver of limitation periods. Subject to the requirements of the
county charter, the parties may waive the time limits and dates established in
this section by written mutual agreement.
   (K)   Modification. At any time, the parties may modify any provision of the
memorandum of understanding by written mutual agreement.
(Bill No. 20-01, passed 2-18-2020)
§§ 1-2-129 – 1-2-130. RESERVED.
ARTICLE X: INTERAGENCY INTERNAL AUDIT AUTHORITY (§§ 1-2-131 — 1-2-140)
Section
   
1-2-131   Establishment
   
1-2-132   Purpose
   
1-2-133   Reporting responsibilities
   
1-2-134   Scope of assignments
   
1-2-135   Membership, meetings, and organization
   
1-2-136   Budgets and personnel
   
1-2-137   Annual work plan
   
1-2-138   External quality control review
§ 1-2-131. ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Frederick County Interagency Internal Audit Authority ("IIAA") is hereby
established.
(Bill No. 18-12, 4-17-2018)
§ 1-2-132. PURPOSE.
   The IIAA shall plan, coordinate, direct and supervise the establishment and
operation of an internal audit staff to provide Frederick County, Maryland, the
Board of Education, and the Frederick Community College Board of Trustees with
a review and appraisal of their operations. The IIAA shall act as an advisory
body on the internal auditing needs and services to Frederick County, Maryland.
(Bill No. 18-12, 4-17-2018)
§ 1-2-133. REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The IIAA shall establish a reporting procedure that maintains the
independence of its audit staff from the functions and organizations that it
reviews and evaluates.
(Bill No. 18-12, 4-17-2018)
§ 1-2-134. SCOPE OF ASSIGNMENTS.
   Assignments may be conducted in the form of audits or non-attest services,
as defined by Government Auditing Standards. Audits shall be conducted in
accordance with Government Auditing Standards. Financial and performance audits
as well as non-attest services are defined below:
   (A)   Financial audits.
      (1)   Financial statement audits provide reasonable assurance as to
whether financial statements are fairly presented in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles or other prescribed basis of accounting.
Financial audits conducted by the IIAA shall be internally based financial
audits, not to include the external financial audits conducted annually as
regulated by state, local and federal government guidelines.
      (2)   Financial related audits involve determining whether
         (a)   financial information is presented in accordance with certain
criteria,
         (b)   the entity has adhered to specific financial compliance
requirements, or
         (c)   the entity's internal control structure over financial reporting
and the safeguarding of assets is suitably designed and implemented to achieve
control objectives.
   (B)   Performance audits.
      (1)   Economy and efficiency audits include determining
         (a)   whether the entity is acquiring, protecting and using its
resources economically and efficiently,
         (b)   the causes of inefficiencies or uneconomical practices, and
         (c)   whether the entity has complied with laws and regulations
relating to economy and efficiency.
      (2)   Program audits determine
         (a)   the extent to which the desired results or benefits established
by the authorizing body are being achieved,
         (b)   the effectiveness of organizations, programs, activities or
functions, and
         (c)   whether the entity has complied with significant laws and
regulations applicable to the program.
   (C)   Non-attest services.
      (1)   Non-attest services, providing a value added service, include
services such as audit follow-up procedures, special projects, investigations
or analysis as requested. Non-attest services are not subject to Government
Auditing Standards and are to be reported in memorandum format.
(Bill No. 18-12, 4-17-2018)
§ 1-2-135. MEMBERSHIP, MEETINGS, AND ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The IIAA shall be composed of seven members:
      (1)   a member of the Board of Education,
      (2)   a member of the Frederick Community College Board of Trustees,
      (3)   a member of the Frederick County Council,
      (4)   four members of the public, of which Frederick County, Maryland
residency is preferred.
   (B)   The members of the public:
      (1)   shall possess expertise in accounting, auditing and internal
control,
      (2)   must be nominated by the IIAA and appointed by the Frederick County
Council,
      (3)   serve four-year terms commencing on a staggered basis,
      (4)   are eligible to serve two consecutive four-year terms and are
subsequently eligible for reappointment if at least one year has elapsed since
the end of their last term, and
      (5)   if appointed to a partial term, are eligible to serve two
additional consecutive terms.
   (C)   The Board of Education, the Community College Board of Trustees and
the County Council shall each appoint a member to the IIAA who shall serve at
the pleasure of the nominating body.
   (D)   The IIAA shall meet at least four times during each fiscal year;
additional meetings may be held as the IIAA deems necessary.
      (1)   Minutes shall be kept and reflect topics of discussion as well as
all decisions and recommendations.
      (2)   All meetings shall be open to the general public unless held in
closed session as permitted by Maryland's Open Meeting Act.
      (3)   A majority of the members of the Authority constitutes a quorum to
transact business.
      (4)   If a quorum is present, the IIAA may act on any matter that is
within its jurisdiction by a majority vote of the members present.
   (E)   The IIAA shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman yearly. Election of
these two officials shall be held each April or at the first meeting held
thereafter.
(Bill No. 18-12, 4-17-2018; Bill No. 25-03, 4-1- 2025)
§ 1-2-136. BUDGETS AND PERSONNEL.
   (A)   Budgets. The IIAA shall prepare an annual budget request to be
submitted to the Frederick County Executive under the County's budgeting
procedures.
   (B)   Director. The IIAA shall be responsible for the employment and
discharge of the internal audit division Director position (the Director)
within the limitation of its approved budget. The Director shall serve at the
pleasure of the IIAA. A majority vote of all IIAA members is required to hire
or to terminate the Director. The IIAA chairman, the vice chairman or a
majority of the IIAA members may schedule a special meeting to consider the
hiring or termination of the Director. Each IIAA member must be provided notice
of a special meeting. IIAA members may participate in such special meeting by
telephone. The IIAA shall recommend the salary of the Director, within the
limitation of its approved budget. All employment actions should adhere to the
County's Human Resources' policies and guidelines. The Director may not vote on
a question or issue before the IIAA. In the absence of a Director, an acting
Director may be appointed by the IIAA under the same guidelines as for
appointing a Director.
   (C)   Personnel. The Director may employ such personnel as believed
necessary to fulfill IIAA functions. All employment actions must adhere to the
County's Human Resources' policies and guidelines. The Director shall recommend
the internal audit division staff salaries, within the limitations of the
IIAA's approved budget. The Director shall inform the IIAA of employment
actions taken by the Director. The IIAA shall be responsible for hearing and
determining all IIAA employee grievances and appeals.
(Bill No. 18-12, 4-17-2018)
§ 1-2-137. ANNUAL WORK PLAN.
   Annually, the Director shall submit to the IIAA a strategic plan outlining
the major risk areas within Frederick County government, Frederick County
Public Schools and Frederick Community College and a five-year plan to provide
coverage of those areas. In addition, prior to the beginning of each fiscal
year, the Director shall present to the IIAA for approval, a detailed work plan
reflecting each project planned for the year and the corresponding budgeted
hours.
(Bill No. 18-12, 4-17-2018)
§ 1-2-138. EXTERNAL QUALITY CONTROL REVIEW.
   If required under Governmental Auditing Standards, IIAA's audit activities
shall be subject to a quality control review at least once every three years by
an organization not affiliated with any agency or function of Frederick County,
Maryland, Frederick County Board of Education or Frederick Community College.
Quality control reviews shall be conducted utilizing guidelines endorsed by the
National Association of Local Government Auditors or the General Accounting
Office and shall determine whether an adequate internal quality control system
is in place and is operating effectively to provide for compliance with
Government Auditing Standards.
(Bill No. 18-12, 4-17-2018)
§§ 1-2-139 - 1-2-140. RESERVED.
ARTICLE XI: SUSTAINABILITY COMMISSION (§§ 1-2-141 — 1-2-147)
Section
   
1-2-141   Establishment, powers
   
1-2-142   Composition
   
1-2-143   Terms, reappointments, vacancies
   
1-2-144   Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary
   
1-2-145   Meetings and quorum
   
1-2-146   Bylaws
   
1-2-147   Compensation
§ 1-2-141. ESTABLISHMENT, POWERS.
   (A)   There is a Frederick County Sustainability Commission, which was
initially created by Resolution 09-02.
   (B)   Among its powers and duties, the Commission shall:
      (1)   Identify and prioritize concerns and issues relating to long-term
environmental, social, and economic sustainability of the Frederick County
community;
      (2)   Frame sustainability priorities for the County that balance
environmental protection, judicious use of resources, economic vitality,
healthy communities, and social equity, and that are appropriate to the
specific challenges and constraints of the region, and develop and propose a
comprehensive set of sustainability principles to inform County policies;
      (3)   With input from other County advisory committees, establish methods
and indicators to measure progress in meeting established sustainability goals;
      (4)   Assist the County Executive and OSER with implementation of the
Star Communities program, certification of Frederick County as a Star
Community, and development of metrics to track the success of Commission
defined Star Community sustainability initiatives;
      (5)   Review and report to the County Executive on progress toward
achieving certification as a Star Community with input from the County Office
of Sustainability and Environmental Resources (OSER), County Divisions and
Departments, and other sources of information necessary for such review;
      (6)   Support and sponsor community programs and projects to provide
information and education to the community on ways to improve individual,
business, or organizational sustainability;
      (7)   Develop and encourage community efforts and resources for action on
sustainability; and
      (8)   Consult with the County Executive as requested relative to specific
sustainability issues and needs that may arise.
   (C)   In fulfilling its duties and responsibilities under this Article, the
Commission may consult and cooperate with federal, state, county, city, town,
or other governmental or public agencies, commissions, and committees,
citizens, community groups, academic institutions, and other entities on
matters relating to sustainability.
   (D)   Members of the Commission will meet with the County Executive and
appropriate staff on a quarterly basis, or more frequently as needed, to review
Commission activities and County sustainability priorities and initiatives.
   (E)   Commission members will advise the County Executive and staff on
issues related to photovoltaics, transportation electrification, energy
efficiency in residential and commercial buildings, forestry, water and air
quality, agriculture, environmental education, waste management, and as the
need arises, other areas within their subject matter expertise.
   (F)   In addition to the activities identified above, members of the
Commission will:
      (1)   Within their individual areas of expertise, serve as subject matter
policy experts and liaisons to the County Executive, OSER, and County agencies
and units in conjunction with the development of sustainability policies and
initiatives;
      (2)   Facilitate citizen and stakeholder convening processes to provide
input on existing and proposed sustainability policies and initiatives; and
      (3)   Serve as a liaison to the Frederick County Forestry Board and other
stakeholder groups closely tied to promoting sustainable practices across a
range of sectors.
   (G)   The Commission shall not engage in any advocacy activities as a
representative of County Government.
(Bill No. 18-15, 6-19-2018)
§ 1-2-142. COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Subject to confirmation by the County Council, the County Executive
shall appoint up to 13 members to the Commission, each of whom shall be
registered voters and residents of Frederick County.
   (B)   The membership of the Commission shall ensure fair representation from
a balanced range of interests including non-profit, academic, and private
sectors.
   (C)   Members of the FCSC shall have a professional affiliation with, or
expertise in, one or more of the following areas:
      (1)   Energy;
      (2)   Sustainable land use and transportation;
      (3)   Open space and land preservation;
      (4)   Green building practices;
      (5)   Air quality/climate;
      (6)   Water quality;
      (7)   Recycling/waste reduction;
      (8)   Environmental justice;
      (9)   Education;
      (10)   Small and/or local business;
      (11)   Green jobs/workforce training;
      (12)   Human/environmental health;
      (13)   Agriculture/food security;
      (14)   Community, grass-roots environmental efforts; or
      (15)   Finance and governance.
(Bill No. 18-15, 6-19-2018)
§ 1-2-143. TERMS, REAPPOINTMENTS, VACANCIES.
   (A)   The term of office of each of the members of the Commission shall be
for a period of 3 years, based on the County's fiscal year, July 1 to June 30.
The terms of the members shall be staggered so that no more than 5 members are
replaced each year.
   (B)   Members may be reappointed, but may not serve more than 2 full
consecutive 3-year terms.
   (C)   Any member may resign at any time by giving written notice of such
resignation to the County Executive.
   (D)   Vacancies shall be filled on the same basis as the original
appointments for the unexpired terms. Members shall continue in office until
their successors are appointed and qualified.
   (E)   A Commission member may be removed by the County Executive for cause.
(Bill No. 18-15, 6-19-2018)
§ 1-2-144. CHAIR, VICE-CHAIR AND SECRETARY.
   (A)   The Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary will be selected by the members of
the Commission.
   (B)   The terms of officers shall be one (1) year or until a successor shall
be elected and qualified.
   (C)   The duties and eligibility of officers shall be established by the
Bylaws of the Commission.
(Bill No. 18-15, 6-19-2018)
§ 1-2-145. MEETINGS AND QUORUM.
   (A)   The Commission shall meet monthly, or more frequently, as determined
by the Commission members at a location in Frederick County that is open to the
public and is ADA accessible.
   (B)   Meeting notices shall be publicized and be part of the public record.
   (C)   A majority of the Commission members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of regular business.
   (D)   Any member of the Commission who shall fail to attend at least 50% of
the meetings during any period of 12 consecutive months shall be considered to
have resigned. Subject to confirmation by the County Council, the County
Executive shall appoint a replacement.
(Bill No. 18-15, 6-19-2018)
§ 1-2-146. BYLAWS.
   The Commission shall adopt bylaws to govern its procedures and activities.
(Bill No. 18-15, 6-19-2018)
§ 1-2-147. COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Bill No. 18-15, 6-19-2018)
ARTICLE XII: VETERANS ADVISORY COUNCIL (§§ 1-2-200 — 1-2-209)
Section
   
1-2-200   Creation, powers
   
1-2-201   Composition
   
1-2-202   Ex-officio non-voting advisory members
   
1-2-203   Terms, reappointments, vacancies
   
1-2-204   Chair, Vice-Chair
   
1-2-205   Meetings and quorum
   
1-2-206   Rules and regulations
   
1-2-207   Compensation
   
1-2-208   [Reports]
   
1-2-209   County staff
§ 1-2-200. CREATION, POWERS.
   (A)   There shall be a Frederick County Veterans Advisory Council (VAC).
   (B)   Among its powers and duties, the VAC shall:
      (1)   Collaborate with established military Veteran oriented service
organizations to evaluate, develop and promote new and existing programs and
services for Veterans and their families within Frederick County.
      (2)   Collaborate with other County Commissions, Boards and Councils, and
County staff with regard to policies, programs, and concerns related to
Veterans' interest.
      (3)   Collaborate with the County Executive and County Council to develop
and promote programs and services in the State and County related to the needs
of Veterans and their families.
(Bill No. 18-11, 5-1-2018)
§ 1-2-201. COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Subject to confirmation by the County Council, the County Executive
shall appoint up to 7 members to the VAC, all of whom shall be registered
voters and residents of Frederick County, not less than 4 of whom are honorably
discharged veterans.
   (B)   Three members may be non-veterans, who represent a variety of
organizations that provide services to veterans such as:
      (1)   A post-secondary educational institution; or
      (2)   A member of a Veterans' Service Organization.
(Bill No. 18-11, 5-1-2018; Bill No. 25-04, 4-1-2025)
§ 1-2-202. EX-OFFICIO NON-VOTING ADVISORY MEMBERS.
   (A)   A representative from the U. S. Department of Veterans Affairs, such
as:
      (1)   Veterans Administration Vet Center;
      (2)   Veterans Administration - Veteran Experience Office; or
      (3)   Veterans Administration - Community Based Outpatient Clinic / Fort
Detrick location.
   (B)   The Director of the Frederick County Workforce Services, or the
Director's designee.
   (C)   The Director of the Frederick County Health Department, Behavioral
Health Services Division, or the Director's designee.
   (D)   A Veteran Liaison from Frederick Memorial Hospital or one of its
affiliates.
   (E)   A member of the Frederick County Council.
   (F)   A member of the Maryland General Assembly who represents Frederick
County.
   (G)   A representative from the office of a member of the U.S. Congress who
represents Frederick County.
   (H)   A representative from the Maryland Department of Veterans and Military
Families that represents Frederick County.
(Bill No. 18-11, 5-1-2018; Bill No. 25-04, 4-1-2025)
§ 1-2-203. TERMS, REAPPOINTMENTS, VACANCIES.
   (A)   The term of office of each of the members shall be for a period of 4
years, effective for all new members appointed following the effective date of
this bill.
   (B)   Members may be reappointed, but may not serve more than 4 full
consecutive 2-year terms or 2 full consecutive 4-year terms.
   (C)   Vacancies shall be filled on the same basis as the original
appointments for the unexpired terms. Members shall continue in office until
their successors are appointed and qualified.
   (D)   A VAC member may be removed by the County Executive for cause.
   (E)   If an individual is a veteran that serves on the Veterans Advisory
Council as an ex-officio, they must be honorably discharged from the United
States military.
(Bill No. 18-11, 5-1-2018; Bill No. 25-04, 4-1-2025)
§ 1-2-204. CHAIR, VICE-CHAIR.
   The Chair and Vice-Chair will be selected by the members of the VAC.
(Bill No. 18-11, 5-1-2018)
§ 1-2-205. MEETINGS AND QUORUM.
   (A)   The VAC shall meet as frequently as determined by the VAC, but not
less than quarterly. Meeting locations shall be determined by the VAC Chair and
shall be in Frederick County, open to the public and ADA accessible.
   (B)   Notice of the date, time, and place of the VAC meetings shall meet the
requirements of the Maryland Open Meetings Act.
   (C)   A majority of the VAC voting members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of regular business.
   (D)   Any voting member of the VAC who fails to attend at least 50% of the
meetings during any period of 12 consecutive months shall be considered to have
resigned. Subject to confirmation by the County Council, the County Executive
shall appoint a replacement.
(Bill No. 18-11, 5-1-2018)
§ 1-2-206. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The VAC shall adopt rules to govern its procedures and activities.
(Bill No. 18-11, 5-1-2018)
§ 1-2-207. COMPENSATION.
   Members of the VAC shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Bill No. 18-11, 5-1-2018)
§ 1-2-208. [REPORTS.]
   On or before July 1 of each year, the VAC shall provide a report to the
County Executive and the County Council on its activities and progress in
meeting its goals. The VAC shall post the report on the VAC website.
(Bill No. 18-11, 5-1-2018)
§ 1-2-209. COUNTY STAFF.
   A county staff member should be designated by the County Executive as a
liaison to assist the VAC.
(Bill No. 18-11, 5-1-2018)
ARTICLE XIII: SUSTAINABLE MONOCACY COMMISSION (§§ 1-2-300 — 1-2-307)
Section
   
1-2-300   Creation, purpose
   
1-2-301   Membership
   
1-2-302   Terms, reappointments, vacancies
   
1-2-303   Chair, Vice-Chair
   
1-2-304   Meetings and quorum
   
1-2-305   Rules and regulations
   
1-2-306   Compensation
   
1-2-307   County staff
§ 1-2-300. CREATION, PURPOSE.
   (A)   There shall be a Frederick County Sustainable Monocacy Commission
(SMC).
   (B)   Among its duties, the SMC shall:
      (1)   Recommend policies that improve water quality, maintain and restore
the ecological health and productivity of the Monocacy River and its
tributaries, and conserve and protect wildlife habitat, the natural, cultural,
and scenic character of the Monocacy River and its tributaries flowing in and
through Frederick County.
      (2)   Review studies, policies, and rules formulated by federal, state,
and local government agencies that concern or affect the Monocacy River and its
tributaries, and to comment and provide advice on such proposals as
appropriate.
      (3)   Review and make recommendations on federal, state, county, and
local programs, policies, regulations, and public and private projects, which
the SMC believes may have an impact on the Monocacy River and its tributaries.
      (4)   Review and make recommendations concerning the implementation of
the most recent Frederick County approved Monocacy Scenic River
Management Plan and to help fulfill the other objectives as outlined in the
document.
      (5)   Educate the public and increase awareness about the importance of
the Monocacy River's environmental, cultural, and recreational resources, and
provide information related to actions that can be taken by individuals and
communities to reduce pollution, conserve water, and promote a healthy and
productive Monocacy River and its tributaries.
      (6)   Prepare a written report outlining the activities, goals, and
accomplishments of the SMC annually or as appropriate. This report shall be
submitted to the County Executive and County Council, and posted on the SMC
website.
      (7)   Meet and collaborate with the Carroll County River Board (or its
equivalent board) annually or as needed and agreed upon by the two boards.
(Bill No. 19-17, 1-21-2020)
§ 1-2-301. MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Number. Subject to confirmation by the County Council, the County
Executive shall appoint up to 13 members to the SMC, all of whom shall be
residents of Frederick County. The elected official from the City of Frederick,
or designee, shall be a non-voting member of the SMC. The elected official from
the County Council, or designee, shall be a non-voting member of the SMC.
   (B)   Composition.
      (1)   The SMC shall consist of:
         (a)   Two owners of property contiguous to Monocacy River;
         (b)   One owner of property contiguous to a named or unnamed tributary
of the Monocacy River;
         (c)   Two individuals who do not reside on property which is
contiguous to Monocacy River;
         (d)   One elected official of The City of Frederick, or designee, non-
voting;
         (e)   One elected official of the County Council, or designee, non-
voting;
         (f)   One representative of the agricultural community;
         (g)   One student representative enrolled in a high school or
postsecondary institution;
         (h)   Three individuals having educational expertise or experience in
the fields of biology, ecology, chemistry, earth sciences, environmental
education, natural resources, or related fields; and
         (i)   One member from the general public.
(Bill No. 19-17, 1-21-2020; Bill No. 24-02, 4-2- 2024)
§ 1-2-302. TERMS, REAPPOINTMENTS, VACANCIES.
   (A)   The term of office of each of the members shall be for a period of
four years, based on the county's fiscal year, July 1 to June 30. The terms of
the members shall be staggered so that no more than five members are replaced
each year.
   (B)   Members may be reappointed, but may not serve more than two full
consecutive four-year terms.
   (C)   Vacancies shall be filled on the same basis as the original
appointments for the unexpired terms. Members shall continue in office until
their successors are appointed and qualified.
(Bill No. 19-17, 1-21-2020; Bill No. 24-02, 4-2- 2024)
§ 1-2-303. CHAIR, VICE-CHAIR.
   The Chair and Vice-Chair will be selected by the members of the SMC.
(Bill No. 19-17, 1-21-2020)
§ 1-2-304. MEETINGS AND QUORUM.
   (A)   The SMC shall meet as frequently as determined by the SMC, but not
less than twice per calendar year. Meeting locations shall be determined by the
SMC Chair and shall be in Frederick County, open to the public, and ADA
accessible.
   (B)   Notice of the date, time, and place of the SMC meetings shall meet the
requirements of the Maryland Open Meetings Act.
   (C)   A majority of the SMC voting members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of regular business.
   (D)   Any voting member of the SMC who fails to attend at least 50% of the
meetings during any period of 24 consecutive months shall be considered to have
resigned. Subject to confirmation by the County Council, the County Executive
shall appoint a replacement.
(Bill No. 19-17, 1-21-2020)
§ 1-2-305. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The SMC shall adopt rules to govern its procedures and activities.
(Bill No. 19-17, 1-21-2020)
§ 1-2-306. COMPENSATION.
   Members of the SMC shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Bill No. 19-17, 1-21-2020)
§ 1-2-307. COUNTY STAFF.
   A county staff member will be designated by the County Executive as a
liaison to assist the SMC in its duties.
(Bill No. 19-17, 1-21-2020)
ARTICLE XIV: DOMESTIC VIOLENCE COORDINATING COUNCIL (§§ 1-2-400 — 1-2-406)
Section
   
1-2-400   Creation, duties
   
1-2-401   Composition
   
1-2-402   Chair, Vice-Chair
   
1-2-403   Rules
   
1-2-404   Advocacy
   
1-2-405   Compensation
   
1-2-406   Reporting
§ 1-2-400. CREATION, DUTIES.
   (A)   There shall be a Frederick County Domestic Violence Coordinating
Council (Coordinating Council).
   (B)   The Coordinating Council will meet at least four times each year.
   (C)   The Coordinating Council shall:
      (1)   Advise the County Executive, County Council, and Criminal Justice
Coordinating Commission and its members on policies, programs, and legislation
necessary to prevent domestic violence and assist victims and their families
with safety, stability and services;
      (2)   Promote and facilitate an effective community wide victim-centered
response to domestic violence, including a well-coordinated, multi-disciplinary
approach to all programs serving victims of domestic violence and their
families;
      (3)   Coordinate with the Maryland Network Against Domestic Violence and
all other county, state, federal, and non-governmental agencies, committees,
boards, commissions, and organizations that operate, monitor, provide education
or technical assistance or coordinate domestic violence programs or services in
the county to maximize the effectiveness of these programs and services;
      (4)   Develop recommendations to improve the coordination and
effectiveness of county, state, federal, and non-governmental multi-
disciplinary, victim-centered efforts regarding domestic violence, including
prevention, intervention, treatment, law enforcement, prosecution, correctional
and advocacy efforts;
      (5)   Cooperate with any relevant departments, agencies, committees,
boards, commissions, and organizations to periodically review the quality and
sufficiency of programs and facilities available to domestic violence victims,
offenders and their children throughout the county;
      (6)   Obtain, evaluate and assist in implementing the recommendations of
the county's Domestic Violence Fatality Review Team established under Md. Code
Ann., Title 4, Subtitle 7, the Family Law Article;
      (7)   Obtain and evaluate statistical data, reports, and other
information related to domestic violence, including information regarding
innovative efforts by other governmental and non-governmental entities, as
necessary to implement the requirements of this section; and
      (8)   Subject to § 1-2-404, advocate for policies or legislation at the
county, state and federal levels that would improve efforts to address domestic
violence issues, including prevention, intervention, treatment, law
enforcement, prosecution, correctional and advocacy efforts.
(Bill No. 20-09, 7-21-2020)
§ 1-2-401. COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The Coordinating Council shall include the following:
      (1)   A member of the County Council;
      (2)   The Administrative Judge for Frederick County District Court or
designee of the Administrative Judge;
      (3)   The Administrative Judge for the Frederick County Circuit Court or
designee of the Administrative Judge;
      (4)   The State's Attorney for Frederick County or designee of the
State's Attorney;
      (5)   The Regional Director of the Division of Parole and Probation,
Maryland Department of Public Safety and Corrections or designee of the
Regional Director;
      (6)   The Frederick County Sheriff or designee of the Frederick County
Sheriff;
      (7)   The Chief of the City of Frederick Police Department or designee of
the Chief;
      (8)   The Forensic Nursing Services Coordinator at Frederick Health
Hospital or designee of the Coordinator;
      (9)   The President of a comprehensive domestic violence program serving
county residents, or designee of the President;
      (10)   The Director of the Frederick County office of the Maryland
Department of Human Services or designee of the Director;
      (11)   The Director of Behavioral Health Services, Frederick County
Health Department or designee of the Director;
      (12)   The Superintendent of Frederick County Public Schools or designee
of the Superintendent; and
      (13)   The Director of the Frederick County Child Advocacy Center or
designee of the Director.
   (B)   Subject to confirmation by the County Council, with input from the
Coordinating Council members listed in §
1-2-401(A), the County Executive must appoint the following individuals to
serve three-year terms on the Coordinating Council:
      (1)   One attorney with experience representing victims of domestic
violence to serve a three-year term;
      (2)   One attorney with experience representing criminal defendants of
domestic violence charges to serve a three-year term;
      (3)   One member of the public with a demonstrated interest in domestic
violence issues, with preference for a survivor of domestic violence, to serve
a three-year term; and
      (4)   One student member with a demonstrated interest in addressing
domestic and dating violence to serve a one-year term on the Coordinating
Council. The student member's term may be renewed for one additional year. The
student member must be a high school or college student who resides in the
county when initially appointed.
   (C)   All members of the Coordinating Council are voting members.
   (D)   If the State's Attorney agrees, their office will provide the primary
staff for the Coordinating Council:
      (1)   At the request of the State's Attorney, the state courts and
agencies listed in this section and the county agencies listed in this section
may provide additional staff assistance to the Coordinating Council.
(Bill No. 20-09, 7-21-2020)
§ 1-2-402. CHAIR, VICE-CHAIR.
   The Coordinating Council must elect a Chair and Vice-Chair from among its
members to serve two-year terms.
(Bill No. 20-09, 7-21-2020)
§ 1-2-403. RULES.
   The Coordinating Council shall adopt rules to govern its procedures and
activities.
(Bill No. 20-09, 7-21-2020)
§ 1-2-404. ADVOCACY.
   The Coordinating Council as an entity may not engage in any advocacy efforts
at the local, state or federal levels unless these efforts are approved by a
majority of the members. This section does not bar individual members or
represented agencies and organizations from engaging in advocacy independent of
the Coordinating Council.
(Bill No. 20-09, 7-21-2020)
§ 1-2-405. COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Coordinating Council shall receive no compensation for their
services.
(Bill No. 20-09, 7-21-2020)
§ 1-2-406. REPORTING.
   The Coordinating Council may make reports and recommendations to the County
Executive and County Council from time to time as the Coordinating Council
finds appropriate but must report annually.
(Bill No. 20-09, 7-21-2020)
ARTICLE XV: IMMIGRATION AFFAIRS COMMISSION (§§ 1-2-500 — 1-2-507)
Section
   
1-2-500   Creation, duties
   
1-2-501   Composition
   
1-2-502   Terms, reappointments, vacancies
   
1-2-503   Chair, Vice-Chair
   
1-2-504   Meetings and quorum
   
1-2-505   Rules and regulations
   
1-2-506   Compensation
   
1-2-507   County staff
§ 1-2-500. CREATION, DUTIES.
   (A)   There shall be a Frederick County Immigrant Affairs Commission
(hereinafter referred to as "the Commission").
   (B)   The Commission shall act as an advisory body that serves as a means
for immigrant voices to be heard and understood, facilitates civic engagement
among immigrants, and recognizes and legitimizes issues of importance to
immigrants arriving and living in Frederick County.
   (C)   Among its responsibilities and duties, the Commission shall:
      (1)   Advise the County Executive and County Council on ways to enhance
and improve immigrant access to county services and resources; strengthen
opportunities for immigrants to participate in civic life; encourage dialogue
and understanding among immigrant communities and the non-immigrant community;
advocate on behalf of immigrants; and provide outreach from and community
feedback to the County Executive and County Council.
      (2)   Monitor, analyze, and make recommendations for existing or proposed
policies and actions, at all levels of government, for their impact on
immigrants.
      (3)   Assess, research, and compile data related to immigrant affairs in
Frederick County, including:
         (a)   Addressing immigrant needs and concerns;
         (b)   Bringing immigrant communities together for the purpose of
collective engagement;
         (c)   Access to and delivery of services and information tailored to
immigrants;
         (d)   Immigrant awareness of civil rights protections and related laws
and;
         (e)   Economic and workforce development opportunities for immigrants.
   (D)   The Commission's scope shall be limited to make recommendations only
on issues and groups under the exclusive authority of the county government.
The Commission's activities shall not include issues outside of the authority
of the county government, including those related to: the Frederick County
Board of Education, the Frederick County Sheriff, the Motor Vehicle
Administration, the State's Attorney's Office, the Frederick County Circuit
Court, the Frederick County District Court, Federal Immigration Policy or
Immigrations and Custom Enforcement (ICE).
      (1)   On or before July 1 of each year, the Commission shall submit an
annual report to the County Executive and County Council. The report should
include assessment findings and recommendations as identified above.
      (2)   Two years following the first meeting, the Commission will submit a
status report to the County Executive and County Council. The report should
include assessment findings and recommendations as identified above. Upon
submission of this report, the County Executive and County Council may submit
questions or requests to the Commission for additional information. The
Commission will have eight weeks to respond to any requests. Upon completion of
this review, the Council must vote whether to reauthorize the Commission.
(Bill No. 20-18, 2-2-2021)
§ 1-2-501. COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Subject to the confirmation of the County Council, the County
Executive must appoint the following individuals to serve on the Commission for
a three-year term unless otherwise noted:
      (1)   Two immigrants residing in the county who are not representatives
of an organization;
      (2)   Two representatives of the business community who are immigrants;
      (3)   Two representatives of community based organizations serving
immigrant populations in the county;
      (4)   Two representatives of a faith-based organization who are
immigrants;
      (5)   One attorney with experience in immigration law;
      (6)   One representative from a law enforcement agency in the county;
      (7)   One representative from the County Citizen Services Division;
      (8)   One representative of Frederick County Public Schools;
      (9)   One representative of Frederick Community College;
      (10)   One representative from the Frederick County Health Department;
      (11)   One student member with a demonstrated interest in immigrant
affairs to serve a one-year term on the Commission. The student's term may be
extended for one year. The student member must be a high school or college
student who resides in the county when initially appointed.
   (B)   The following individuals shall serve as ex-officio, non-voting
members with no terms assigned:
      (1)   A member of the County Council; and
      (2)   A member of the City of Frederick Board of Alderman.
(Bill No. 20-18, 2-2-2021)
§ 1-2-502. TERMS, REAPPOINTMENTS, VACANCIES.
   (A)   Members may be reappointed, but may not serve more than two full
consecutive three-year terms.
   (B)   Vacancies shall be filled on the same basis as the original
appointments for the unexpired terms. Members shall continue in office until
their successors are appointed and qualified.
(Bill No. 20-18, 2-2-2021)
§ 1-2-503. CHAIR, VICE-CHAIR.
   The Commission must elect a Chair and Vice-Chair from among its members to
serve one-year terms.
(Bill No. 20-18, 2-2-2021)
§ 1-2-504. MEETING AND QUORUM.
   (A)   The Commission shall meet with the frequency it determines necessary
to perform its functions but there shall be no less than six meetings annually.
   (B)   A majority of the Commission members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of regular business.
   (C)   Any voting members of the Commission who fail to attend at least 50%
of the meetings during any period of 12 consecutive months shall be considered
to have resigned. Subject to confirmation by the County Council, the County
Executive shall appoint a replacement.
(Bill No. 20-18, 2-2-2021)
§ 1-2-505. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Commission shall adopt rules to govern its procedures and activities.
(Bill No. 20-18, 2-2-2021)
§ 1-2-506. COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Bill No. 20-18, 2-2-2021)
§ 1-2-507. COUNTY STAFF.
   A county staff member may be designated by the County Executive to assist
and support the Commission.
(Bill No. 20-18, 2-2-2021)
ARTICLE XVI: SMALL BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMISSION (§§ 1-2-600 — 1-2-605)
Section
   
1-2-600   Creation, duties
   
1-2-601   Composition
   
1-2-602   Chair, Vice-Chair
   
1-2-603   Rules
   
1-2-604   Compensation
   
1-2-605   Meetings and quorum
§ 1-2-600. CREATION, DUTIES.
   (A)   There shall be a Frederick County Small Business Advisory Commission
hereinafter referred to as "the Commission".
   (B)   The Commission shall act as an advisory body that serves as a means
for small businesses to be heard and understood, facilitate civic engagement,
and legitimize issues of importance to small businesses operating in Frederick
County.
   (C)   Among its responsibilities and duties the Commission shall:
      (1)   Advise the County Council on ways to enhance and improve the
business climate for small businesses in Frederick County;
      (2)   Represent the views and the needs on behalf of the small business
community;
      (3)   Monitor, analyze, and make recommendations for existing or proposed
legislation of the county government for their impact on small businesses;
      (4)   Review existing Frederick County ordinances for recommended changes
through legislation to improve the business climate in Frederick County;
      (5)   Review regulations and make recommendations on issues under the
authority of county government that could be altered to enhance the business
climate for small businesses in Frederick County; and
      (6)   Within one year of the Commission's first meeting, and annually
thereafter, the Commission shall submit a report to the County Council. The
report shall include recommendations as identified above.
   (D)   Two years following the first meeting, the Commission will submit a
status report to the County Council. The report should include assessment
findings and recommendations as identified above. Upon submission of this
report, the County Council may submit questions or requests to the Commission
for additional information. The Commission will have eight weeks to respond to
any requests. Upon completion of this review, the Council must vote whether to
reauthorize the Commission.
(Bill No. 21-06, 6-15-21)
§ 1-2-601. COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The County Council must appoint the following individuals to serve on
the Commission for a three-year term unless otherwise noted:
      (1)   One member selected by the Frederick County Chamber of Commerce;
      (2)   One member selected by the Downtown Frederick Partnership;
      (3)   One member selected by a non-profit entity that advocates on behalf
of small businesses;
      (4)   One member selected by the Frederick Farm Bureau;
      (5)   One member selected by the Business Law Section of the Frederick
County Bar Association;
      (6)   One member of Visit Frederick; and
      (7)   Two members belonging to municipal business organizations;
   (B)   The following individuals shall serve as ex-officio, non-voting
members with no terms assigned:
      (1)   The County Council member sponsoring this bill. If the Commission
is reauthorized, the Council member who moved to extend the term of the
Commission shall serve as a member; and
      (2)   A member of the Frederick County Office of Economic Development.
   (C)   Members of the Commission shall continue to serve until their
replacement is appointed by the County Council.
(Bill No. 21-06, 6-15-21)
§ 1-2-602. CHAIR, VICE-CHAIR.
   The Coordinating Council must elect a Chair and Vice-Chair from among its
members to serve two-year terms.
(Bill No. 21-06, 6-15-21)
§ 1-2-603. RULES.
   The Coordinating Council shall adopt rules to govern its procedures and
activities.
(Bill No. 21-06, 6-15-21)
§ 1-2-604. COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Coordinating Council shall receive no compensation for their
services.
(Bill No. 21-06, 6-15-21)
§ 1-2-605. MEETINGS AND QUORUM.
   (A)   The Commission shall meet no less than four times annually, but may
not meet more than once a month.
   (B)   A majority of the Commission members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of regular business.
(Bill No. 21-06, 6-15-21)
ARTICLE XVII: OFFICE OF EQUITY AND INCLUSION AND EQUITY AND
INCLUSION COMMISSION (§§ 1-2-700 — 1-2-709)
Section
Division 1. Office of Equity and Inclusion
   
1-2-700   Definitions
   
1-2-701   Creation and purpose
   
1-2-702   Staff
Division 2. Equity and Inclusion Commission
   
1-2-703   Creation and purpose
   
1-2-704   Duties
   
1-2-705   Appointments and members
   
1-2-706   Chair, Vice-Chair
   
1-2-707   Meetings and quorum
   
1-2-708   Rules and regulations
   
1-2-709   County staff
DIVISION 1. OFFICE OF EQUITY AND INCLUSION
§ 1-2-700. DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.
   EQUITY. An intentional and systemic approach to remedy and address
historical practices, policies, and structures that have produced distinct
disparate outcomes which have resulted in the oppression, marginalization,
hindrance to the success of, and restricted access to opportunities and
benefits for historically underrepresented and oppressed populations. The goal
of equity is achievement of equitable outcomes for all.
   INCLUSION. More than simply diversity and numerical representation.
Inclusion exists when historically oppressed and marginalized groups are
empowered to participate in all elements of society in a manner that is
culturally relevant to them, and when their full engagement is both welcomed
and exercised to the degree that it redefines and helps to shape communities
and culture. True inclusion requires changing or eliminating various historical
practices that limit, hinder, and fail to provide opportunities for members of
historically oppressed and marginalized groups to contribute, lead, and
influence decisions and outcomes.
(Bill No. 21-10, 10-19-21)
§ 1-2-701. CREATION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   There shall be an Office of Equity and Inclusion (hereinafter referred
to as the "Office") in the Office of the County Executive of Frederick County,
Maryland.
   (B)   The Office will raise and sustain the visibility of equity and
inclusion as a leadership, social, and economic imperative for the county.
   (C)   The functions of the Office shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
      (1)   Develop and provide management of a strategic framework to shape,
direct and advance racial, gender, ethnic, inclusion and social equity
priorities and to achieve equitable opportunities within all levels of county
government and for all residents in Frederick County;
      (2)   Work to ensure county employees are aware of Frederick County's
diversity, inclusion and equity goals and to provide employees with the
opportunity to take on an active role in fostering a county-wide culture that
acknowledges, values and celebrates diversity, equity, inclusion and belonging
within all levels of Frederick County Government;
      (3)   Coordinate with county divisions to initiate organizational change
through utilization of an equity lens that results in equity-informed planning,
policy development and decision-making, as well as in the development of
legislation;
      (4)   Provide staff support to the Equity and Inclusion Commission, work
with, evaluate and act on, as appropriate, the recommendations of the Equity
and Inclusion Council;
      (5)   Develop and implement programs, services and trainings for county
staff and county residents that support achievement of the county's diversity,
equity, inclusion and belonging goals;
      (6)   Coordinate with and refer complaints or issues of discrimination to
the Human Relations Department and Commission, as appropriate;
      (7)   Create a review process of bills and resolutions, including the
preparation of an impact statement, that will assist the Council in the
legislative function; and
      (8)   Report annually, on or before July 1, to the County Executive and
County Council, goals, activities, accomplishments and outcomes.
(Bill No. 21-10, 10-19-21)
§ 1-2-702. STAFF.
   (A)   The Office of Equity and Inclusion will include a Chief Equity and
Inclusion Officer (CEIO) to carry out the responsibilities of the Office. The
County Executive shall appoint the CEIO, subject to confirmation of the
Council. The CEIO will serve at the pleasure of the Executive.
   (B)   At the discretion of the County Executive, the Office staff or
structure may be modified or expanded to meet the goals of the Diversity,
Equity, Inclusion, and Belonging Strategic Plan.
(Bill No. 21-10, 10-19-21)
DIVISION 2. EQUITY AND INCLUSION COMMISSION
§ 1-2-703. CREATION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   There shall be a Frederick County Equity and Inclusion Commission
(hereinafter referred to as "the Commission").
   (B)   The Commission shall act as an advisory body to the Frederick County
Executive, County Council, and the CEIO. The Commission will help identify
issues, concerns, and needs of county residents to improve diversity, equity,
inclusion, and belonging and make recommendations as appropriate.
(Bill No. 21-10, 10-19-21)
§ 1-2-704. DUTIES.
   (A)   Advise and work collaboratively with the Chief Equity and Inclusion
Officer on issues of diversity, equity and inclusion issues such as:
      (1)   Enhancing and improving equitable and fair access to county
government opportunities, resources and services;
      (2)   Conducting community education and awareness to encourage dialogue
and understanding; and
      (3)   Examining and analyzing the impacts of Frederick County Government
policy, practice, and services in relation to equity and inclusion.
   (B)   Provide assistance in the planning of community outreach, initiatives,
and events that affirm, celebrate, and advance diversity, equity and inclusion
throughout the county;
   (C)   Coordinate its engagement and advocacy with the Human Relations
Commission, and other Commissions as appropriate;
   (D)   Refer potential complaints of discrimination to the Human Relations
Department;
   (E)   Provide input on the Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Belonging
Strategic Plan or framework as developed by the Office of Equity and Inclusion
and the Chief Equity and Inclusion Officer; and
   (F)   Prepare a report annually, on or before July 1, to the County
Executive and County Council of the Commission's activities, accomplishments
and outcomes.
(Bill No. 21-10, 10-19-21)
§ 1-2-705. APPOINTMENTS AND MEMBERS.
   (A)   Members. The County Executive shall appoint, subject to confirmation
by the County Council, members of the Commission. The Commission shall consist
of 13 members, who shall be registered voters and residents of the county, and
should reflect a range of ethnicities, professional backgrounds, socioeconomic
status, and places of origin to reflect the racial, economic, and linguistic
diversity of the county. All members should have a commitment to building
equity, inclusion, and understanding of the issues regarding diversity, equity
and inclusion, as evidenced by knowledge and awareness of cultural competency,
structural and institutional barriers to equity, previous work or leadership,
particularly in traditionally marginalized communities. The County Executive
shall strive to include individuals from the following groups:
      (1)   One at-large member who has shown a commitment to diversity and
inclusion within the county;
      (2)   One member from local African American serving organization;
      (3)   One member from a local Hispanic or Latina serving organization;
      (4)   One member from a local Asian American serving organization;
      (5)   One member from an organization working in affordable housing;
      (6)   One member from a locally owned minority business;
      (7)   One member from a local higher education institution;
      (8)   One member from Frederick County Public Schools;
      (9)   One member from local clergy;
      (10)   One member representing the LGBTQ community;
      (11)   One member from the Frederick County Health Department;
      (12)   One member from law enforcement; and
      (13)   One member from the Frederick County Human Relations Commission.
   (B)   Term. Members will serve for a three-year term as a volunteer without
compensation. A member may not serve more than two consecutive full terms. The
initial terms of members shall be staggered so that one-third of members shall
serve an initial term of three years, one-third of members shall serve an
initial term of two years, and one-third of members shall serve an initial term
of one year.
      (1)   An initial term of one or two years shall not be considered a full
term.
      (2)   Any member who is appointed to fill a vacancy shall not be
considered to have served a full term.
      (3)   Vacancies for an unexpired term shall be filled on the same basis
as the original appointment. Members appointed in this way shall continue in
office until their successors are appointed and qualified.
   (C)   Removal. The County Executive may remove a member for neglect or
inability to perform the duties of the office.
(Bill No. 21-10, 10-19-21)
§ 1-2-706. CHAIR, VICE-CHAIR.
   The Commission shall annually elect one member as Chair and another as Vice-
Chair.
(Bill No. 21-10, 10-19-21)
§ 1-2-707. MEETINGS AND QUORUM.
   (A)   The Commission shall meet as frequently as determined by the Chair as
often as required to perform its duties, but not less than six meetings
annually.
   (B)   All meetings shall be subject to the Open Meetings Act.
   (C)   A majority of the Commission members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
(Bill No. 21-10, 10-19-21)
§ 1-2-708. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Commission shall be subject to Robert's New Rules of Order, but may
adopt additional rules to govern its procedures and activities.
(Bill No. 21-10, 10-19-21)
§ 1-2-709. COUNTY STAFF.
   Staff assistance shall be provided by the Office of the County Executive and
the Chief Equity and Inclusion Officer.
(Bill No. 21-10, 10-19-21)
ARTICLE XVIII: POLICE ACCOUNTABILITY BOARD AND ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGING
COMMITTEE
Section
   
1-2-800   Definitions
   
1-2-801   Creation, duties
   
1-2-802   Composition
   
1-2-803   Chairperson
   
1-2-804   Meetings, quorum, records
   
1-2-805   Complaints
   
1-2-806   Administrative Charging Committee
   
1-2-807   Ethics
   
1-2-808   Effective date
§ 1-2-800. DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse and dependent children.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. A governmental police force, sheriff's office, or
law enforcement organization of the state, a county, or a municipal corporation
that by statute, ordinance, or common law is authorized to enforce the general
criminal laws of the state.
   POLICE MISCONDUCT. A pattern, practice, or conduct by a police officer or
law enforcement agency that includes:
      (1)   Depriving persons of rights protected by the Constitution or laws
of the state or the United States;
      (2)   A violation of a criminal statute; or
      (3)   A violation of law enforcement agency standards and policies.
   POLICE OFFICER. "Police Officer" has the meaning set forth in § 3-201 of the
Public Safety Article of the State Code.
(Bill No. 22-09, 4-26-2022)
§ 1-2-801. CREATION, DUTIES.
   (A)   There is a Frederick County Police Accountability Board, which
consists of 11 voting members, appointed by the County Executive and confirmed
by the County Council, as set forth below.
   (B)   Budget and staff. The County Executive shall propose a budget for the
Board that shall be included in the annual budget and appropriation ordinance
adopted by the County Council and shall assign staff as needed to the Board,
including the designation of an Executive Administrator.
   (C)   The Board shall:
      (1)   Hold quarterly meetings, and additional meetings if necessary, with
heads of law enforcement agencies and otherwise work with law enforcement
agencies with jurisdiction in the county and county government to improve
matters of policing;
      (2)   Appoint civilian members to Charging Committees and trial boards;
      (3)   Receive complaints of police misconduct filed by members of the
public;
      (4)   On a quarterly basis, review outcomes of disciplinary matters
considered by Charging Committees; and
      (5)   On or before December 31 each year, submit a report to the County
Executive and the County Council of the county, and each municipality located
within Frederick County that maintains a police agency that:
         (a)   Identifies any trends in the disciplinary process of police
officers in the county; and
         (b)   Makes recommendations on changes to policy, training, or
supervision that would improve police accountability in the county.
(Bill No. 22-09, 4-26-2022)
§ 1-2-802. COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Subject to the confirmation of the County Council, the County
Executive must appoint 11 individuals to serve on the Board as regular, voting
members for a three-year term unless otherwise noted.
   (B)   To the maximum extent practicable, the membership of the Board shall
reflect the racial, gender, and cultural diversity of the county as well as
representation from communities that experience a higher frequency of
interactions with law enforcement, including but not limited to people who are
Black/African-American, Latino, and lesbian/gay/bisexual/transgender/queer
(LGBTQ), first or second generation immigrants, people with disabilities,
people with behavioral health concerns, and people who have experienced
homelessness.
   (C)   Regular, voting members of the Board must:
      (1)   Be at least 21 years of age, residents of Frederick County, legal
residents or citizens of the United States, and registered voters. To the
extent practicable, the membership of the Police Accountability Board shall
reflect the racial, gender, cultural diversity, and geography of the county;
      (2)   Be county residents, to include:
         (a)   Two residents of the City of Frederick;
         (b)   One resident of the City of Brunswick;
         (c)   One resident of the Town of Thurmont;
         (d)   One resident who is Black or African-American; and
         (e)   One resident who is a first or second generation immigrant.
      (3)   Have familiarity or experience within the legal field, the
behavioral health field, social services, human resources or personnel
management, the operation of a government agency, criminal justice agency,
community service organization, or relevant lived experience;
      (4)   Participate in an in-person or virtual interview and appropriate
background research conducted by:
         (a)   The County Executive or designee;
         (b)   The municipal mayors of the Cities of Frederick and Brunswick
and the Town of Thurmont, or their Chief Administrative Officer or equivalent;
and
         (c)   Other individuals as determined by the County Executive.
      (5)   Successfully complete training on matters related to police
procedures from the Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission, the
County Ethics Law, the Open Meetings Act, and any other training required by
the State, the County Executive, or majority vote of the Board. A ride along
with a police officer to observe the workday is encouraged.
      (6)   Sign an agreement to maintain the confidentiality of all Board
matters related to individual complaints until final disposition and all
appeals have been exhausted.
   (D)   An individual may not be a member of the Board if:
      (1)   They are, or an immediate family member is, an active police
officer as defined in § 3-201 of the Public Safety Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland; or
      (2)   They have been convicted of, or received a probation before
judgement for, a felony or a misdemeanor with a statutory penalty of more than
two years.
   (E)   The following individuals shall serve as liaisons to the Board for
purposes of serving as a resource and answering questions as needed or
requested by the Board:
      (1)   A designee of the Chief of Police of each municipal police agency
within the county;
      (2)   A designee of the Sheriff; and
      (3)   The Frederick County Chief Equity and Inclusion Officer.
   (F)   Of the initial appointees to the Board, three appointees shall have a
term of one year, four appointees shall have a term of two years, and four
appointees, one of which shall be the chairperson, shall have a term of three
years. Members may be reappointed, but may not serve more than two full
consecutive three-year terms.
   (G)   A member may be removed from the Board if at any time they fail to
meet the requirements of this section or any other requirement for members of
the Board or, fail to attend at least 75% of the meetings during any period of
12 consecutive months.
   (H)   Vacancies shall be filled on the same basis as the original
appointments for the unexpired terms. Members shall continue in office until
their successors are appointed and qualified.
(Bill No. 22-09, 4-26-2022; Bill No. 25-08, 6-17-2025)
§ 1-2-803. CHAIRPERSON.
   The County Executive shall nominate, and the County Council shall approve,
an individual to serve as the Board Chairperson who shall have familiarity with
criminal justice or other relevant experience needed for the position. The term
of the chairperson is two years.
(Bill No. 22-09, 4-26-2022; Bill No. 25-08, 6-17-2025)
§ 1-2-804. MEETINGS, QUORUM, RECORDS.
   (A)   The Board shall meet at least quarterly.
   (B)   A majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of regular business.
   (C)   The meetings of the Board shall be subject to the Open Meetings Act.
   (D)   The Board members shall be subject to the Frederick County Ethics Law.
   (E)   The Board shall be authorized to create subcommittees.
   (F)   Records shall be maintained by the Executive Administrator pursuant to
a record retention schedule created by County Administration in accordance with
state law. The Board and its staff shall keep confidential any records
prohibited from disclosure under the Maryland Public Information Act.
(Bill No. 22-09, 4-26-2022; Bill No. 25-08, 6-17-2025)
§ 1-2-805. COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   The Board shall receive complaints of police misconduct filed by
members of the public or forwarded to them from a police agency.
   (B)   The Board, in conjunction with the law enforcement agencies located
within the county, shall establish a uniform procedure for allowing members of
the public to file complaints of police misconduct.
   (C)   A complaint of police misconduct filed with the Board or law
enforcement agency shall include:
      (1)   The name of the police officer accused of misconduct;
      (2)   A description of the facts on which the complaint is based;
      (3)   Contact information of the complainant or a person filing on behalf
of the complainant for investigative follow-up; and
      (4)   A complaint need not be notarized.
   (D)   A complaint of police misconduct filed with the Board shall be
forwarded to the appropriate law enforcement agency within three business days
after receipt by the Board.
(Bill No. 22-09, 4-26-2022)
§ 1-2-806. ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGING COMMITTEE.
   (A)   There shall be an Administrative Charging Committee to serve
countywide law enforcement agencies and local law enforcement agencies within
Frederick County.
   (B)   The Committee shall:
      (1)   Meet once per month or as needed;
      (2)   Review the findings of a law enforcement agency's investigation
conducted and forwarded in accordance with state law;
      (3)   Make a determination that the police officer who is subject to
investigation shall be:
         (a)   Administratively charged; or
         (b)   Not administratively charged.
      (4)   If the police officer is charged, recommend discipline in
accordance with the law enforcement agency's disciplinary matrix established in
accordance with state law;
      (5)   Review any body camera footage that may be relevant to the matters
covered in the complaint of misconduct;
      (6)   Authorize a police officer called to appear before the Committee to
be accompanied by a representative;
      (7)   Issue a written opinion that describes in detail its findings,
determinations, and recommendations; and
      (8)   Forward a written opinion to the chief of the law enforcement
agency, the police office, and the complainant.
   (C)   In executing its duties, the Committee may:
      (1)   Request information or action from the law enforcement agency that
conducted the investigation, including requiring additional investigation and
the issuance of subpoenas;
      (2)   If the police officer is not administratively charged, make a
determination that:
         (a)   The allegations against the police officer are unfounded; or
         (b)   The police officer is exonerated.
      (3)   Record, in writing, any failure of policy, training, or supervision
that caused or contributed to a police officer's misconduct.
   (D)   Membership; term.
      (1)   Sign an agreement to maintain the confidentiality of all Committee
matters related to individual complaints until final disposition and all
appeals have been exhausted.
      (2)   Before serving as a member of the Committee, an individual shall
successfully complete training on matters relating to police procedures from
the Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission, the County Ethics Law,
the Open Meetings Act, and any other training required by the state, the County
Executive, or a majority vote of the Committee.
      (3)   The Committee shall be comprised of five members.
         (a)   Members shall be at least 21 years of age, legal residents or
citizens of the United States, residents of the county, and registered voters;
         (b)   Be of good moral character and free from bias that would
negatively impact the integrity of the Committee; and
         (c)   Have familiarity or experience within the legal field, the
behavioral health field, social services, human resources or personnel
management, the operation of a government agency, criminal justice agency, or
community service organization.
      (4)   An individual may not be a member of the Committee if:
         (a)   They are, or an immediate family member is, an active police
officer as defined in § 3-201 of the Public Safety Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland;
         (b)   They are an employee of a police agency located within Frederick
County;
         (c)   They are under criminal investigation by any police agency;
         (d)   They are currently charged with a crime that is pending before
any court; or
         (e)   They have been convicted of, or received a probation before
judgement for, a felony or a misdemeanor with a statutory penalty of one year
or more.
      (5)   The Chairperson of the Police Accountability Board, or a member of
the Board designated by the chairperson, shall serve as a member of the
Committee.
      (6)   The County Executive shall appoint two civilians as members of the
Committee.
      (7)   The Police Accountability Board shall appoint two civilians as
members of the Committee.
      (8)   Subject to division (D)(9) below, members shall serve a term of two
years and shall not be eligible for reappointment after a total of five
consecutive years of service on the Committee.
      (9)   The initial terms of one civilian appointed by the County Executive
and one civilian appointed by the Police Accountability Board shall be one
year.
      (10)   The Committee shall elect a chairperson annually from among its
members by majority vote each first meeting occurring on or after October 1.
      (11)   The Chairperson of the Committee shall serve no more than two
consecutive terms as chairperson.
      (12)   Of the initial appointees to the Committee, two appointees shall
have a term of one year, and three appointees, one of which shall be the
chairperson, shall have a term of two years. Members may be reappointed, but
may not serve more than two full consecutive two-year terms.
      (13)   A Committee member may be removed by a majority vote of the
Committee if at any time they fail to meet the requirements of this section or
any other requirement for members of the Committee or fail to attend at least
75% of the meetings during any period of 12 consecutive months.
      (14)   A majority of the members of the Committee shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of regular business.
      (15)   Vacancies shall be filled on the same basis as the original
appointments for the unexpired terms. Members shall continue in office until
their successors are appointed and qualified.
(Bill No. 22-09, 4-26-2022; Bill No. 25-08, 6-17-2025)
§ 1-2-807. ETHICS.
   (A)   Members of the Police Accountability Board and the Administrative
Charging Committee shall be subject to the Frederick County Ethics Law.
   (B)   No member of the Police Accountability Board or the Administrative
Charging Committee shall cast a vote on any matter where a conflict of interest
exists. For the purposes of this section, a conflict of interest occurs when a
member's personal interests could compromise his or her judgment, decisions, or
actions. Personal interests could include, but are not limited to, the
following: employer/employee relationships, familial relationships,
friendships, financial, or social factors.
(Bill No. 22-09, 4-26-2022)
§ 1-2-808. EFFECTIVE DATE.
   In accordance with House Bill No. 670 enacted as Chapter 59 of the Laws of
Maryland by the Maryland General Assembly during its 2021 Session, the Board
may not engage in any of the activities listed in § 3-102 of the Public Safety
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland until July 1, 2022.
(Bill No. 22-09, 4-26-2022)
ARTICLE XIX: BOARD OF HEALTH
Section
   
1-2-900   Creation, purpose, powers
   
1-2-901   Membership
   
1-2-902   Liaisons
   
1-2-903   Meetings, attendance
   
1-2-904   Staffing
   
1-2-905   Regulations
§ 1-2-900. CREATION, PURPOSE, POWERS.
   (A)   There shall be a Frederick County Board of Health.
   (B)   The Frederick County Board of Health shall:
      (1)   Have the powers and duties granted to a local board of health under
state law, including those provided in Md. Code Ann. Title 3 of the Health-
General Article.
      (2)   Assist and cooperate with the Secretary of the Maryland Department
of Health of the State of Maryland in health-related matters, including
behavioral health.
      (3)   Have general responsibility for the health and sanitary interests
of the people of the county including the investigation and study of the causes
of disease, epidemics and nuisances affecting public health, behavioral health,
the prevention of contagious diseases, and the preservation of health.
      (4)   Advise the County Executive and County Council on health matters
including behavioral health.
      (5)   Have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas and apply for
injunctive relief.
      (6)   At the request of the CE or a majority of the County Council, the
Frederick County Health Officer (or their alternate) will convene a meeting of
the Board of Health to review and make recommendations on any matter related to
public health.
(Bill No. 23-06, 4-18-2023)
§ 1-2-901. MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The membership of the Board of Health shall consist of the seven
Frederick County Council members, the County Executive, and the Frederick
County Health Officer.
   (B)   The Frederick County Health Officer shall serve as the executive
officer and secretary, and need not be a resident of Frederick County or a
registered voter.
   (C)   All members shall have full voting privileges.
   (D)   All members will serve without additional compensation.
(Bill No. 23-06, 4-18-2023)
§ 1-2-902. LIAISONS.
   (A)   In addition to the members above, the Board shall appoint the
following liaisons:
      (1)   An epidemiologist;
      (2)   A nurse;
      (3)   A mental health professional;
      (4)   A veterinarian;
      (5)   A member from the Frederick Chamber of Commerce; and
      (6)   One person with a science related background.
   (B)   Liaisons shall be appointed and confirmed by a majority of the Board
of Health.
   (C)   Liaisons shall have no voting privileges, and will not be counted in
determining presence of a quorum.
   (D)   Liaisons will serve without compensation. Subject to subsection (E),
the term of office of each of the members shall be for a period of three years.
   (E)   Of the initial six appointed liaisons, two shall be appointed for a
term that expires in one year, two shall be appointed for a term that expires
in two years, and two shall be appointed for a term that expires in three
years.
   (F)   Liaisons may be reappointed but may not serve more than two full
consecutive three-year terms.
   (G)   Vacancies shall be filled on the same basis as the original
appointments for unexpired terms and shall be filled with a person of the same
or similar background of the liaison being replaced. Liaisons shall continue in
office until their successors are appointed and qualified.
   (H)   Liaisons shall serve as a resource, provide information and data, and
answer questions as needed or requested by the Board of Health.
(Bill No. 23-06, 4-18-2023)
§ 1-2-903. MEETINGS, ATTENDANCE.
   (A)   The Frederick County Board of Health shall meet in May and October of
each year and at any other time the Board considers necessary.
   (B)   Meetings shall take place at a Frederick County location which is open
and accessible to the public.
   (C)   A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
   (D)   Any motion of the Board requires the affirmative vote of at least five
members to pass.
(Bill No. 23-06, 4-18-2023)
§ 1-2-904. STAFFING.
   Staffing to the Board of Health shall be provided by the Frederick County
Health Department.
(Bill No. 23-06, 4-18-2023)
§ 1-2-905. REGULATIONS.
   Any regulation approved by the BOH shall contain a specific date and time
when the regulation shall go into effect.
(Bill No. 23-06, 4-18-2023)
ARTICLE XX: FREDERICK COUNTY BEHAVIORAL HEALTH ADVISORY COUNCIL
Section
   
1-2-1000   Creation, duties
   
1-2-1001   Membership
   
1-2-1002   Terms
   
1-2-1003   Chair, Vice-Chair
   
1-2-1004   Meetings, quorum
   
1-2-1005   Rules
§ 1-2-1000. CREATION, DUTIES.
   (A)   In accordance with Md. Code Ann. Title 10, Subtitle 3, Part II of the
Health-General Article for the provision of Joint Mental Health and Addictions
Advisory Committees, there shall be a Frederick County Behavioral Health
Advisory Council ("Council").
   (B)   Powers. The Council may:
      (1)   Create subcommittees;
      (2)   Have additional members participate as needed; and
      (3)   Consult with state and county agencies to obtain such technical
assistance and advice as it considers necessary to complete its duties.
   (C)   Duties. The Council shall:
      (1)   Monitor, review and evaluate the allocation and adequacy of
publicly funded behavioral health services within the county;
      (2)   Determine the needs of the county behavioral health system,
including quality of services, gaps in the system, and interagency
coordination;
      (3)   Participate in the development of the local behavioral health plan
and budget;
      (4)   Prepare and disseminate an annual report in form and to required
parties in accordance with Md. Code Ann. § 10-312 of the Health-General
Article;
      (5)   Review and comment on the annual county behavioral health plan and
preliminary budget, before submission of the budget to the state; and
      (6)   Review and comment on the Frederick County Health Department's
annual fiscal report to the Maryland Department of Health.
(Bill. No. 23-07, 4-18-2023)
§ 1-2-1001. MEMBERSHIP.
   The Council shall include the following:
   (A)   As nonvoting ex officio members, the following individuals or their
designees:
      (1)   The Health Officer for the county;
      (2)   A representative of a state inpatient facility that serves the
county, appointed as provided in subsection (A)(2) of this section;
      (3)   The Director of Behavioral Health Services Division, Frederick
County Health Department;
      (4)   The Director of the Local Behavioral Health Authority; and
      (5)   A representative from the County Council.
   (B)   As voting members and representatives of the county's major socio-
economic and ethnic groups:
      (1)   The County Executive shall appoint at least five, but not more than
seven, representatives selected from among the following:
         (a)   The Office of the County Executive;
         (b)   The Superintendent of Frederick County Public Schools, or the
Superintendent's designee;
         (c)   The Director of the County's Department of Social Services, or
the Director's designee;
         (d)   Practicing physicians;
         (e)   Behavioral health professionals who are not physicians;
         (f)   Clergy;
         (g)   Practicing legal professional;
         (h)   The head of a local law enforcement agency, or their designee;
         (i)   A county general hospital that contains an inpatient behavioral
health unit;
         (j)   The Director of the County Division of Senior Services, or the
Director's designee;
         (k)   The Regional Director of the Department of Juvenile Services, or
the Director's designee;
         (l)   The Director of the Division of Fire and Rescue Services, or the
Director's designee;
         (m)   A community rehabilitation or housing program that operates in
the county; and
      (2)   The County Executive shall appoint at least two but not more than
four members, selected from among the following groups or organizations:
         (a)   Individuals who are currently receiving or who have in the past
received behavioral health services;
         (b)   Parents or other relatives of adults with behavioral health
disorders;
         (c)   Parents or other relatives of children or adolescents with
emotional, behavioral, or mental health disorders the onset of which occurred
during childhood or adolescence;
         (d)   The Frederick County Mental Health Association; and
         (e)   A member of the general public.
   (C)   The County Executive may appoint any additional non-voting members to
the Council as necessary to advise and advocate about behavioral health issues.
(Bill. No. 23-07, 4-18-2023)
§ 1-2-1002. TERMS.
   (A)   The term of an appointed member is three years and begins on July 1.
   (B)   Staggered terms. Of the initial members one-third shall be appointed
for a three- year term, one-third shall be appointed to a two-year term and
one-third shall be appointed for a one-year term which shall end each year on
June 30.
   (C)   Term limits. A member who serves two consecutive full three-year terms
may not be reappointed for two years after completion of those terms.
   (D)   Compensation. Members of the Council shall receive no compensation.
(Bill. No. 23-07, 4-18-2023)
§ 1-2-1003. CHAIR, VICE-CHAIR.
   (A)   The Council shall elect annually a Chair and Vice-Chair from among its
members to serve a single year term.
   (B)   A member may not serve as Chair for more than two consecutive years.
   (C)   The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Council.
   (D)   The Vice Chair shall assume all duties of the Chair in the absence of
the Chair and shall perform other duties as assigned by the Chair.
   (E)   The Council may elect other officers as needed. The manner of election
of additional officers shall be as the Council determines.
(Bill. No. 23-07, 4-18-2023)
§ 1-2-1004. MEETINGS, QUORUM.
   (A)   Meetings. The Council shall have not fewer than six meetings per year
at the times and places that the Council determines.
   (B)   Quorum.
      (1)   A majority of the voting members present of the Council shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; and
      (2)   An affirmative vote by the majority of those present at any meeting
shall be sufficient for any official action.
   (C)   Staff. The Health Officer or the Health Officer's designee shall
provide staff services for the Council.
(Bill. No. 23-07, 4-18-2023)
§ 1-2-1005. RULES.
   The Council shall adopt rules to govern its procedures and activities.
(Bill. No. 23-07, 4-18-2023)
ARTICLE XXI: BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN ADVISORY COMMISSION
Section
   
1-2-1006   Creation, duties
   
1-2-1007   Composition
   
1-2-1008   Chair, Vice-Chair
   
1-2-1009   Rules
   
1-2-1010   Compensation
   
1-2-1011   Meetings, quorum
§ 1-2-1006. CREATION, DUTIES.
   (A)   There shall be a Frederick County Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory
Commission hereinafter referred to as "the Commission".
   (B)   The Commission shall act as an advisory body that advises County
officials and staff on the sound development, management, and safe use of the
County's pedestrian and bicycle systems as they relate to infrastructure,
accessibility, and promoting the benefits of these systems.
   (C)   Among its responsibilities and duties, the Commission shall:
      (1)   Review the annual Capital Improvement Program and provide to the
County Executive and County Council recommendations regarding funding for
projects relating to bicycling and pedestrian transportation;
      (2)   Assist the County with the implementation of the Bikeways and
Trails Plan;
      (3)   Periodically, or at the request of the County Executive or County
Council, provide advice on the development of regulations or policies that
benefit cyclists and pedestrians;
      (4)   Engage in community outreach and education on cycling and
pedestrian initiatives and events; and
      (5)   On or before July 1 of each year, the Commission shall submit an
annual report to the County Executive and County Council. The report shall
include recommendations on the above.
(Bill. No. 23-10, 6-6-2023)
§ 1-2-1007. COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Subject to the confirmation of the County Council, the County
Executive must appoint nine individuals to serve on the Commission for a three-
year term unless otherwise noted.
   (B)   Of the initial nine members, three shall be appointed for a term that
expires in one year, three shall be appointed for a term that expires in two
years, and three shall be appointed for a term that expires in three years.
   (C)   Members may be reappointed but may not serve more than two full
consecutive three-year terms.
   (D)   Members of the Commission shall continue to serve until their
replacement is confirmed by the County Council.
   (E)    A member of the County Council shall serve as an ex-officio, non-
voting member with no term assigned.
   (F)   A County staff member shall be designed by the County Executive to
assist and support the Commission.
(Bill. No. 23-10, 6-6-2023)
§ 1-2-1008. CHAIR, VICE-CHAIR.
   At its first meeting, and biennially thereafter, the Commission must elect a
chair and vice-chair from among its members to serve two-year terms.
(Bill. No. 23-10, 6-6-2023)
§ 1-2-1009. RULES.
   The Commission shall adopt rules to govern its procedures and activities.
(Bill. No. 23-10, 6-6-2023)
§ 1-2-1010. COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Bill. No. 23-10, 6-6-2023)
§ 1-2-1011. MEETINGS AND QUORUM.
   (A)   The Commission shall meet with the frequency it determines necessary
to perform its functions but there shall be no less than four meetings
annually.
   (B)   A majority of the then-serving Commission members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of regular business.
(Bill. No. 23-10, 6-6-2023)
ARTICLE XXII: SCOTT KEY CENTER ADVISORY BOARD
Section
   
1-2-1200   Creation, duties
   
1-2-1201   Composition and terms
   
1-2-1202   Chair, Vice-Chair
   
1-2-1203   Bylaws
   
1-2-1204   Compensation
   
1-2-1205   Meetings, quorum
§ 1-2-1200. CREATION, DUTIES.
   (A)   There shall be a Scott Key Center Advisory Board ("Board").
   (B)    Among its responsibilities and duties, the Board shall:
      (1)   Ensure that the Center operates in compliance with all applicable
laws and regulations;
      (2)   Approve the Center's mission statement, long-range goals, policies,
procedures, and budget;
      (3)   Define and prohibit those circumstances which would create a
financial or personal conflict of interest for members of the Board, staff,
care providers, volunteers, and members of any standing committees;
      (4)   Ensure that the Center responds to all plans of correction (POC) in
a timely manner;
      (5)   Approve the Center's Program Service Plan and ensure its services
are provided in accordance with the Plan.
(Bill No. 25-07, 5-20-2025)
§ 1-2-1201. COMPOSITION AND TERMS.
   (A)   The Board shall consist of a minimum of five members appointed by the
County Executive and confirmed by the County Council. The membership shall
include at a minimum:
      (1)   One individual with a developmental disability;
      (2)   One family member of an individual with a developmental disability;
and
      (3)   One individual with experience in the field of developmental
disabilities.
   (B)   Members will serve for a three-year term as a volunteer without
compensation. The initial terms of members shall be staggered so that three
members serve an initial term of three years, and two members serve an initial
term of two years. A member may not serve more than two consecutive full terms.
An initial term of two years shall not be considered a full term.
   (C)   Members of the Board shall continue to serve until their replacement
is confirmed by the County Council.
   (D)   An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
   (E)   A county employee with the Division of Aging & Independence shall be
designated by the County Executive to assist and support the Board.
(Bill No. 25-07, 5-20-2025)
§ 1-2-1202. CHAIR, VICE-CHAIR.
   At its first meeting, and biennially thereafter, the Board must elect a
Chair and Vice-Chair from among its members to serve two-year terms.
(Bill No. 25-07, 5-20-2025)
§ 1-2-1203. BYLAWS.
   Subject to approval by the County Executive, the Board shall adopt bylaws to
govern its procedures and activities.
(Bill No. 25-07, 5-20-2025)
§ 1-2-1204. COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Bill No. 25-07, 5-20-2025)
§ 1-2-1205. MEETINGS AND QUORUM.
   (A)   The Board shall meet with the frequency it determines necessary to
perform its functions, but there shall be no less than four meetings annually.
   (B)   A majority of the then-serving Board members shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of regular business.
(Bill No. 25-07, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 1-3: AIR QUALITY CONTROL (§§ 1-3-1 — 1-3-12)
Section
   
1-3-1   Definitions
   
1-3-2   Interpretation
   
1-3-3   Open fires
   
1-3-4   Visible emissions
   
1-3-5   Particulate matter emissions
   
1-3-6   Gas, vapor and odor emissions
   
1-3-7   Installations and operations
   
1-3-8   Reporting of information
   
1-3-9   Inspection and right of entry
   
1-3-10   Confidentiality of records
   
1-3-11   Violations
   
1-3-12   Exemption
Statutory reference:
   Air quality control, see Md. Code Ann., Environment Article Title 2
§ 1-3-1. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   AIR POLLUTION. The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of substances in
quantities, having characteristics and being of a duration which, from any
single source or in combination with other sources, are, or may be predicted
with reasonable certainty to be injurious to human, plant or animal life or to
property, or which unreasonably interfere with the proper enjoyment of the
property of others by reason of the emission of odors, solids, vapors, liquids
or gases throughout the county and in such areas of the county as are affected
thereby.
   CONTROL OFFICER. The Deputy State Health Officer of the County Health
Department, supervisor of air quality control or his inspectors of the County
Health Department or any employee designated by the Deputy State Health Officer
of the County Health Department.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   DEPARTMENT. The County Health Department.
   EMERGENCY. Any sudden, unexpected and unforeseen condition of such public
gravity and exigency as to require immediate action, or a condition which is
predicted with reasonable certainty to require immediate action to carry out
the purposes of this chapter.
   EMISSIONS. Any substance, other than water in an uncombined form, discharged
directly or indirectly into the atmosphere, including, but not limited to
odors, particulate matter, vapors or gases or any combination thereof.
   EXISTING INSTALLATION. Any installation erected prior to January 17, 1972.
   INCINERATOR. Any equipment, device or contrivance used for the destruction
of garbage, rubbish or other wastes by burning.
   INSTALLATION. Any article, machine, equipment or other contrivance,
including but not limited to emission control equipment, processing equipment,
manufacturing equipment, fuel burning equipment, incinerators or any equipment,
or construction capable of generating, causing or reducing emission.
   MODIFIED INSTALLATION. Any installation which has been altered, changed or
added to on or after January 17, 1972.
   NEW PLANT. Any installation for which the major proportion of the fuel
burning, incineration, processing or manufacturing equipment in the
installation is erected on or after January 17, 1972. This definition is not
intended to apply to a “modified installation” where new control equipment is
added to an existing installation. In questionable cases, the determination of
new plant shall be made by the Department.
   ODOR. That property of an emission which stimulates the sense of smell.
   OPEN FIRE. A fire where any material is burned in the open or in a
receptacle other than a furnace, incinerator or other equipment connected to a
stack or chimney.
   ORIGINATING OR ORIGINATED ON THE PREMISES. Materials or items on the
premises when they are to be disposed of and not brought to the premises by
other persons for disposal.
   PARTICULATE MATTER. Any material, except water in uncombined form, that is
or has been airborne, and exists as a liquid or a solid at a temperature of
70°F and a pressure of 29.92 inches of mercury.
   PERSON. Any individual, group of individuals, firm, partnership, voluntary
association or private, public or municipal corporation, or political
subdivision of the state, responsible for the use of property.
   RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART. The chart published and described in the latest
applicable U.S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular, used in estimating the
light obscuring power of smoke. Any other method for grading smoke which is
approved by the State Department of Health and Mental Hygiene as the equivalent
of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart may be substituted therefore.
   SOURCE. Any property, real or personal, or person contributing to air
pollution.
(1959 Code, § 41-1) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-3-2. INTERPRETATION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as repealing or abridging the
emergency powers of any agency or government except to the extent expressly set
forth herein.
(1959 Code, § 41-13) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-3-3. OPEN FIRES.
   (A)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit an open fire except as
provided in subsection (B), (C) or (D) of this section.
   (B)   (1)   The control officer may, upon receipt of an application made on
forms provided by the Department or local fire control agency, issue or approve
a permit in writing allowing an open fire; provided, that all of the following
conditions are met:
         (a)   The control officer is satisfied that there is no practical
alternate method to dispose of the material to be burned or to conduct the
desired activity;
         (b)   No hazardous condition or air pollution or nuisance will be
created;
         (c)   Fire control laws or regulations of other governmental agencies
will not be violated;
         (d)   No materials which produce dense smoke when burned, including,
but not limited to tires and roofing material will be burned;
         (e)   The material to be burned shall have originated on the premises
on which it is to be burned.
      (2)   The control officer may impose other conditions to minimize
creation of smoke, to prevent nuisance and air pollution and to protect the
health, safety, comfort and property of any persons.
   (C)   Public officers, in the performance of their official duties, may set
an open fire or give permission for an open fire, with concurrence of the
control officer; provided, that all reasonable means are employed to minimize
smoke if the fire is necessary for one or more of the following reasons or
purposes:
      (1)   For the prevention of a fire hazard that cannot be abated by other
means;
      (2)   For the instruction of public fire fighters of industrial employees
under supervision of the appropriate fire control official;
      (3)   For the protection of public health or safety when other means for
disposing of hazardous materials are not available.
   (D)   Open fires otherwise in conformance with other governmental fire
control ordinances; provided, that no nuisance or air pollution is created, are
allowed without permission as follows:
      (1)   In those areas where no provision is made for public collection of
leaves, the open burning of leaves originating on the premises by householders
is permitted. No leaves shall be burned at locations closer than 200 feet from
any neighboring habitable dwelling or place where people work or congregate;
      (2)   In those areas where no provision is made for public collection of
refuse, burning of ordinary household trash, paper, tree limbs and dried weeds
originating on the premises, excluding commercial establishment, by
householders is permitted; provided that:
         (a)   Garbage or other materials are not to be burned which create
unpleasant odors or dense smoke (emissions of an opacity or darkness greater
than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart);
         (b)   No refuse shall be burned at locations closer than 200 feet from
any neighboring habitable dwelling or place where people work or congregate;
      (3)   Cooking of food;
      (4)   Fires set in the course of agricultural operations in growing crops
or raising fowl or animals or in accepted forestry practice. In no case shall
this provision be construed as allowing the burning of materials which produce
dense smoke, such as tires, oil, and the like;
      (5)   Recreational purposes, such as campfires;
      (6)   Oil or gas fired salamanders or similar devices designated
specifically for space heating or warming of outdoor workers and the like;
provided that no visible emissions are created;
      (7)   Warming fires for outdoor workers; provided that smoke emissions
are not darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, and the fires are
located no closer than 200 feet from any neighboring habitable buildings.
(1959 Code, § 41-2) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-3-4. VISIBLE EMISSIONS.
   (A)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the discharge of
emissions from any new plant or building other than water in an uncombined
form, which are visible to human observers.
   (B)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the discharge of
emissions from any existing or modified bituminous concrete manufacturing
installation other than water in an uncombined form, which are visible to human
observers.
   (C)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit emissions from any
other existing installation, modified installation or building that are darker
in shade or appearance than that designated as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart; or of such opacity as to obscure an observer’s view to a degree greater
than does smoke designated as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart.
   (D)   Subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section shall not apply to
emissions during the building of a new fire, cleaning of fires, soot blowing,
start-up and process modification or adjustment or occasional cleaning of
control equipment, the shade or appearance of which is not darker than No. 2 on
the Ringelmann Smoke Chart for periods aggregating no more than 4 minutes in
any 60 minutes.
   (E)   Subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to emissions of the
following:
      (1)   From the burning of wood in fireplaces on premises used for
residential or recreational purposes;
      (2)   From open fires (except salamanders) permitted under provisions of
§ 1-2-3 of this Code.
   (F)   The control officer may grant exceptions to subsections (B) or (C)
when the application of such subsections to a residential building housing 2 or
less families creates undue economic hardship on individuals residing therein.
   (G)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit visible emissions
beyond the lot line of the property on which emissions originate.
(1959 Code, § 41-3) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-3-5. PARTICULATE MATTER EMISSIONS.
   (A)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit any material to be
handled, transported or stored; or a building, its appurtenances or a road to
be used, constructed, altered, repaired or demolished without taking reasonable
precautions to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne.
   (B)   Such reasonable precautions shall include, when appropriate as
determined by the control officer, but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Use of water or chemicals for control of dust in the demolition of
existing buildings or structures, construction operations, the grading of roads
or the clearing of land;
      (2)   Application of asphalt, oil, water or suitable chemicals on dirt
roads, materials, stockpiles and other surfaces which can create airborne
dusts;
      (3)   Installation and use of hoods, fans and dust collectors to enclose
and vent the handling of dusty materials. Adequate containment methods shall be
employed during sand blasting of buildings or other similar operations;
      (4)   Covering, at all times, when in motion, open-bodied vehicles
transporting materials likely to create air pollution. Alternate means may be
employed to achieve the same results as would covering;
      (5)   The paving of roadways and their maintenance in a clean condition;
      (6)   The prompt removal from paved streets of earth or other material
which has been transported thereto by trucks or earth moving equipment or
erosion by water.
(1959 Code, § 41-4) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-3-6. GAS, VAPOR AND ODOR EMISSIONS.
   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the discharge into the
atmosphere of gases, vapors or odors beyond the property line in such a manner
that a nuisance or air pollution is created.
(1959 Code, § 41-5) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-3-7. INSTALLATIONS AND OPERATIONS.
   (A)   No installation or premises shall be operated or maintained in such a
manner that a nuisance or air pollution is created. Nothing in this chapter
shall in any manner be construed as authorizing or permitting the creation of
or maintenance of a nuisance of air pollution.
   (B)   No person shall install or use any article, machine, equipment or
other contrivance, the use of which, without resulting in a reduction in the
total weight of emissions, conceals or dilutes an emission which would
otherwise constitute a violation of any applicable air pollution control
regulation.
   (C)   When a malfunction in any installation occurs that can be expected to
increase the emissions and to continue for a period greater than 4 hours, the
person shall notify the control officer by telephone. On receipt of this
notification, the control officer may permit the continuance of the operation
for a period not to exceed 10 days, provided that written application is made
to the control officer. Such application shall be made within 24 hours of the
malfunction or within such other time period as the control officer may
specify.
   (D)   No person shall burn refuse in any plant, installation or equipment
not specifically designed, constructed or modified for that purpose.
   (E)   No person shall construct a new fuel burning plant designed for use of
residual fuel oil in which any individual furnace has a rated heat input of
less than 5,000,000 B.T.U.’s per hour, nor shall residual fuel oil be used at
any time in any new fuel burning plant having a rated heat input of less than
5,000,000 B.T.U.’s per hour.
   (F)   No person shall construct a new fuel burning plant designed for use of
coal in which any individual furnace has a rated heat input of less than
250,000,000 B.T.U.’s per hour, nor shall coal be used at any time in any new
fuel burning plant having a rated heat input of less than 250,000,000 B.T.U.’s
per hour.
(1959 Code, § 41-6) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-3-8. REPORTING OF INFORMATION.
   Persons responsible for installations which may result in air pollution
shall, if so requested by the Department, file with the Department reports
containing information which shall include the following:
   (A)   Description of the installation;
   (B)   Design capacity of the process equipment, including process weight and
process weight per hour;
   (C)   Expected physical and chemical composition of the emission and
pertinent design criteria such as discharge rate, concentration, volume and
temperature;
   (D)   Type and general characteristics of the control equipment;
   (E)   Description and evaluation of the location of the discharge point and
other factors relating to dispersion and diffusion in the atmosphere;
   (F)   Information on the relation of the discharge point to nearby
structures and topography necessary to appraise the possible effects of the
emissions;
   (G)   Such other information as the Department may require.
(1959 Code, § 41-7) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-3-9. INSPECTION AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Any duly authorized officer, employee or representative of the Department
may enter and inspect any property, premise or place at any reasonable time for
the purpose of investigation or testing either an actual or suspected source of
air pollution or of ascertaining the state of compliance with this chapter. No
person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative of the
Department who requests entry for the aforementioned purposes, and who presents
appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere
with any such inspection.
(1959 Code, § 41-8) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-3-10. CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS.
   Information relating to secret processes or methods of manufacture of
production may be withheld by any person from disclosure at a public hearing
before the Department, but shall be furnished to the Department under
conditions which will prevent its public disclosure, and any such information
which may be required, ascertained or discovered by any inspector or other
employee of the Department shall be kept confidential.
(1959 Code, § 41-9) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-3-11. VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of this
chapter, and upon conviction of such violation, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $500. The violation of any section or subsection of
this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of
the violation of any other section or subsection or of any order issued
pursuant to this chapter. Each day of violation shall constitute an additional,
separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   (1)   Any such person charged with a violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be issued an air pollution citation requiring him to appear
on a day to be named therein, before the district court for the county. It
shall be the duty of the control officer to issue such air pollution citations.
Such citation shall contain the following:
         (a)   Name and address of the person charged with a violation of this
chapter;
         (b)   Location or address and the date and time the alleged violation
is said to occur;
         (c)   The offense with which such person is charged;
         (d)   Time and place the person shall appear in court;
         (e)   A space in which the person may endorse the citation;
         (f)   Such other pertinent information as necessary.
      (2)   The person to whom a citation has been issued shall signify his
willingness to appear before the district court named, on the day named, by
endorsing his name and address on such citation. If such person shall fail to
appear, the district court shall issue a warrant for the arrest of such person
or in lieu of such warrant may send by certified mail a summons to the violator
at his last known address, setting the case for trial on a date at least 2
weeks subsequent to the original date of trial.
   (C)   The time specified in the notice to appear shall be a minimum of 5
days after the alleged violation unless the person charged with the violation
requests an earlier hearing. If a person does not willingly consent in writing
to issuance of the citation or is not a resident of the state, the following
actions are authorized by a police officer or control officer:
      (1)   If a police officer witnessed the violation, he shall proceed to
arrest the person; or
      (2)   If the control officer who witnessed the violation is not a police
officer, he shall proceed to obtain a warrant from a commissioner of the
district court or a judge of the district court in the manner provided by law.
   (D)   Action pursuant to subsection (A) of this section shall not be a bar
to enforcement of this chapter, and orders made pursuant to this chapter, by
injunction or other appropriate remedy, and the county shall have the power to
institute and maintain in the name of the county any or all such enforcement
proceedings.
   (E)   The County Attorney shall enforce compliance with the requirements of
this chapter through any appropriate legal remedies and shall prosecute
violations in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abridge, limit, or
otherwise impair the right of any person to damages or other relief on account
of injuries to persons or property and to maintain any action or other
appropriate proceedings therefor.
(1959 Code, § 41-10, 41-11) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-3-12. EXEMPTION.
   Any person who, pursuant to Md. Code Ann., Environment Article § 2-611 has
submitted a plan for compliance and who has had that plan approved by the
Secretary of the Environment, or any person who has submitted such a plan for
compliance and whom the State Department of the Environment has certified is
actively engaged in good faith negotiation of such a plan for compliance shall
not be considered to be in violation of this chapter as long as he acts in
accordance with an approved plan for compliance or so long as the State
Department certifies active good faith negotiations are being carried on.
(1959 Code, § 41-12) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
CHAPTER 1-4: AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-4-1 — 1-4-20)
Section
   
1-4-1   Definition
   
1-4-2   Water supply
   
1-4-3   Washrooms and comfort stations
   
1-4-4   Toilets
   
1-4-5   Garbage and refuse
   
1-4-6   Sanitation of premises
   
1-4-7   Penalties
Cross references:
   Admissions tax, see §§
1-8-46 et seq.;
   Licensing of pinball machines, see §
2-9-1
Statutory reference:
   Permits for dance halls, amusement parks and the like, see Md. Code Ann.,
Local Government Article § 13-201
§ 1-4-1. DEFINITION.
   The term AMUSEMENTS as used in this chapter shall mean any circuses,
carnivals, walkathons, motorcycle races or exhibitions, automobile races or
exhibitions of all kinds and boxing or wrestling contests or exhibitions in the
county.
   COUNTY. The term COUNTY as used in this chapter shall mean Frederick County,
Maryland.
(1959 Code, § 31-1) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-4-2. WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   An adequate supply of safe drinking water shall be provided by the
management of an amusement within easy access to all their employees and
patrons. The safety of a particular supply shall be determined by the County
Board of Health after bacteriological examinations of such supply have been
made and a survey of the watershed has been completed.
   (B)   Only drinking fountains or spigots of an approved type will be
permitted.
   (C)   Single-service drinking cups shall be provided in sufficient quantity
at all spigots. The use of common drinking cups or dipper and the practice of
dipping drinking water or other drinks is expressly forbidden.
(1959 Code, § 31-6) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-4-3. WASHROOMS AND COMFORT STATIONS.
   Washrooms or comfort stations shall be provided for each amusement. They
shall be conveniently located and of sufficient size and adequately equipped
for the accommodation of all employees and the general public who may attend
performances or exhibits. The washrooms shall be equipped with ample running
water supply and provided with individual sanitary towels and a sufficient
amount of soap.
(1959 Code, § 31-7) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-4-4. TOILETS.
   (A)   Amusements which remain in the county less than 48 hours shall install
water closets or chemical toilets of approved design, watertight and flyproof.
One such water closet or toilet for each sex shall be provided for every 500
persons or fraction thereof employed on the premises or in attendance at any
performance or exhibition of such enterprise. All water closets or chemical
toilets shall be readily accessible to those they are intended to serve. The
seat openings shall be covered with flytight lids. Each water closet and
chemical toilet shall be inspected and approved or disapproved by a
representative of the County Board of Health prior to and any time subsequent
to its installation.
   (B)   Every amusement which remains in the county for longer than 48 hours
shall comply with the provisions of this section and, in addition, shall have
all such water closets and chemical toilets connected with a sewerage system of
1 of the towns in the county or a properly constructed and approved septic tank
or cesspool shall be installed at the expense of such amusement.
   (C)   One person shall remain in constant attendance at each of the comfort
stations and toilets provided for public use. Such person shall keep the
station clean and properly disinfected so that the public may be protected.
(1959 Code, § 31-8) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-4-5. GARBAGE AND REFUSE.
   (A)   All garbage and refuse at amusement shall be separated.
   (B)   All paper, trash, boxes and other combustible material shall be
disposed in the manner which the County Health Officer may designate.
   (C)   Table scraps and other organic garbage shall be collected in covered,
watertight, metal garbage cans. A sufficient number of cans shall be available
at all points where garbage accumulates.
(1959 Code, § 31-12) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-4-6. SANITATION OF PREMISES.
   The premises occupied by an amusement shall be maintained in a clean
condition at all times. Satisfactory arrangements shall be made to eliminate
flies, rats, vermin and other vectors of disease.
(1959 Code, § 31-13) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-4-7. PENALTIES.
   Any organization in charge of an amusement or any manager of an amusement
violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine and penalty
as set forth in Md. Code Ann., Environment Article, § 10-301. Every violation
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(1959 Code, § 31-14) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-4-8 – 1-4-20. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: PERMIT (§§ 1-4-21 — 1-3-24)
Section
   
1-4-21   Generally
   
1-4-22   Cash deposit
   
1-4-23   Denial
   
1-4-24   Revocation
§ 1-4-21. GENERALLY.
   At least 10 days before any amusement plans to operate in the county, the
management of such enterprise shall apply in writing for a permit from the
County Board of Health. Such a permit shall be issued by the Secretary of the
Board of Health with the approval of the President and a majority of the
members of the Board, upon payment of the sum of $25 and after the Board of
Health has received satisfactory assurances that such enterprise will comply
with all rules and regulations of the Board of Health.
(1959 Code, § 31-2) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-4-22. CASH DEPOSIT.
   The management of an amusement shall deposit with the County Board of Health
cash in the amount of $50 at the time that application is made for a permit.
This sum shall be held as a cash guarantee that the grounds whereon the
enterprise subject to these regulations is exhibited shall be left in a
sanitary condition. The cash deposit shall be returned to the management when,
in the opinion of the County Board of Health, or its duly appointed
representative, the grounds have been restored to their former sanitary
condition. The failure of the management of such enterprise to so restore the
grounds shall result in the forfeiture of the cash deposit.
(1959 Code, § 31-5) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-4-23. DENIAL.
   The County Board of Health may refuse to issue a permit required by this
chapter to any amusement which has recently exhibited, shown or operated within
1 month in any locality in which diseases such as infantile paralysis,
influenza or other acute communicable conditions are known to be present in
epidemic proportions.
(1959 Code, § 31-4) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-4-24. REVOCATION.
   The permit required by this article may be revoked by the County Board of
Health upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this chapter.
(1959 Code, § 31-3) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
CHAPTER 1-5: ANIMALS AND FOWL
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-5-1 — 1-5-21)
Section
   
1-5-1   Definitions
   
1-5-2   Enforcement
   
1-5-3   Animal control officers
   
1-5-4   Abandonment prohibited; control; humane destruction of suffering animal
   
1-5-5   Poisoning prohibited
   
1-5-6   Disposition of fines
   
1-5-7   Interference with authorized persons
   
1-5-8   Commercial operations
   
1-5-9   Penalty
Cross references:
   Animals in parks, see §
1-12-37;
   Penalty for violation of Md. Code Ann., Local Government Article, Title 13,
Subtitle 1, see §
2-3-1
Statutory reference:
   Power of county to regulate animals, see Md. Code Ann., Local Government
Article, Title 13, Subtitle 1.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 94-24-119, adopted Nov. 15, 1994, amended Chapter 1-5 to read as herein
set out. Prior to this amendment, Chapter 1-5 pertained to similar subject
matter and was derived from Code 1959, §§ 32-1 through 32-15; and from the
following legislation: Ord. 77-17-94, § 1, 10-17-77; Ord. 84-27-324, 10-23-84;
Ord. 84-28-325, 10-23-84; Ord. 93-04-068, 1-19-93.
§ 1-5-1. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to therein by this section.
   ANIMAL. Specifically includes, but is not limited to, domestic dogs,
domestic cats, animals used for agricultural purposes and animals used for
public exhibitions.
   AT LARGE. An animal shall be deemed to be at large whenever it is not on the
owner’s property or under the immediate physical control of a responsible
person capable of physically restraining the animal.
   COMMERCIAL OPERATION. An establishment operating as a business within the
county to include, but not be limited to, pet shops, boarding stables, boarding
kennels and sales barns.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that:
      (1)   Without provocation causes death or serious injury to a person; or
      (2)   After having been designated as a potentially dangerous dog by the
Director of Animal Control, engages in any behavior which results in death or
serious injury to a person or death or serious injury to an animal.
   IMPOUND. The taking into physical custody of any animal by the Division of
Animal Control.
   KEEPING or HARBORING. The act or sufferance either of feeding or sheltering
an animal on the premises of the occupant or owner thereof.
   OWNER.
      (1)   Any person having a right of property in an animal or any person
who keeps or harbors an animal or has it in his/her care or acts as custodian
or permits it to remain on or about any premises occupied or controlled by
him.; or
      (2)   Any person, firm, corporation, organization, or department
possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having control or
custody of a dog.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that poses a threat to public safety,
demonstrated by any of the following behaviors:
      (1)   Causes injury to a person without provocation which is less severe
than a serious injury, or causes severe injury to or kills a domestic animal;
or
      (2)   Running at large, meaning whenever the animal, three or more times
within any consecutive six month period is not on the owner's real property or
under the immediate physical control of a responsible person capable of
physically restraining the dog, or impounded by the Division of Animal Control
three or more times within any consecutive six month period.
   PROPER ENCLOSURE.
      (1)   Secure confinement indoors; or
      (2)   Secure confinement outdoors in a locked pen or structure measuring
at least five feet in width, 10 feet in length, and six feet in height, with
secure sides, roof and floor, which provides protection from the elements for
the dog, is suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and is designed to
prevent the animal from escaping.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any animal found repeatedly running at large, damaging
property, molesting passersby, chasing vehicles or acting in any manner which
is deemed to be doing damage to property or to the public health and well
being, or shall have been determined by the animal control officer, the local
health officer or any other authorized representative of the county to be a
detriment to public health, welfare and safety shall be deemed to be a public
nuisance.
   SERIOUS INJURY. Any physical injury that results in broken bones or
lacerations that require two or more sutures, or cosmetic surgery.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 04-13-357, 8-17-2004; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-5-2. ENFORCEMENT.
   Animal control officers are hereby designated as the enforcement authority
for animal control and dog and cat licensing provisions of the county.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-3. ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS.
   (A)   Animal control officers are hereby empowered to take into custody
stray, injured, sick or dead animals in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   For enforcement purposes, animal control officers are authorized to
act after receipt of a complaint or witnessing a violation.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-4. ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED; CONTROL; HUMANE DESTRUCTION OF SUFFERING
ANIMAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any animal, whether or
not the person is the owner.
   (B)   All owners of animals shall exercise care and control of such animals
so as to prevent same from becoming public nuisances.
   (C)   Any state-licensed veterinarian in the county is hereby authorized by
the county to immediately humanely euthanize or treat a suffering animal
without liability if its owner cannot be promptly identified.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-5. POISONING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall poison any animal other than rodents unless authorized by
the local health officer to protect human health.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-6. DISPOSITION OF FINES.
   All fines imposed under this chapter shall be transferred to the County
Treasurer by the Clerk of the Court.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-7. INTERFERENCE WITH AUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   No person shall attempt to interfere with the animal control officers or any
other authorized persons in the performance of their duties, nor shall any
person attempt to or release without authority any animal impounded pursuant to
the animal control laws of the county.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-8. COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS.
   Upon receipt of a complaint concerning improper care or treatment of animals
at a commercial operation, an animal control officer shall have the authority
to conduct inspections of the facility, to the extent not preempted by state
law or federal regulations, in order to determine if there is any abuse of
animals.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-9. PENALTY.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates any provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-5-10 – 1-5-21. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS (§§ 1-5-22 — 1-5-53)
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
1-5-22   Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs
   
1-5-23   Females in heat
   
1-5-24   Running at large
   
1-5-25   Offensive dog and cat noises
   
1-5-26   Proper restraint, shelter, protection and care for dogs
Division 2. License and Vaccination
   
1-5-33   Required
   
1-5-34   Application and fees
   
1-5-35   License expiration
   
1-5-36   Transfer
   
1-5-37   Tag
Division 3. Impoundment
   
1-5-49   Generally
   
1-5-50   Service fee
   
1-5-51   Redemption fees for violations
   
1-5-52   Liability for impounding fee
Division 4. Civil Animal Infractions
   
1-5-53   Generally
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 1-5-22. DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Determination of a potentially dangerous dog.
      (1)   The Director is authorized to make a determination whether a dog is
potentially dangerous as defined in §
1-5-1. An investigation must be initiated within ten days after the situation
becomes known to the Division of Animal Control. The Director shall notify the
owner of the dog in writing of that status within ten days after the completion
of the investigation.
      (2)   Following notice to the owner, if the Director has probable cause
to believe that a dog is a potentially dangerous dog and poses a threat to
public safety, may impound the dog pending disposition of the case. The owner
of the dog shall reimburse to Frederick County for the costs and expenses of
keeping the dog.
      (3)   An owner may, within ten days after a determination that a dog is
potentially dangerous, request a hearing before the Director seeking review of
the determination.
   (B)   Determination of a dangerous dog.
      (1)   If the Director has probable cause to believe that a dog is a
dangerous dog, the Director may convene a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether the dog in question shall be declared a dangerous dog and
to determine if the dog would pose a threat to public safety if returned to its
owner.
      (2)   The hearing shall be held no less than ten days after service of
notice upon the dog's owner. The hearing shall be informal and open to the
public. The owner shall have the opportunity to present evidence as to why the
dog should not be declared a dangerous dog. The Director may present all issues
for or against the owner of the dog regardless of whether the owner appears at
the hearing.
         (3)   Within five days after the hearing, the Director shall notify
the owner in writing of the decision.
   (C)   Exceptions. No dog shall be declared a dangerous or potentially
dangerous dog if:
      (1)   The dog was used by a law enforcement official for legitimate law
enforcement purposes.
      (2)   The injury or damage was sustained by a person:
         (a)   Who was committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other
tort upon the premises lawfully occupied by the owner of the dog; or
         (b)   Who was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog; or
         (c)   Who was committing or attempting to commit a crime on the
owner's property; or
      (3)   The dog was:
         (a)   Responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, or its
offspring; or
         (b)   Protecting or defending a human being within the immediate
vicinity of the dog from a physical attack or assault.
   (D)   Consequence of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog determination.
      (1)   If the Director determines that a dog is a potentially dangerous
dog under this section, the owner shall comply with the provisions of this
section and any other security or care requirements the Director may establish.
      (2)   If the Director determines that a dog is a dangerous dog under this
section, the owner shall comply with the provisions of this section and any
other security or care requirements the Director may establish.
      (3)   The Director may humanely destroy a dog that has been determined to
be a dangerous dog and poses a threat to public safety if returned to its
owner.
      (4)   The Director may impound the dog until the owner of the dog has
satisfied all of the requirements of which deemed the dog dangerous or
potentially dangerous. The owner of the dog shall be liable to Frederick County
for the costs and expenses of holding the dog. The requirements must be met
within 30 days.
   (E)   Dangerous dog and potentially dangerous dog registration requirements.
      (1)   The Director shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner
of a potentially dangerous dog if the owner establishes to the satisfaction of
the Director:
         (a)   The owner of the potentially dangerous dog is 21 years of age or
older; and
         (b)   The owner has paid an annual fee in an amount to be determined
by the Animal Control Director, in addition to regular dog licensing fees, to
register the potentially dangerous dog; and
         (c)   The potentially dangerous dog has current rabies vaccinations;
and
         (d)   The owner has a proper enclosure to prevent the entry of any
person or animal and the escape of said potentially dangerous dog; and
         (e)   A valid license has been issued for the potentially dangerous
dog pursuant to this jurisdiction.
      (2)   The Director shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner
of a dangerous dog if the owner, in addition to satisfying the requirements for
registration of a potentially dangerous dog pursuant to subparagraph (1) of
this section, establishes to the satisfaction of the Director:
         (a)   The owner of the dangerous dog has written permission of the
property owner, landlord or property manager to maintain the animal on the
premises where the dangerous dog will be kept; and
         (b)   The owner will maintain the dangerous dog exclusively on the
owner's property except for examination or medical treatment; and
         (c)   The owner of the dangerous dog has posted on the premises a
clearly visible written warning sign that there is a dangerous dog on the
property with a conspicuous warning symbol that informs children of the
presence of a dangerous dog. The sign will be visible from the public highway
or 50 feet whichever is less; and
         (d)   The owner of the dog will have the dog spayed or neutered within
30 days of being deemed dangerous; and
         (e)   The owner will have the dog implanted with a microchip
containing owner identification information. The microchip information must be
registered and provided to the Director within three days of being deemed
dangerous.
      (3)   The Director may order the immediate impoundment or humane
destruction of a dangerous dog if the owner fails to abide by the conditions
for registration of a dangerous dog.
   (F)   Dangerous or potentially dangerous dog owner responsibility. It shall
be unlawful for the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog to:
      (1)   Keep a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog without a valid
certificate of registration issued under this section;
      (2)   Permit a potentially dangerous dog off the owner's real property
unless the potentially dangerous dog is under the immediate physical control of
a responsible adult and restrained by a chain or leash;
      (3)   Fail to keep a dangerous dog within the owner's real property
except for medical treatment or examination. When removed from the owner's
property for medical treatment or examination, the dangerous dog shall be caged
or under the control of a responsible adult capable of physically restraining
the animal, and muzzled and restrained with a chain or leash, not exceeding
four feet in length. The muzzle shall be approved by the Director.
      (4)   Fail to notify the Director within 24 hours if a dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another
domestic animal, has attacked a human being, has died, has been sold, or has
been given away. If the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog has been sold or
given away, the owner shall also provide the Director with the name, address,
and telephone number of the new owner of the dangerous or potentially dangerous
dog.
      (5)   Fail to surrender a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to the
Director for safe confinement pending a disposition of the circumstances when
there is reason to believe that the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog
poses a threat to public safety after an investigation is conducted by animal
control.
   (G)   Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof shall be fined
no more than $1,000.
   (H)   Annual dangerous dog licensing drive; educational program. The
Director shall encourage the owners of dangerous dogs to participate in
preventive, behavioral and/or obedience programs.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 04-13-357, 8-17-2004; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-5-23. FEMALES IN HEAT.
   The owner of a female dog or cat which is in oestrus or in a condition
commonly known as “in heat” or “in season” shall keep such dog or cat confined
in a secure enclosure or under the immediate physical control of the owner.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-24. RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner to allow any animal to run at large.
   (B)   The provisions of subsection (A) shall not apply to any dog which is
accompanied by its owner and is being used for hunting or is being trained,
exhibited or accompanied by its owner on horseback.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-25. OFFENSIVE DOG AND CAT NOISES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat owner to permit, either
willfully or through failure to exercise due care and control, his dog or cat
to repeatedly bark, cry, howl, whine or cause other objectionable noises which
disturb the comfort, peace, quiet or repose of members of the community
residing in the vicinity as reflected by reasonable persons with normal
sensitivities to noise.
   (B)   The provision of subsection (A) shall not apply to the barking of
hunting dogs while in the pursuit of game and supervised by the owners or
trainers.
   (C)   Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., the provisions of
subsection (A) shall not apply to commercial operations that have received
special exception and site plan approval.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-26. PROPER RESTRAINT, SHELTER, PROTECTION AND CARE FOR DOGS.
   (A)   Restraint requirement.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, fasten, chain, tie,
restrain or cause a dog to be fastened, chained, tied or restrained to any
stationary or inanimate object by means of a rope, chain, strap or other
physical restraint for the purpose of confinement for more than four hours,
cumulatively in any 24-hour period.
      (2)   The dog must be tethered by a non- choke type collar or a body
harness to a tether that is at least four times the body length of the dog,
measured from the dog's nose to the back of the hindquarters, or at a minimum
be ten feet in length, and which the tether is free from entanglement.
      (3)   The tether shall have swivels at both ends and all areas of
confinement shall be maintained as to provide a safe and healthy environment
for the dog.
      (4)   An individual found chaining or tethering an animal in violation of
this section has 30 days to provide other means of confinement, as long as
other conditions of confinement and care are being met. The grace period is
null and void immediately if the owner, at any time during the grace period, is
not in compliance with other applicable laws relating to animals.
      (5)   Individuals who do not comply within the 30-day grace period are
subject to fines and penalties stipulated in this chapter.
   (B)   Shelter and outdoor enclosure requirements.
      (1)   Proper shelter, including protection from the weather and elements,
shall be provided at all times. The shelter for a dog shall have a weatherproof
roof, enclosed sides, a doorway, and a solid floor raised at least two inches
above the ground. No interior surfaces shall be metal. The shelter shall have
an entryway that the dog can easily enter and sufficient in size for a dog to
stand, turn around, lie down, and exit in a natural manner. The shelter shall
have adequate ventilation and protection from temperature extremes at all
times.
      (2)   Bedding, such as wood shavings, straw or other material, shall be
provided in sufficient quantity for insulation. Bedding shall be kept dry.
      (3)   Shade, separate from the shelter, either natural or manmade, shall
be available at all times to a tethered dog, or a dog confined to an outdoor
enclosure.
      (4)   Any dog confined within an outdoor enclosure must have adequate
space for exercise. A minimum of 100 square feet is required. Dogs over 75
pounds must have an additional 50 square feet. Seventy-five square feet is
required for each additional dog kept within the same enclosed area.
   (C)   Care requirements.
      (1)   Any person owning or having care, control or custody of a dog shall
provide daily food that is free from contamination and is of sufficient
quantity and nutritive value to maintain the animal in good health.
      (2)   Potable water must be accessible to the dog at all times.
      (3)   The dog must receive care and medical treatment for injuries,
parasites and disease, sufficient to maintain the dog in good health.
      (4)   Any outdoor area where a dog is confined must be kept free of
excretions and contaminated materials and cleaned regularly.
   (D)   Penalties. A violation of this section may result in a civil citation
pursuant to §
1-5-53 of this chapter, or impoundment of the dog(s), or both.
(Ord. 08-24-500, 9-23-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-09, 5-16-
2017)
§§ 1-5-27 – 1-5-32. RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE AND VACCINATION
§ 1-5-33. REQUIRED.
   No persons shall own or have custody of any dog or cat over 4 months of age
unless such dog or cat is licensed as herein provided and has been vaccinated
against rabies in a procedure approved by the Maryland Public Health
Veterinarian. Proof of rabies vaccination shall be given to the seller of dog
and cat licenses. This provision shall not apply to dogs or cats in the county
owned by a nonresident, provided such dogs or cats are duly licensed in their
home jurisdiction, providing the owner has a valid rabies vaccination
certificate for said dog or cat while it is in the county.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 05-16-377, 6-23-2005; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-5-34. APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   Application for dog and cat licenses shall be made to the Frederick
County Animal Control Center or any other authorized facility accompanied by a
license fee of $15 for unaltered dogs and cats for each year; however, if
individual licenses for owned dogs or cats exceed $40, the owner may request a
multiple domestic animal license, or a blanket kennel or cattery license for
$40 for each year, providing the owner gives duplicate copies of the rabies
certificates to the county and the owner notifies the animal control center by
the first of the following month of the transfer of ownership of any licensed
dog or cat.
   (B)   County residents who are 65 years of age or older can obtain dog or
cat licenses at the rate of $7 for an unaltered dog or cat.
   (C)   The license fee for a spayed or neutered dog or cat under subsections
(A) and (B) above shall be ½ the fee for an unaltered dog or cat.
   (D)   Applications for licenses may be made within 30 days following the
establishment of residence within the county, or within 30 days following the
procurement of a dog or cat, without penalty.
   (E)   "Seeing eye" dogs trained to assist the blind, "hearing ear" dogs
trained to assist the hearing impaired and dogs trained and used by police in
the official performance of their duties shall be provided licenses free of
charge.
   (F)   Fees specified in this section may be modified at any time by
resolution of the county governing body, after a duly advertised public
hearing.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 05-16-377, 6-23-2005; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-5-35. LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   The license of a dog or cat shall expire when the rabies vaccination
certification for that animal issued under Md. Code Ann., Health General
Article, § 18-319(A)(3) expires.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 05-16-377, 6-23-2005; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-5-36. TRANSFER.
   (A)   If the ownership of a licensed dog or cat changes during the licensing
year, the Director of Animal Control shall be notified of the change of
ownership, together with the name and address of the new owner and
identification number of the old license. The new owner may apply to have the
original license transferred, provided a transfer fee of $1 is made to the
Frederick Animal Control Center.
   (B)   The provisions of subsection (A) shall apply to dogs licensed as part
of a kennel and cats licensed as part of a cattery. Owners of kennels and
catteries must notify animal control of any changes in their kennel or cattery.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-37. TAG.
   (A)   Upon payment of a dog or cat license fee, a receipt and a numbered
identification tag shall be issued to the owner. The license tag shall be
securely fastened to each dog or cat collar or harness and worn by the dog or
cat at all times when not on the owner’s property. Any dog that is engaged in
supervised hunting or other sport where the collar would endanger the dog’s
safety or adversely affect its hunting or sport purpose is exempt from this
section only for the period that the dog is actually engaged in activity.
   (B)   The provisions of subsection (A) shall not apply to dogs licensed as
part of a kennel or cats licensed as part of a cattery.
   (C)   A license tag to replace a lost tag shall be issued to the owner upon
application and payment of a $2 fee.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-5-38 – 1-5-48. RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. IMPOUNDMENT
§ 1-5-49. GENERALLY.
   Whenever any person finds an animal running at large or complains that an
animal constitutes a public nuisance, that person may notify the animal control
officer, who, after investigation, may cause the animal to be impounded. No
individual shall have the right to willfully destroy or attempt to destroy or
maim the animal so long as the animal does not pose a threat to life. Upon the
capture of any animal, the animal control officer shall make diligent effort to
notify the owner of its capture, if the owner’s identity can be ascertained. An
impounded animal may be confined and offered for adoption or euthanized if not
identified and claimed within 5 calendar days after its capture. No owner may
claim an animal unless and until all charges incident to the confinement of the
animal have been paid. An animal which is ill or injured may be euthanized in
less than 5 calendar days.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-50. SERVICE FEE.
   Whenever an animal is impounded pursuant to this chapter or any other
provision of law, the owner thereof shall pay a service fee of $10 per day or
part thereof and costs of any required veterinary services and furnish
satisfactory evidence that the dog or cat is licensed and vaccinated for rabies
before release.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 04-13-357, 8-17-2004; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-5-51. REDEMPTION FEES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In addition to the service fee, an owner shall pay the following
redemption fee if the owner’s animal was impounded for a violation of this
chapter:
      (1)   For the first impoundment within a 6 month period, $20;
      (2)   For the second or subsequent impoundment within a 6 month period,
$50.
   (B)   The Director of Animal Control has the authority to reduce or suspend
all or a portion of the redemption fee payable through the Director’s office
upon a showing of financial hardship.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-5-52. LIABILITY FOR IMPOUNDING FEE.
   Where the owner of an impounded animal can be ascertained, such owner shall
be liable for the service fee and other proper charges even in cases where the
animal has been adopted or euthanized pursuant to §
1-5-49 of this Code.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 4. CIVIL ANIMAL INFRACTIONS
§ 1-5-53. GENERALLY.
   (A)   Pursuant to Chapter 634 of the Laws of Maryland 1984, being §
2-2-29 of the Frederick County Code, any violation of any of the provisions of
this entire chapter, which is
Chapter 1-5 entitled “Animals and Fowl” is a civil infraction and shall be
called a civil animal infraction. If, after investigation, a civil animal
infraction is believed to exist, the Frederick County Director of Animal
Control or his authorized agent shall deliver a citation or warning to the
animal owner and others responsible for the infraction. If the Director or his
authorized agent is unable to locate the owner personally, the Director or
authorized agent may post the citation or warning in a conspicuous place on the
property of the owner and mail a copy of same to the person, which shall be
sufficient for delivery under this section.
   (B)   The citation or warning, as provided for in this section, shall be in
writing and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the person charged or warned;
      (2)   The nature of the violation;
      (3)   The location of the violation;
      (4)   The date(s) of the violation;
      (5)   The amount or potential amount of the fine assessed;
      (6)   The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid, or
violation corrected, if applicable;
      (7)   The person’s right to stand trial for the violation if applicable;
      (8)   A certification by the Director or authorized agent attesting to
the truth of the matters set forth.
   (C)   Whenever an alleged or possible civil animal infraction comes to the
attention of the Animal Control Director, the following procedures shall apply:
      (1)   The Director of Animal Control will investigate whether an
infraction has occurred;
      (2)   If the Director finds that an infraction has occurred, he will
issue a warning to the person(s) responsible in the form and manner as outlined
in this section, with a reasonable time stated to abate or to prevent future
infractions;
      (3)   If the infraction continues or is allowed to occur after the
reasonable time stated, the Director will issue a citation to the person(s)
responsible in the form and manner as outlined in this section. Notwithstanding
the provision of step (2) above, the Director may issue a citation at step (2)
without the prior issuance of a warning.
   (D)   A fine of $50 is hereby imposed upon any person responsible for a
civil animal infraction for the first violation. A fine of $75 will be imposed
for the second violation and a fine of $100 will be imposed for the third
violation or any subsequent violation. Each day such violation is permitted to
exist shall be considered a separate infraction. All fines shall be payable to
the Treasurer of Frederick County, Maryland, in the office of the Animal
Control Center.
   (E)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
offense by filing with the Director of Animal Control a notice of intention to
stand trial. The notice shall be given at least 10 days before the date of
payment of the fines as set forth in the citation. Upon receipt of the notice
of intention to stand trial, the Director shall forward to the district court
of Frederick County, Maryland, a copy of the citation and the notice of
intention to stand trial. Upon receipt of the citation, the district court
shall schedule the case for trial and notify the defendant of the trial date.
All fines, penalties, or forfeitures collected by the district court for any
civil animal infractions shall be remitted to the Treasurer of Frederick
County, Maryland.
   (F)   If a person who receives a citation for an infraction fails to pay the
fine by the date of payment set forth on the citation and fails to file a
notice of intention to stand trial, a formal notice of the infraction shall be
sent to the person’s last known address. If the citation is not satisfied
within 15 days from the date of the notice, the person shall be liable for
double the amount of the initial fine levied for each infraction. If after 35
days the citation is not satisfied, the Director may request adjudication of
the case through the district court by the filing of civil judgment procedures.
   (G)   Adjudication of an infraction under this subsection is not a criminal
conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities ordinarily imposed
by a criminal conviction.
   (H)   In a proceeding before the district court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Code Ann., Local Government Article, Title 6. However, the
County Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute all civil animal infractions
under this section.
   (I)   If a person is found by the district court to have committed a civil
animal infraction, that person shall be liable for costs of the proceedings in
the district court.
   (J)   Depending on the circumstances of each case and after consultation
with the County Attorney, the Director has the discretionary authority to
reduce or suspend all or a portion of the fine payable through the animal
control office.
   (K)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit or prevent the
Director of Animal Control, or any one else, from seeking other legal remedies,
such as injunctions or criminal prosecution.
   (L)   Provisions of this section are in addition to, not in lieu of, those
penalties specified in other sections of this chapter, specifically §§
1-5-9 and
1-5-22.
   (M)   The fines specified in this section can be modified at any time by
resolution of the county governing body, after a duly advertised public
hearing.
(Ord. 94-24-119, 11-15-1994; Ord. 00-01-243, 2-1-2000; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
CHAPTER 1-6: BUILDINGS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (1-6-1 — 1-6-15)
Section
   1-6-1 –1-6-15   Reserved
§§ 1-6-1 – 1-6-15. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: BUILDING CODE (§§ 1-6-16 — 1-6-30)
Section
   
1-6-16   Adopted
   
1-6-17   Revisions
   
1-6-18A   Local amendments to International Building Code
   
1-6-18B   Local amendments to International Residential Code
   
1-6-19   Severability
   
1-6-20   Civil building infractions
   
1-6-21   Penalties
   
1-6-22   Saving clause
   
1-6-23   Electric vehicle charging; residential construction
Cross references:
   Adequate public facilities, see
Chapter 1-20;
   Approval of building permits, see §
1-16-10;
   Building permits, see §
2-4-1;
   Department of Permits and Inspections, see §§
1-2-49 et seq.;
   Electricity, see
Chapter 1-7;
   Grading, erosion and sediment control, see
Chapter 1-10;
   Plumbing, see
Chapter 1-14;
   Storm water management, see
Chapter 1-15.2;
   Unsafe buildings, see §§
2-4-16 et seq.;
   Water, sewers and drains, see
Chapter 2-13;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 1-19
§ 1-6-16. ADOPTED.
   The county hereby adopts the International Building Code, 2021 Edition and
the International Residential Code, 2021 Edition, including the amendments
adopted by the State of Maryland in the Maryland Building Performance Standards
(COMAR 05.02.07), and subject to the local amendments described below in §
1-6-18A and §
1-6-18B.
(Ord. 80-21-173, 7-15-1980; Ord. 81-10-200, 4-28-1981; Ord. 82-6-250, 4-13-
1982; Ord. 84-32-329, 12-11-1984; Ord. 89-15-546, 3-21-1989; Ord. 91-06-006, 4-
16-1991; Ord. 95-13-137, 7-24-1995; Ord. 99-10-237, 6-29-1999; Ord.02-06-302,
4-4-2002; Ord. 05-31-392, 11-29-2005; Ord. 08-18-494, 6-17-2008; Ord. 10-13-
548, 6-8-2010; Ord. 12-11-606, 6-14-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No.
15-03, 6-16-2015; Bill No. 19-21, 1-21-2020; Bill No. 24- 04, 5-21-2024)
§ 1-6-17. REVISIONS.
   (A)   Substitute “Frederick County” for the phrase “Name of Jurisdiction”
wherever it appears in the Building Code.
   (B)   Substitute “County Executive” for phrases “appointing authority,”
“chief appointing authority,” and “chief authority” wherever they appear in the
Building Code.
   (C)   Substitute "Director of the Frederick County Department of Permits and
Inspections or Administrative Authority" for the term "building official" or
"code official” wherever it appears in the Building Code.
   (D)   Substitute “Department of Permits and Inspections” for the term
“Department of Building Safety” wherever it appears in the Building Code.
(Ord. 80-21-173, 7-15-1980; Ord. 82-6-250, 4-13-1982; Ord. 89-15-546, 3-21-
1989; Ord. 02-06-302, 4-4-2002; Ord. 10-13-548, 6-8-2010; Ord. 12-11-606, 6-14-
2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-18A. LOCAL AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
    The International Building Code, 2021 Edition as adopted by the State of
Maryland in the Maryland Building Performance Standards (COMAR 05.02.07) is
hereby amended as described and shown below:
   Subsection 101.2 is hereby amended by adding the following exceptions:
      Exception 4: Agricultural Buildings and Farm Stands. The provisions of
this code shall not apply to the construction, alteration, addition, repair,
removal, demolition, use, location or maintenance of agricultural buildings and
farm stands. This provision does not exempt the owner from obtaining required
zoning certificates, electrical or plumbing permits, nor from complying with
all other applicable local, state and federal regulations, laws, and
ordinances. An “agricultural building” for purposes of this subsection means a
building or structure utilized for agricultural activity as defined in the
International Building Code:
   "Agricultural Building. A structure designed and constructed to house farm
implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural products.
This structure shall not be a place of human habitation or a place of
employment where agricultural products are processed, treated or packaged, nor
shall it be a place used by the public."
   A "farm stand" for purposes of this subsection means:
   "Farm Stand": A structure that does not exceed 600 square feet which may be
used to process, treat, or package agricultural products, the majority of which
are produced on the farm. A Farm Stand may not be used as a place of human
habitation or employment, nor used or occupied by the public.
   Subsection 101.2.1, Appendices, is hereby amended with the addition of the
following language:
      Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted.
The following appendices are adopted in their entirety:
   Appendix C, Group U, Agricultural Buildings
   Appendix E, Supplementary Accessibility Requirements
   Appendix F, Rodent Proofing
   Appendix G, Flood Resistant Construction
   Appendix H, Signs
   Appendix I, Patio Covers
   Appendix O, Performance Based Application
   Subsection 101.4.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the Frederick County Plumbing Code
shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of
plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, and where connected to a
water or sewage system and as aspects of a medical gas system. The provisions
of the Frederick County Plumbing Code shall apply to private sewage disposal
systems.
   Subsection 101.4.8 is hereby added to read as follows:
      101.4.8 Electrical. The provisions of the Frederick County Electrical
Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including
alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings
and appurtenances thereto.
   Subsection 105.2 is hereby modified to read as follows:
      105.2 Work exempt from permit.
      Building:
         1.   One-story detached accessory structures with eave heights less
than 10 feet, used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses,
provided the floor area does not exceed 150 square feet.
      [Items 3 – 13 unchanged]
         14.   Farm Stands (as defined in Subsection 101.2)
   Subsection 105.3.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      105.3.1 Action on application. The administrative authority shall examine
or cause to be examined applications for permits and revisions thereto within a
reasonable time after filing by routing the application to appropriate agencies
and departments for their review. If the application or the construction
documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the
administrative authority shall reject such application in writing, stating the
reasons therefore. If the building official and the reviewing agencies and
departments are satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements
of this code, laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the administrative
authority shall issue a permit therefore as soon as practicable.
   Subsection 105.3.2. is hereby amended to read as follows:
      105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for
any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the
date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a
permit has been issued; except that the administrative authority is authorized
to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding
180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable
cause demonstrated.
   Subsection 105.5 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      Expiration. Every permit issued shall expire one year from the date of
issuance unless the final building inspection has been approved, or an
extension has been granted. The building official is authorized to grant, in
writing, a one (1) year extension prior to the expiration date of the permit,
provided that work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within
(one) 1 year of permit issuance. Commencement of work is evidenced by the
administrative authority approval of the first required building inspection.
The extensions shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated.
   Subsection 108.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      108.1 General. The administrative authority is authorized to issue a
permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be
limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 1 year.
   Subsection 111.2 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
      111.2 Certificate issued. When a structure is entitled thereto, the
administrative authority shall issue a certificate of occupancy upon completion
of the final inspections in accordance with Section 110.3.10, correction of the
violations and discrepancies, and approval for occupancy is given from the
departments and agencies that gave approvals for the issuance of the zoning
certificate/building permit.
   Subsection 112.4 is hereby added to read as follows:
      112.4 Service connections. Before a structure is demolished or removed,
the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service connections to the
structure such as water, electric, gas, sewer and other connections.
   Subsection 112.5 is hereby added to read as follows:
      112.5 Notice to adjoining owners. Written notice shall be given by the
applicant to the owners of adjoining lots and to the owners of wired or other
facilities, of which the temporary removal is necessitated by the proposed
work, prior to the removal of a building or structure.
   Subsection 113 is hereby amended to read as following:
      113.1 General. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code
shall be filed in writing with the Director of the Division of Planning and
Permitting for the County. Appeals from the decision of the Director may be
filed in the Frederick County Circuit Court.
      113.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based
on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do
not fully apply or an equivalent or better form of construction is proposed.
The Director of the Division of Planning and Permitting shall not have
authority to waive requirements of this code or interpret the administration of
this code.
      113.3 Deleted
      113.4 Administration. The building official shall take immediate action
in accordance with the decision of the Director.
      113.4 Appeals. Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Appeals
shall have the right to appeal an adverse decision to the County Executive.
   Subsection 308.5.1, Child care facility - The section is hereby deleted in
its entirety and replaced with the following:
      Subsection 308.5.1: A child day care facility that provides for more than
five but no more than 49 children 2½ years or less of age, when the rooms where
such children are cared for are located on the level of the exit discharge and
each of these child care rooms has an exit door directly to the exterior, shall
be classified as Group E.
   Delete Section 502.1 Address Identification in its entirety.
   Subsection 507.4, Sprinklered, one story, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
      The area of a one or two-story, Group B, F, M, or S building, of Type I
or II construction, shall not be limited when the building is provided with
automatic sprinkler systems throughout in accordance with Section 903.1.1 and
is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet in
width. (Note: Exceptions for Section 507.4 are unchanged from the IBC).
   Subsection 708.1, General, is hereby amended to read as follows:
      9. Walls and floor/ceiling assemblies separating tenant spaces shall be
constructed at a minimum as fire partitions in accordance with Section 708 or
Section 711. Exception: In fully sprinklered buildings, openings in corridor
walls are not required to be protected.
   Subsection 903.2.9, Group S-1, is hereby amended by adding a new
subparagraph 5 as follows:
      5. Throughout all mini storage buildings with fire areas greater than
2500 square feet in area.
   Subsection 903.4.3, Floor control valves, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
      Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the
point of connection to the riser on each floor in multi- story buildings. Each
floor of a building shall be zoned separately with maximum zone sizes in
accordance with the provisions of NFPA #13. Fire alarm zones shall coincide
with sprinkler system zones.
   Subsection 905.2, Installation standards, is hereby amended to add two
exceptions as follows:
   Exceptions:
      (1)   The residual pressure requirements from an automatic water supply
are not required in buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic
sprinkler system and where the highest floor level is not more than 75 feet
above the lowest level of the Fire Department access. Pipe sizes shall be
hydraulically calculated based on maintaining a residual pressure of 100 psi
flowing 500 gpm at the hydraulically most remote hose outlet based on a
pressure of 150 psi available at the Fire Department connection. An additional
250 gpm shall be added at the point of connection for each additional riser up
to a maximum of 1250 gpm. The minimum riser pipe size shall be 4" nominal
diameter.
      (2)   All Class I standpipes shall have a minimum size hose connection of
2½" and shall be equipped with a 1½" reducing adapter.
   Subsection 905.4, Location of Class I standpipe hose – connection, is hereby
amended and modified to read as follows:
         1.   In every required stairway, a hose connection shall be provided
for each floor level above or below grade. Hose connections shall be located at
the level of stair entry.
   Subsection 907.6.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      907.6.4 Zones. Each floor shall be zoned separately. Where the building
is not protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903, a zone shall not exceed 22,500 square feet (2090 m2) and the
length of any zone shall not exceed 300 feet (91440 mm) in any direction. Where
the building is protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903, the area of the fire alarm zone shall coincide with the area of
the sprinkler system.
      Delete exception.
   Subsection 1010.2.4, Locks and latches - subparagraph 3 is hereby amended as
follows:
      3.   In buildings in Occupancy Group A having an occupant load of 99 or
less, Groups B, F, M and S, and in places of religious worship, the main
exterior door or doors are permitted to be equipped with locks from the egress
side provided:
      3.1. The locks, if provided, shall not require the use of a key, a tool,
special knowledge, or effort for operation from the egress side.
      3.2 [deleted]
      3.3.[deleted]
   Subsection 1029.3, Constructions and openings, is hereby deleted and
replaced with the following:
      Where an egress court serving a building or portion thereof is less than
10 feet (3048 mm) in width, all egress court enclosure walls shall have not
less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a distance of 10 feet
(3048 mm) above the floor of the court. Openings within such walls shall be
protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less
than ¾ hour.
   (Exceptions 1. and 2. remain unchanged.)
   Subsection 1030.2, Assembly main exit is hereby deleted and replaced with
the following:
      Group A occupancies consisting of bars with live entertainment, dance
halls, discotheques, nightclubs, and assembly occupancies with festival
seating, that have an occupancy load of greater than 50 shall be provided with
a main exit. The main exit shall be of sufficient width to accommodate not less
than two thirds (2/3) of the occupant load, but such width shall not be less
than the total required width of all means of egress leading to the exit. In
assembly occupancies, other than those listed above, the main entrance/exit
shall be a width that accommodates one-half of the total occupant load. Where
the building is classified as a Group A occupancy, the main exit shall front on
at least one street or an unoccupied space of not less than 10 feet (3048 mm)
in width that adjoins a street or public way.
   Chapter 11. Accessibility. The provisions of IBC Chapter 11 shall apply to
all matters affecting the design and construction of facilities for
accessibility to physically disabled persons except where the provisions of
COMAR Section 05.02.02, the Maryland Accessibility Code, are more stringent in
which case they shall apply.
   Subsection 1210.4 is hereby added as follows:
      Subsection 1210.4 - Baby Changing Stations required in all public
restrooms of group A and M occupancies that have an occupant load of greater
than 49.
   Subsection 1608.2 is hereby amended by adding the following:
      1608.2 … The design roof load of any roof shall be thirty (30) PSF or
greater for ground snow load except as required by Figure 1608.2
   Subsection 1809.5, Frost protection - Exception 2, is hereby amended as
follows:
         2.   Area of 400 square feet or less; and
   Chapters 27, 29 and 30 of the International Building Code, 2021 Edition are
hereby deleted in their entireties.
   Electrical components, equipment and systems used in buildings and
structures shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Frederick
County Electrical Code (
Chapter 1-7, Article III of the Frederick County Code).
   The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted by Frederick
County (
Chapter 1-14, Article IV of the Frederick County Code), shall govern the
erection, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement addition
to, use or maintenance of plumbing equipment and systems.
   Subsection 3107.1 is hereby adopted to read as follows:
      3107.1 Signs. All signs shall comply with the requirements of the
Frederick County Zoning Ordinance.
   The alteration, repair, addition and change of occupancy of existing
structures in Frederick County shall be governed by the Maryland Building
Rehabilitation Code (International Existing Building Code), adopted under the
authority of the State of Maryland, Department of Housing and Community
Development, Annotated Code of Maryland, Public Safety Article § 12-1004 (COMAR
05.16).
(Ord. 80-21-173, 7-15-1980; Ord. 81-10-200, 4-28-1981; Ord. 82-6-250, 4-13-
1982; Ord. 84-32-329, 12-11-1984; Ord. 85-43-375, 11-26-1985; Ord. 87-23-455,
8-4-1987; Ord. 89-15-546, 3-21-1989; Ord. 91-06-006, 4-16-1991; Ord. 91-19-019,
8-8-1991; Ord. 95-13-137, 7-24-1995; Ord. 99-10-237, 6-29-1999; Ord. 02-06-302,
4-4-2002; Ord. 05-31-392, 11-29-2005; Ord. 08-18-494, 6-17-2008; Ord. 10-13-
548, 6-8-2010; Ord. 12-11-606, 6-14-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No.
15-03, 6-16-2015; Bill No. 19-21, 1-21-2020; Bill No. 22-04, 3-1-2022; Bill No.
24-04, 5-21-2024)
§ 1-6-18B. LOCAL AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   The county hereby adopts the International Residential Code, 2021 Edition
including the amendments adopted by the State of Maryland in the Maryland
Building Performance Standards (COMAR 05.02.07) with the amendments described
and shown below.
   Subsection R102.7.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
   The alteration, repair, addition and change of occupancy of existing
structures in Frederick County shall be governed by the Maryland Building
Rehabilitation Code (International Existing Building Code) adopted under the
authority of the State of Maryland, Department of Housing and Community
Development, Annotated Code of Maryland Local Government Article § 12-1004
(COMAR 05.16)
   Subsection R105.2, Work exempt from permit - Building - Subparagraph 1 is
hereby deleted and replaced with the following:
   1.   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds,
playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 150 square
feet.
   Subsection R105.2, Work exempt from a permit - Building Subparagraph 10 is
amended as follows:
   Replace 200 sq. ft. with 150 sq. ft.
   [Items 2-10 unchanged]
   11. Farm Stands
   Subsection R105.2 is hereby amended to add the following:
   R105.2 (11) Agricultural Buildings and Farm Stands. The provisions of this
code shall not apply to the construction, alteration, addition, repair,
removal, demolition, use, location or maintenance of agricultural buildings and
farm stands. This provision does not exempt the owner from obtaining required
zoning certificates, electrical or plumbing permits, nor from complying with
all other applicable local, state and federal regulations, laws, and
ordinances. An "agricultural building" for purposes of this subsection means a
building or structure utilized for agricultural activity as defined in the
International Building Code:
   "Agricultural Building. A structure designed and constructed to house farm
implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural products.
This structure shall not be a place of human habitation or a place of
employment where agricultural products are processed, treated or packaged, nor
shall it be a place used by the public."
   A "farm stand" for purposes of this subsection means:
   "Farm Stand": A structure that does not exceed 600 square feet which may be
used to process, treat, or package agricultural products, the majority of which
are produced on the farm. A Farm Stand may not be used as a place of human
habitation or employment, nor used or occupied by the public.
   Subsection R105.2 Electrical Subsection Exemption #4 is deleted in its
entirety.
   Subsection R105.3.1.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   Subsection R105.5 - Expiration, is hereby deleted and replaced with the
following:
   R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall expire one year from the date
of issuance unless the final building inspection has been approved, or an
extension has been granted. The building official is authorized to grant, in
writing, a one (1) year extension prior to the expiration date of the permit,
provided that work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within
(one) 1 year of permit issuance. Commencement of work is evidenced by the
building official's approval of the first required building inspection. The
extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
   IRC Chapter 2. Definitions
   The following new definition is hereby added:
   Mobile home. A transportable structure built prior to June 15, 1976,
otherwise meeting the same dimensional limits as used to describe a
manufactured home.
   The definition of manufactured home is hereby modified by adding the
following language to the end of the definition:
   All manufactured/mobile homes designed and built solely for residential
purposes or human habitation must bear a HUD label certifying compliance with
the federal standards. Non-labeled manufactured homes and mobile homes shall be
prohibited from being relocated into Frederick County.
   Table R301.2 is to be filled in as follows with the deletion of Manual J
design criteria requirement:
   Ground Snow Load (pounds per square foot) = 30 psf except as required by
Figure R301.2
   Wind Speed   115 (MPH)
   Topographic Effects = No
   Special Wind Region = No
   Wind-Borne Debris Zone = No
   Seismic Design Category   =   B
   Subject to damage from
      Weathering      =   Severe
      Frost Line Depth   =   30 inches
      Termite      =   Yes (moderate/heavy)
   Winter Design Temp.      =   12 deg. F
   Table R301.2 is hereby modified by the addition of the following:
   Ice shield underlayment requirement = Yes
   Flood hazard = As determined by Division of Planning and Permitting
   Air freezing index = Greater than 1,500
   Mean annual temperature = 52 degrees Fahrenheit
   Section R313 is hereby deleted in its entirety
   Section R319 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
   Section R319 Site Address and Premises Identification shall be in accordance
with the Frederick County Address Ordinance No. 05-01-362.
   Subsection R403.1.4.1, Frost Protection - The exceptions are deleted and
amended to read as follows:
         1.   Freestanding accessory storage structures with an area of at
least 150 square feet but less than 401 square feet, and an eave height of not
more than 10 feet (3048 mm) shall not be required to be protected, but
structures that are less than 401 square feet must be provided with a minimum
of 4 permanent tie-downs that are designed to withstand the applicable wind
load requirements according to the adopted building code.
            2.   Decks exceeding 150 square feet in area and not supported by a
dwelling will require footings according to the building code unless joist
members are in direct contact with the earth.
         3.   Structures with an area 401 square feet or more will require
permanent footings and/or foundations according to the applicable sections of
the building code.
   R807.1 Attic Access is hereby amended to add the following:
   Where air-handling units, water heaters, or similar equipment are installed
in attics in residential structures, access to the attic opening shall be
provided by a permanent or pull-down stairway in all new construction.
   IRC Chapter 11 is hereby deleted in its entirety. The provisions of the
International Energy Conservation Code 2021, shall govern the design and
construction of buildings in regard to energy efficiency.
   IRC Chapters 12 – 23 are hereby deleted in their entirety. Regulation of the
design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical
systems that are permanently installed and utilized to provide control of
environmental conditions within the building shall be installed according to
the International Mechanical Code 2021 or the Mechanical Code adopted pursuant
to the provisions of Md. Code Ann., Business Regulations Article, § 9A-205.
   IRC Chapter 24 is hereby deleted in its entirety. The provisions of the
International Fuel Gas Code 2021, shall govern the erection, installation,
alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance
of fuel gas equipment and systems.
   IRC Chapters 25 – 33 are hereby deleted in their entirety. The provisions of
the International Plumbing Code, as adopted by Frederick County, shall govern
the erection, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing equipment and systems.
   IRC Chapters 34 - 43 are hereby deleted in their entirety. Electrical
components, equipment and systems used in buildings and structures shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Frederick County Electrical
Code.
   IRC Chapter 44 - Standards listed in this chapter shall be considered part
of the requirements of this code. Where differences occur between provisions of
this code and the referenced standard, the provisions of this code shall apply.
   IRC Appendix E -Manufactured housing used as dwelling, is hereby adopted
with the following amendments:
      The definition of manufactured home in Appendix E, AE103 is hereby
deleted and replaced with definition of manufactured home in IRC Chapter 2.
   Sections AE104, AE105, AE106, AE107 are hereby deleted in their entirety and
Chapter 1, Administration, as adopted by Frederick County shall govern
applications for permits, permit issuance, and fees.
   IRC Appendix F, Radon control methods, is hereby adopted, with the following
amendments:
   Addition of the following exception:
      Buildings in which an approved mechanical crawl space ventilation system
or other equivalent system is installed, or that are passively ventilated in
accordance with section R408.2 of this code.
   Sections AF103.5.3 and AF103.6.1 are hereby amended to add the following
text:
      Vent pipe must extend vertically straight through the roof for passive
sub-membrane depressurization systems.
      Exception: No single offset shall exceed 45 degrees to jog the vent pipe
around an obstacle.
   IRC Appendix H - Patio covers, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
   IRC Appendix J - Existing Buildings and Structures
   IRC Appendix K - Sound transmission, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
   IRC Appendix S - Strawbale construction, is hereby adopted in its entirety.
   The following appendices are hereby adopted in their entirety:
      IRC Appendix M – Home Day Care – R3 Occupancy
      IRC Appendix R - Light Straw-Clay Construction
      IRC Appendix S – Strawbale Construction
(Ord. 80-21-173, 7-15-1980; Ord. 81-10-200, 4-28-1981; Ord. 82-6-250, 4-13-
1982; Ord. 84-32-329, 12-11-1984; Ord. 85-43-375, 11-26-1985; Ord. 87-23-455,
8-4-1987; Ord. 89-15-546, 3-21-1989; Ord. 91-06-006, 4-16-1991; Ord. 91-19-019,
8-8-1991; Ord. 95-13-137, 7-24-1995; Ord. 99-10-237, 6-29-1999; Ord. 02-06-302,
4-4-2002; Ord. 05-31-392, 11-29-2005; Ord. 08-18-494, 6-17-2008; Ord. 10-13-
548, 6-8-2010; Ord. 12-11-606, 6-14-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No.
15-03, 6-16-2015; Bill No. 19-21, 1-21-2020; Bill No. 22-04, 3-1-2022; Bill No.
24-04, 5-21-2024)
§ 1-6-19. SEVERABILITY.
   If any clauses, sentences, paragraphs or other parts of the code, or this
article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall for any
reason, be judged by the court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of the code or
this article, and that application thereof to any persons or circumstances,
which shall be confined in its operation to the clauses, sentences, paragraphs
or parts thereof directly involved in the controversy in which the judgment
shall have been rendered and the persons or circumstances involved. It is
hereby declared to be the legislative intent that the code and this article
would have been adopted had such invalid provisions not been included.
(Ord. 80-21-173, 7-15-1980; Ord. 82-6-250, 4-13-1982; Ord. 10-13-548, 6-8-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-20. CIVIL BUILDING INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to §
2-2-29 of the Frederick County Code, any violation of any of the provisions of
this entire chapter, which is
Chapter 1-6, entitled "Buildings," is a civil infraction and shall be called a
civil building infraction. If, after investigation, a civil building infraction
is believed to exist, the Frederick County Planning and Permitting Division
Director ("Director") or authorized agent shall deliver a citation or warning
to the property owner and any others responsible for the infraction. If the
Director or authorized agent is unable to locate the owner or other responsible
person, the Director or authorized agent may post the citation or warning in a
conspicuous place on the property and mail a copy of same to the owner or other
responsible person, which shall be sufficient for delivery of the warning or
citation under this section.
   (B)   The citation or warning, as provided for in this section, shall be in
writing and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the person charged or warned;
      (2)   The nature of the violation;
      (3)   The location of the violation;
      (4)   The date(s) of the violation;
      (5)   The amount or potential amount of the fine assessed;
      (6)   The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid, or
violation corrected, if applicable;
      (7)   The person’s right to stand trial for the violation if applicable;
      (8)   A certification by the Director or authorized agent attesting to
the truth of the matters set forth.
   (C)   Whenever an alleged or possible civil building infraction comes to the
attention of the Director or administrative authority, the following procedures
shall apply:
      (1)   The Director or administrative authority will investigate whether a
violation has occurred;
      (2)   If the Director or administrative authority finds that a violation
has occurred, a warning will be issued to the person(s) responsible in the form
and manner as outlined in this section, with reasonable time stated to abate or
to prevent future infractions;
      (3)   If the infraction continues or is allowed to occur after the
reasonable time stated, the Director or administrative authority will issue a
citation to the person(s) responsible in the form and manner as outlined in
this section. Notwithstanding the provision of step (2) above, the Director or
administrative authority may issue a citation at step (2) without the prior
issuance of a warning.
   (D)   A fine of $200 shall be imposed upon any person responsible for each
civil building infraction. Each day such violation exists shall be considered a
separate civil building infraction. All fines shall be payable to the Treasurer
of Frederick County, Maryland, in the office of the Division of Planning and
Permitting.
   (E)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
offense by filing with the Director or administrative authority a notice of
intention to stand trial. The notice shall be delivered to the Director or
administrative authority at least 10 days before the due date for payment of
the fines as set forth in the citation. Upon receipt of the notice of intention
to stand trial, the Director or administrative authority shall forward to the
District Court of Frederick County, Maryland, a copy of the citation and the
notice of intention to stand trial. Upon receipt of the citation, the district
court shall schedule the case for trial and notify the defendant of the trial
date. All fines, penalties, or forfeitures collected by the district court for
any civil building infractions shall be remitted to the Treasurer of Frederick
County, Maryland.
   (F)   If a person who receives a citation for a civil building infraction
fails to pay the fine by the date of payment set forth on the citation and
fails to file a notice of intention to stand trial at least 10 days prior to
the payment date, a formal notice of the civil building infraction shall be
sent to the person's last known address. If the citation is not satisfied
within 15 days from the date specified on the notice, the person shall be
liable for a fine of $400 for each infraction. If the citation is not satisfied
within 35 days of the date specified on the formal notice, the Director or
administrative authority may request adjudication of the case through the
district court by following appropriate civil procedures.
   (G)   Adjudication of a civil building infraction under this subsection is
not a criminal conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities
ordinarily imposed by a criminal conviction.
   (H)   In a proceeding before the district court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Code Ann. Local Government Article Title 6. However, the
County Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute all civil building
infractions under this section.
   (I)   If a person is found by the district court to have committed a civil
building infraction, that person shall be liable for the costs of the
proceedings in the district court.
   (J)   Depending on the circumstances of each case and after consultation
with the County Attorney, the Director or administrative authority has the
discretionary authority to reduce or suspend all or a portion of the fine(s)
payable through the Permits and Inspections office.
   (K)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit or prevent the
Director or administrative authority from seeking other legal remedies, such as
injunctions or criminal prosecution.
   (L)   Provisions of this section are in addition to, not in lieu of, those
penalties specified in other sections of this chapter, specifically §
1-6-21.
   (M)   The fines specified in this section can be modified at any time by
resolution of the county governing body, after a duly advertised public
hearing.
(Ord. 99-10-237, 6-29-1999; Ord. 10-13-548, 6-8-2010; Ord. 12-11-606, 6-14-
2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-04, 5-21-2024)
§ 1-6-21. PENALTIES.
   Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who directs or knowingly
permits any violation of any of the provisions of this article, or any rule or
regulation duly promulgated hereunder or who aids or assists therein, either on
its own behalf or in the interest of its employer or principal shall, upon
conviction thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for
not more than 30 days or both, for each separate offense. Every day each
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.
(Ord. 80-21-173, 7-15-1980; Ord. 82-6-250, 4-13-1982; Ord. 10-13-548, 6-8-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-22. SAVING CLAUSE.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed or held to affect or control any
violation of the sections of the Frederick County Code which occurred prior to
the enactment of this amending ordinance (Ordinance 89-15-546), or the
prosecution of any violation of the previous sections but each violation and
prosecution shall be governed by the provisions of the Building Code as it read
and was in effect at the time the violation occurred.
(Ord. 80-21-173, 7-15-1980; Ord. 82-6-250, 4-13-1982; Ord. 84-32-329, 12-11-
1984; Ord. 89-15-546, 3-12-1989; Ord. 91-06-006, 4-16-1991; Ord. 10-13-548, 6-
8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-23. ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING; RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Definitions. In this section the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE. A vehicle that uses electricity for propulsion.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUPPLY EQUIPMENT. A device or facility for delivering
electricity to an electric vehicle.
      EV READY PARKING SPACE. A parking space that has full circuit
installation of a minimum 40 ampere, 208/240-volt circuit, raceway wiring
(three-quarter-inch minimum), a NEMA 14-50R receptacle, and circuit overcurrent
protection devices.
      EVSE-INSTALLED PARKING SPACE. A parking space with electric vehicle
supply equipment that is fully installed from the electric panel to the parking
space.
      HOUSING UNITS.
         (a)   1.   Single- family detached houses;
            2.   Duplexes; and
            3.   Townhouses that are subject to the provisions of the
International Residential Code.
         (b)   HOUSING UNITS does not include multifamily residential buildings
that are subject to the provisions of the International Building Code.
      LEVEL 2 CHARGING. The charging capability of the electric vehicle supply
equipment:
         (a)   Includes the ability to charge a battery or any other energy
storage device in an electric vehicle through the means of an alternating
current electrical service with a minimum of 208 volts; and
         (b)   Meets applicable industry safety standards.
      VEHICLE. The meaning stated in Md. Code Ann., Transportation Art., § 11-
176.
   (B)   This subsection applies to the construction of housing units that
include a separate garage, carport, or driveway for each residential unit.
      (1)   Shall include in or on garage, carport or driveway:
         (a)   One EVSE-installed parking space capable of providing at least
Level 2 charging; or
         (b)   One EV-ready parking space.
(Bill No. 22-01, 3-15-2022; Bill No. 24-04, 5-21-2024)
§§ 1-6-24 — 1-6-30. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: MINIMUM LIVABILITY CODE (§§ 1-6-31 — 1-6-49)
Section
   
1-6-31   General provisions
   
1-6-32   Definitions
   
1-6-33   Application
   
1-6-34   Code enforcement
   
1-6-35   Duties and powers of code official
   
1-6-36   Condemnation
   
1-6-37   Notices and orders
   
1-6-38   Violations
   
1-6-39   Right to appeal
   
1-6-40   Environmental requirements
   
1-6-41   Light and ventilation requirements
   
1-6-42   Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements
   
1-6-43   Mechanical and electrical requirements
   
1-6-44   Fire safety requirements
   
1-6-45   Responsibilities of persons
   
1-6-46   Severability
Cross references:
   Electricity, see
Chapter 1-7;
   Health and sanitation, see
Chapter 1-11;
   Plumbing, see
Chapter 1-14;
   Unsafe buildings, see
Chapter 2-4, Art. II;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 1-19
§ 1-6-31. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Title. This article shall be known as the “Minimum Livability Code.”
   (B)   Scope. This code is created to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare in residential structures and premises by:
      (1)   Establishing minimum property maintenance standards for basic
equipment and facilities used for light, ventilation, heating and sanitation
for residential structures and premises, and for safe and sanitary maintenance
of residential structures and premises;
      (2)   Establishing minimum requirements for residential structures and
premises for means of egress, fire protection systems and other equipment and
devices necessary for safety from fire;
      (3)   Fixing the responsibilities of property owners, operators and
tenants of residential structures and premises; and
      (4)   Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
   (C)   Intent. This code shall be construed liberally and justly to protect
public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued
use and maintenance of residential structures and premises.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-32. DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation.
      (1)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the terms defined in subsection
(B) of this section shall have the meanings indicated for purposes of this
code.
      (2)   Words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. The singular number includes
the plural and the plural the singular.
      (3)   When terms are not defined, through the methods authorized by this
section, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context
may imply.
   (B)   Terms defined.
      BASEMENT. That portion of a structure which is partly or completely below
grade.
      CENTRAL HEATING. The heating system permanently installed and adjusted so
as to provide the distribution of heat to all habitable areas from a source
outside of these areas.
      CODE. The Minimum Livability Code regulations.
      CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of the Frederick County Department of Housing
and Community Development or her designee.
      CONDEMN. To declare a structure or part of it, premises, or equipment,
unsafe or unfit for use or occupation.
      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other
pests by:
         (a)   Eliminating their harborage places;
         (b)   Removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as
their food;
         (c)   Poison spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other pest
elimination methods which have received all necessary and legally required
approvals.
      GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      HABITABLE AREA. The space in a structure used for living, sleeping,
eating, or cooking, including bathrooms and toilet compartments. Closets,
halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable
areas.
      HOUSING UNIT. A single unit of a structure providing or intended to
provide complete living and sleeping facilities for 1 or more persons.
      INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or
premises of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
      MAINTENANCE. The repair and other acts intended to prevent a decline in
the condition of a structure, premises, or equipment below the standards
established by this code and other applicable statutes, codes and ordinances.
      OCCUPANT. An individual having possession of a space within a housing
unit.
      OPERATOR. A person who has charge, care, or control of a structure or
premises which is offered for occupancy.
      OWNER. PROPERTY OWNER, as defined below.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, limited partnership, trust, estate,
association or corporation.
      PLUMBING. The practice, materials, facilities, and fixtures used in the
installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of all piping, fixtures,
appliances, and appurtenances within the scope of the applicable plumbing code.
      PLUMBING FIXTURE. A receptacle or device which:
         (a)   Is either permanently or temporarily connected to the water
distribution system of the premises and demands a supply of water from it;
         (b)   Discharges used water, liquid- borne waste materials, or sewage
either directly or indirectly to the drainage system of the premises; or
         (c)   Requires both a water supply connection and a discharge to the
drainage system of the premises.
      PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the structures on it.
      PROPERTY OWNER. A person having a legal or equitable interest in the
premises, including the guardian of the estate of the person, or the executor
or administrator of the estate of the person if ordered to take possession of
the premises by a court.
      RUBBISH. Paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather,
tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass,
crockery, dust and other similar materials as well as the residue from the
burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials.
      STRUCTURE. A residential structure used for human habitation.
      TENANT. An occupant other than a property owner.
      VENTILATION.
         (a)   VENTILATION means the process of supplying and removing air by
natural or mechanical means to or from a space.
         (b)   MECHANICAL VENTILATION means ventilation by power-driven
devices.
         (c)   NATURAL VENTILATION means ventilation by opening to outer air
through windows, skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks without power- driven
devices.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-33. APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Minimum Livability Code shall apply to residential structures used
for human habitation except:
      (1)   Owner-occupied single-family housing units; or
      (2)   Housing exempted by the code official.
   (B)   Repairs or alterations to a structure, or changes of use to it, which
may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be
done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Frederick County
Building Code, the Frederick County Plumbing Code, the Frederick County
Electrical Code or any other law or ordinance applicable to housing in
Frederick County.
   (C)   The provisions in this code do not abolish or impair any remedies
available to the county or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or
demolition of any structures which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe, and
unsanitary.
   (D)   Repairs, maintenance, alterations, or installations which are required
for compliance with this code shall be executed and installed in accordance
with industry standards so as to secure the results intended by this code.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross references:
   Building Code, see
Chapter 1-6, Art. II;
   Electrical Code, see
Chapter 1-7, Art. III;
    Plumbing Code, see
Chapter 1-14, Art. IV
§ 1-6-34. CODE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Director
of the Frederick County Department of Housing and Community Development or her
designee to enforce the provisions of this code.
   (B)   Waiver. The Director of the Frederick County Department of Housing and
Community Development may waive applicability of this code, in whole or part,
to a unit of rental housing on application of the owner if:
      (1)   Adequate notice is afforded a tenant of the unit; that is, a copy
of the said application is either hand-delivered or mailed first class to the
tenant with a request for comment;
      (2)   The tenant is afforded an opportunity to comment on the application
either in writing or in person; and
      (3)   The waiver would not threaten the health or safety of a tenant.
   (C)   Displacement. A person may not be displaced by enforcement of the
Minimum Livability Code unless alternate housing of comparable affordability is
available within a reasonable distance of the vacated premises.
   (D)   Enforcement and waiver applications are not intended to supersede any
state laws pursuant to the Maryland Code Annotated as follows:
      (1)   State fire laws, Md. Code Ann., Public Safety Article, Title 6;
      (2)   State elevator laws, Md. Code Ann., Public Safety Article, Title
12, Subtitle 8; and
      (3)   State boiler laws, Md. Code Ann., Public Safety Article, Title 12,
Subtitle 9.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-35. DUTIES AND POWERS OF CODE OFFICIAL.
   (A)   General. The Director of the Frederick County Department of Housing
and Community Development or her designee is hereby designated as the code
official. The code official shall enforce the provisions of this code except as
may otherwise be specifically provided by these sections.
   (B)   Notices and orders. The code official shall issue all notices and
orders necessary to ensure compliance with this code.
   (C)   Inspections. The code official is authorized to enter a structure or
premise at any reasonable time upon providing reasonable notice to the owner or
tenant for the purpose of making inspections and performing duties under this
code.
   (D)   Alterations and repairs.
      (1)   The code official has the authority to require and approve any
alterations or repairs necessary to bring a structure or premises into
compliance with this code. The determination of what may be necessary to bring
the premises into compliance shall take into consideration the use of
alternatives and equivalent approaches as provided for in this code.
      (2)   The code official shall have the authority to approve changes in
alterations or repairs in the field when conditions are encountered which make
the originally approved work impractical, if the changes in approved work can
be readily determined to be in compliance with this code and are requested by
the owner or his agent before the changes.
      (3)   The changes shall be specifically documented by the owner or by his
agent, describing the change in work and the reasons and justification for the
change, and shall be filed with the permit for the project.
   (E)   Right of entry. If a property owner, tenant, or operator of a
structure refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts, or obstructs
entry and free access to any part of the structure or premises where inspection
authorized by this code is sought, the code official may seek, in a court of
competent jurisdiction, an order that the property owner, tenant, or operator
cease and desist from the interference.
   (F)   Access by owner. A tenant of a structure or premises shall give the
owner or agent or employee access to any part of the structure or its premises
at reasonable times upon being given reasonable notice for the purpose of
making the inspection, maintenance, repairs, or alterations as are necessary to
comply with the provisions of this code.
   (G)   Credentials. The code official shall disclose his credentials for the
purpose of inspecting a structure or premises.
   (H)   Coordination of enforcement.
      (1)   The inspection of structures and premises, the issuance of notices
and orders, and enforcement of them shall be the responsibility of the code
official.
      (2)   Whenever a code official initiating an inspection of a premises
under this code becomes aware that an inspection of the same premises is to be
made by any other governmental official or agency, the code official shall make
a reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of the inspections so as to
minimize the number of visits by inspectors.
      (3)   The code official shall confer with the other governmental official
or agency for the purpose of eliminating conflicting orders before any are
issued.
      (4)   The code official may not, however, cause the delay of the issuance
of any emergency orders by any governmental official or agency which the
governmental official or agency determines must be issued.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-36. CONDEMNATION.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   When a structure or part of it is found by the code official to be
unsafe or unfit for human occupancy or use, the code official may condemn the
structure or part of it and may order the structure or part of it to be
placarded and vacated pursuant to the provisions of this code.
      (2)   The structure or part of it may not be reoccupied without approval
of the code official. Unsafe equipment may be condemned, placarded, and placed
out of service pursuant to the provisions of this code.
   (B)   Unsafe structure. An unsafe structure is one in which all or part of
it is found by the code official to be dangerous to life, health, property, or
the safety of its tenants by not providing minimum protection from fire or
because it is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of such
faulty construction or unstable foundation that is likely to partially or
completely collapse.
   (C)   Unsafe equipment.
      (1)   Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, cooking
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable
liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure
which is in such disrepair or condition that it is found by the code official
to be a hazard to life, health, property, or safety of the tenants of the
premises or structure.
      (2)   Unsafe equipment may contribute to the finding that the structure
is unsafe or unfit for human occupancy or use.
   (D)   Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human
occupancy or use whenever the code official finds that it is unsanitary, vermin
or rodent infested, contains filth or contamination, or lacks ventilation,
illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment
required by the code.
   (E)   Closing of vacant structures. Upon failure of an owner to close or
vacate a premises within the time specified in an order, the code official may
cause the premises to be closed through any available public agency or by
contract or arrangement with private persons and the cost shall be charged
against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien
upon the real estate. If the owner fails to repay the county for expenses
incurred pursuant to this procedure within 30 days after written demand has
been mailed to his last known address, the code official shall notify the
collector of taxes for Frederick County and a tax lien in favor of the county
for the amount of the expenses incurred pursuant to this procedure shall attach
to the property. The property may be sold at tax sale to satisfy a lien
authorized by this section.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-37. NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Whenever the code official determines that there has been a
violation of this code or has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation
has occurred, or whenever the code official has determined to condemn any
structure, or part of it, or equipment under the provisions of §
1-6-36, notice shall be given to the owner and operator and to the tenant in
the manner prescribed in this code.
      (2)   If the code official has condemned the structure, or part of it, or
equipment, the code official shall serve prior notice to the property owner and
operator and to the tenants of the intent to:
         (a)   Order the structure or part of it placarded or vacated; or
         (b)   Order the equipment placed out of service.
   (B)   Service of notice. Notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon a
property owner or operator or tenant by one of the following methods:
      (1)   By delivering to the person to be served or his agent a copy of the
notice and all other necessary papers; or
      (2)   By mailing to the person to be served at his last known address or
to his agent by first class mail a copy of the notice and all other necessary
papers and by posting a copy of it in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by the notice.
   (C)   Notice to vacate. When a condemnation order is served on a tenant, the
tenant shall be given a reasonable time to vacate the structure in accordance
with the state or local law.
   (D)   Transfer of ownership. A property owner who has received a compliance
order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served may not sell,
transfer, mortgage, lease, or otherwise dispose of the premises until:
      (1)   The provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have
been complied with; or
      (2)   The property owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee a true copy of the compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the code official and a signed and notarized statement from the
grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, in which he acknowledges the receipt
of the compliance order or notice of violation and states that he fully accepts
and assumes the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or
repairs required by the compliance order or notice of violation.
   (E)   Removal of placard. A property owner may not deface or remove a
condemnation placard without the approval of the code official.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-38. VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Penalty. Any person who willfully violates any provision of this code
is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction for each violation is subject to a
fine not exceeding $500 for each day that the violation exists or imprisonment
not exceeding 3 months, or both.
   (B)   Other penalties. A penalty ordered under this code is in addition to
and is not a substitute for any other penalty authorized under a federal,
state, or local law.
   (C)   Injunctive relief. The county has the authority to seek injunctive
relief to gain compliance with the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-39. RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Petition: A person aggrieved by a decision of the code official which has
been made in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this code, or
of a regulation adopted pursuant to this code, may request and shall be granted
a hearing by the Director of the Division of Citizens Services or his designee.
Any person aggrieved by his decision may request and may be granted a hearing
by the County Executive or the County Executive's designee.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-40. ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall establish the minimum
standards for maintenance of premises and structures under this code.
   (B)   Premises conditions.
      (1)   Sanitation. The premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish and garbage.
      (2)   Insect and rodent control. The premises shall be free from
infestation of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests of a public health
significance.
   (C)   Exterior structure.
      (1)   General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair and shall be structurally sound and maintained in a sanitary condition
so as not to pose a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants.
      (2)   Structural members. Supporting structural members of a structure
shall be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration, and maintained capable
of safely bearing the dead and live loads imposed upon them.
      (3)   Exterior surfaces. Each foundation, exterior wall, roof, and all
other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good repair and shall be kept in
such condition as to exclude rodents and other pests of public health
significance.
      (4)   Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be structurally sound and
shall be maintained free from open cracks and breaks.
      (5)   Exterior walls.
         (a)   Each exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or
rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or
dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied areas of the
structure.
         (b)   All exterior surface materials, including wood, composition, or
metal siding, shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be properly surface-
coated when required to prevent deterioration.
      (6)   Roofs and drainage. The roof shall be structurally sound and may
not have defects which might admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent rainwater from causing dampness or deterioration in the walls or
interior portion of the structure.
      (7)   Decorative features. All cornices, entablatures, belt courses,
corbels, terra-cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall
be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
      (8)   Signs, marquees, and awnings. All canopies, marquees, signs, metal
awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, and similar
overhang extensions shall be maintained in good repair, be properly anchored
and kept in a safe and sound condition. They shall be protected from the
elements and against decay and rust by the periodic application of a weather-
coating material such as paint or other protective treatment.
      (9)   Chimneys.
         (a)   All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar
appurtenances shall be maintained structurally sound, safe and in good repair.
         (b)   All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from
the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-
coating materials such as paint or similar surface treatment.
      (10)   Stairs and porches. Each exterior stair, porch, fire escape,
balcony, and all appurtenances attached to them shall be safe to use and
capable of supporting the anticipated loads and shall be maintained in a safe
and sound condition and good repair.
      (11)   Windows, doors and frames. Each window, door, and frame shall be
maintained so as to exclude rain and rodents as completely as possible, and to
substantially exclude wind from entering the structure.
      (12)   Weathertight. Each window and exterior door shall be fitted
reasonably in its frame and be weathertight. Each window shall be free of
cracks and holes.
      (13)   Openable windows. Each window used for ventilation pursuant to §
1-6-41(C) or emergency escape pursuant to §
1-6-44(B)(6) shall be capable of being easily opened from the inside and shall
be held in position by window hardware.
      (14)   Insect screens.
         (a)   General. During the period from April 1 to December 1, every
door and window or other outside opening used for ventilation purposes shall be
supplied with tight-fitting insect screens.
         (b)   Exception. Upon the prior approval of the code official, screens
may not be required for exterior doors or other types of openings which make
screening impractical, such as openings equipped with air-conditioning units or
openings above the fourth floor. The code official may require alternatives to
screens.
      (15)   Door hardware. Each exterior door and its hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Door locks on all interior and exterior doors
entering housing units shall be in good repair and capable of tightly securing
the door.
   (D)   Interior of structure.
      (1)   General. The interior of a structure and its equipment and
facilities shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, and in
sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the health, safety, or welfare
of the occupants.
      (2)   Structural members. The supporting structural members of a
structure shall be maintained structurally sound, free of deterioration, and
maintained capable of safely carrying the imposed loads.
      (3)   Interior surfaces. Floors, walls (including windows and doors),
ceilings and other interior surfaces shall be maintained in good repair and in
a clean, safe and sanitary condition.
      (4)   Bathroom and kitchen floors. Each toilet, bathroom, and kitchen
floor surface shall be maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water
to permit the floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (5)   Sanitation.
         (a)   The interior of a structure shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
         (b)   Rubbish or garbage shall be properly kept inside temporary
storage facilities.
         (c)   Garbage or rubbish may not be allowed to accumulate or be stored
in public halls or stairways.
      (6)   Insect and rodent harborage.
         (a)   A structure shall be kept free from infestation, and where
infestation is found, the area shall be promptly exterminated by processes
which are not injurious to human health.
         (b)   Continuing or repeated incidents of infestation, as determined
by the code official, shall require the installation of rodent- and vermin-
proof walls. The rodent- and vermin-proof walls shall be installed in
accordance with the applicable local building code.
      (7)   Exit doors. Each door available as an exit shall be capable of
being opened easily from the inside.
      (8)   Exit facilities.
         (a)   All interior stairs and railings and other exit facilities of a
structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
         (b)   Each interior stair used for exit shall be maintained so as to
be safe to use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-41. LIGHT AND VENTILATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum
standards for basic equipment and facilities used for light and ventilation of
a structure under this code.
      (2)   Alternative methods and devices. In place of the means for natural
light and ventilation prescribed in this regulation, alternative arrangement of
windows, louvers, or other devices or methods that will provide the equivalent
minimum performance requirements shall be permitted in order to comply with the
Frederick County Building Code.
   (B)   Light.
      (1)   General. All areas in a structure shall be provided sufficient
light so as not to endanger health and safety. All areas in a structure shall
be provided with natural light or equipment to accommodate artificial light of
sufficient intensity and distributed so as to permit the maintenance of
sanitary conditions and the safe use of the area and the appliances, equipment
and fixtures.
      (2)   Common halls and stairways. Each common hall and stairway in a
structure, other than one- and two-family structures, shall be adequately
lighted at all times with an illumination equivalent to the footcandles
provided by at least a 60 watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200
square feet of floor area, provided that the spacing between lights may not be
greater than 30 feet. Every exterior stairway shall be illuminated.
   (C)   Ventilation.
      (1)   General. All areas in a structure shall be provided sufficient
ventilation so as not to endanger health and safety.
      (2)   Mechanical ventilation.
         (a)   When mechanical ventilation is provided instead of natural
ventilation, the mechanical ventilating system shall be maintained in operation
during the occupancy of the structure or portion of it.
         (b)   When part of the air provided by a mechanical ventilation system
is recirculated, the portion or volume of air recirculated may not be
recirculated to a different habitable area.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-42. PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum
standards for plumbing facilities and fixtures under this code.
   (B)   Required plumbing facilities. Each housing unit shall include its own
plumbing facilities which shall be maintained in proper operating condition,
can be used in privacy, and are adequate for personal cleanliness and the
disposal of human waste. The following minimum plumbing facilities shall be
supplied and maintained in a sanitary and safe working condition.
      (1)   Water closet and lavatory.
         (a)   Each housing unit shall contain within its walls a room separate
from other habitable areas, which provides a water closet supplied with cold
running water and which affords privacy.
         (b)   A lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet
or located in another room in close proximity to the door leading directly into
the room in which the water closet is located.
         (c)   The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.
      (2)   Bathtub or shower. Each housing unit shall contain a room which is
equipped with a bathtub or shower supplied with hot and cold running water and
which affords privacy.
      (3)   Kitchen sink. Each housing unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart
from the lavatory required under §
1-6-42(B)(1). The sink shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.
   (C)   Alternative plumbing. Alternative plumbing facilities and fixtures for
use in housing units may be allowed as approved on a case-by-case basis by the
code official.
   (D)   Plumbing fixtures.
      (1)   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe and
usable condition. All plumbing fixtures shall be of nonabsorbent material and
shall have received all necessary and legally required approvals.
      (2)   Conditions.
         (a)   Water supply lines, plumbing fixtures, vents, and drains shall
be properly installed, connected, and maintained in working order and shall be
kept free from obstruction, leaks, and defects and shall be capable of
performing the function for which they are designed.
         (b)   All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with
the provisions of the Frederick County Building Code or the Frederick County
Plumbing Code.
      (3)   Maintenance. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition so as not to breed insects, rodents, or produce
dangerous or offensive gases or odors.
      (4)   Access for cleaning. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed to permit
easy access for cleaning both the fixture and area around it.
   (E)   Water system.
      (1)   General. Each sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet, or other plumbing facility shall be properly connected to either
a public water system or to a private water system which has received all
necessary and legally required approvals.
      (2)   Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination. All water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above
the overflow rim of the fixture.
      (3)   Water supply. The water supply system shall have separate meters
for each unit where the tenant is required to pay for water usage above and
beyond their rent and shall be installed and maintained to provide at all times
a supply of water to plumbing facilities, fixtures, devices, and appurtenances
in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable them to function
satisfactorily.
      (4)   Water heating facilities.
         (a)   Water heating facilities shall be installed in a manner which
has received all necessary and legally required approvals, properly maintained,
and properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required to be
supplied with hot water.
         (b)   Water heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to
such a temperature so as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at
every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower, and laundry facility or
other similar facilities, at a temperature of not less than 110°F.
      (5)   Alternative water systems. Alternative water systems may be allowed
as approved on a case- by-case (basis).
   (F)   Sewage system.
      (1)   General. Each sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other plumbing facility shall be properly connected to either a
public sewer system or private sewage disposal system which has received all
necessary and legally required approvals.
      (2)   Maintenance.
         (a)   Each plumbing stack, waste and sewer line shall be installed and
maintained as to function properly and shall be kept free from obstructions,
leaks, and defects to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards.
         (b)   All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with
the provisions of the Frederick County Building Code or the Frederick County
Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 93-18-082, 9-7-1993; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-6-43. MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS. 
   (A)   General. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum
standards for mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment under this
code.
   (B)   Heating facilities.
      (1)   Residential structures.
         (a)   Each housing unit shall be supplied with sufficient heat or
heating equipment capable of supplying sufficient heat during the period from
October 1 to May 15 to maintain a room temperature of not less than 65°F in all
habitable areas during the hours between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day
and maintain a temperature of not less than 60°F during other hours.
         (b)   The temperature shall be measured at a point 3 feet above the
floor and 3 feet from exterior walls.
         (c)   Exception. When the exterior temperature falls below 0°F and the
heating system is operating at its full capacity, a minimum room temperature of
60°F shall be maintained at all times.
      (2)   Cooking and heating equipment.
         (a)   All cooking and heating equipment, components, and accessories
in every heating, cooking, and water heating device shall be maintained free
from leaks and water flow obstructions, and kept functioning properly so as to
be free from fire, health, and safety hazards.
         (b)   A refrigerator supplied by the owner shall be capable of storing
food at temperatures between 32° and 45°F under ordinary maximum summer
conditions. Any replacement by the owner shall be approximately the same
capacity, or larger, than the one removed.
         (c)   All installations and repairs shall be made in accordance with
the provisions of the Frederick County Building Code, or other applicable laws
or ordinances thereto.
         (d)   Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited, except
for residential type food trays or salvers which are heated by a candle or
alcohol lamp and which have received all necessary and legally required
approvals.
      (3)   Installation. All mechanical equipment used for heating and cooking
shall be properly installed and safely maintained in good working condition and
shall be capable of performing the function for which it was designed and
intended.
      (4)   Fuel-burning equipment. All fuel- burning equipment shall be
connected to a chimney, flue, or vent in accordance with applicable local or
state codes or according to manufacturer’s instructions in cases where no local
or state codes apply.
      (5)   Clearances. All necessary and legally required clearances to
combustible materials shall be maintained.
      (6)   Safety control. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment
shall be maintained in effective operation in accordance with applicable local
or state codes, or according to manufacturer’s instructions in cases where no
local or state codes apply.
      (7)   Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel
and for ventilation of the space shall be provided to the fuel-burning
equipment.
      (8)   Unauthorized devices. Devices purporting to reduce gas consumption
by attachment to a gas appliance, the gas supply line, or the vent outlet or
vent piping may not be used unless labeled for that use and the installation
has specifically received all necessary and legally required approvals.
      (9)   Fireplaces. Fireplaces and other construction and devices intended
for use similar to a fireplace shall be stable and structurally safe and
connected to chimneys which have received all necessary and legally required
approvals.
      (10)   Climate control. When facilities for interior climate control
(heating, cooling, and humidity) are integral functions of housing units, these
facilities shall be maintained and operated in accordance with the designed
capacity.
   (C)   Electrical facilities.
      (1)   Facilities required. Provided that there is usable electric service
available from a power line not more than 300 feet away, a structure shall be
adequately and safely provided with an electrical system in compliance with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   Separate service. Each housing unit shall have a separate electric
meter for each unit where the tenant is required to pay for electric usage
above and beyond their rent.
      (3)   Receptacles. Each habitable area in a housing unit shall contain at
least 1 receptacle outlet. Each laundry area and bathroom shall contain at
least 1 grounded type receptacle. Each kitchen shall contain at least 2
receptacles.
      (4)   Lighting fixtures. Each public hall, interior stairway, water
closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room and furnace room shall contain at
least 1 electric lighting fixture.
      (5)   Service. When the electrical system requires modification to
correct a violation of this section, the service shall be corrected to a
minimum of 60-ampere, 3 wire service.
      (6)   Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring, and appliances
shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all
applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of a type which has received
all necessary and legally required approvals.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 93-18-082, 9-7-1993; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-6-44. FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum
standards for fire safety facilities and equipment under this code. All
structures shall be constructed and maintained to prevent and avoid fire
hazards and in a manner conducive to fire safety.
   (B)   Means of egress.
      (1)   General. A safe, continuous, and unobstructed means of egress shall
be provided from the interior of a structure to the exterior at a street, yard,
court, or passageway leading to a public open area at grade.
      (2)   Direct exit. Each housing unit shall have access directly to the
outside or to a common area that leads directly to the outside.
      (3)   Doors. All doors in the required means of egress shall be easily
opened from the inner side.
      (4)   Fire escapes. All fire escapes shall be maintained in working
condition and structurally sound.
      (5)   Exit signs. All exit signs shall be illuminated and visible.
      (6)   Emergency escape. Each sleeping room located in a basement shall
have at least 1 openable window or exterior door for emergency egress or rescue
which has received all necessary and legally required approvals or shall have
access to 2 separate exits which have received all necessary and legally
required approvals.
   (C)   Accumulation and storage.
      (1)   General. Garbage or rubbish may not be allowed to accumulate in
stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire escapes, or other means of egress.
      (2)   Flammable matter. Highly flammable or explosive matter, such as
paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or combustible rubbish such as waste
paper, boxes and rags, may not be accumulated or stored on the premises except
in reasonable quantities consistent with normal usage.
      (3)   Residential unit. A housing unit may not be located within a
structure containing an establishment handling, dispensing, or storing
flammable liquids with a flash point of 100°F or lower, except as provided for
in the applicable local building code.
   (D)   Fire resistance ratings. Floors, walls, ceilings, and other elements
and components which are required by the applicable fire code to comply with a
fire resistance rating shall be maintained so that the respective fire
resistance rating of the enclosure, separation, or construction is preserved.
   (E)   Fire protection systems.
      (1)   General. All fire protection systems and equipment shall be
maintained in proper operating condition at all times.
      (2)   Smoke detectors.
         (a)   All housing units shall be provided with a minimum of 1 single
station smoke detector in the vicinity of each sleeping area.
         (b)   The smoke detector shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the state fire laws, Md. Code Ann., Public Safety Article,
Title 9, Subtitle 1, Smoke Detection Systems, or its successor statute.
         (c)   When actuated, the smoke detector shall provide an alarm
suitable to warn the occupants within the unit.
      (3)   Fire suppression system. Fire suppression systems in housing units
so equipped shall be maintained in good condition, free from mechanical defect.
Sprinkler heads shall be kept clean and free of corrosion and paint and may not
be bent or damaged.
      (4)   Fire extinguishers. All portable fire extinguishers in housing
units so equipped shall be visible and accessible and maintained in an
efficient and safe operating condition.
   (F)   Fire doors.
      (1)   All necessary and legally required fire resistance rated doors or
smoke barriers shall be maintained in good working order, including all
hardware necessary for their proper operation.
      (2)   The use of doorstops, wedges and other hold-open devices which have
not received all necessary and legal approvals or which have been denied
approval is prohibited.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-45. RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONS.
   (A)   Scope. An owner shall be responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this code and may be cited for violations of it, except as
provided in this section. A person may not rent or lease to another person for
occupancy or use any housing unit unless the structure and premises comply with
the provisions of this code.
   (B)   General. An owner may not be cited for a violation of this code that
is caused by the negligent, wrongful or malicious acts or omissions of a
tenant, provided the owner’s acts or omissions have not contributed in any way
to cause the violation.
   (C)   Sanitary condition.
      (1)   Cleanliness.
         (a)   The tenant shall be responsible for keeping that part of the
structure or premises which the tenant occupies, controls, or uses in a clean
and sanitary condition.
         (b)   Each owner of a structure containing 2 or more housing units
shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the common areas of the
structure and premises.
      (2)   Disposal and storage of rubbish and garbage. The tenant shall be
responsible for the storage and disposal of rubbish and garbage in a clean and
sanitary manner as may be required by applicable laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Supplied fixtures and equipment.
         (a)   The tenant shall be responsible for keeping owner-supplied
equipment and fixtures clean and sanitary and for the exercise of reasonable
care in their proper use and operation.
         (b)   The owner shall be responsible for maintaining the equipment and
fixtures in good and proper operating condition.
      (4)   Furnished by tenant. The tenant shall be responsible for the
maintenance of equipment and fixtures furnished by the tenant. The equipment
and fixtures shall be properly installed and shall be maintained in good
working condition, kept clean and sanitary, and free of defects, leaks, or
obstructions.
   (D)   Extermination.
      (1)   All structures. If necessary, the owner shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure and on the premises before renting or
leasing the structure.
      (2)   Single occupancy. The tenant of a structure containing a single
housing unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents
or other pests in the structure or the premises.
      (3)   Multiple occupancy. Each owner of a structure containing 2 or more
housing units shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects,
rodents, or other pests in the structure or on the premises except where
infestation within a housing unit is caused by a failure of the tenant to take
reasonable action to prevent the infestation within the housing unit.
   (E)   Fire safety. Responsibility for installing and maintaining in good
working order any smoke detector installed pursuant to this code shall be in
accordance with the state fire laws, Md. Code Ann., Public Safety Article,
Smoke Detection Systems, or its successor.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-46. SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of these sections are severable. A judgment by any court of
competent jurisdiction finding or declaring that any provisions of these
sections or the application of any provision to any person or circumstance is
invalid does not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of the
sections or any other application of these sections and the remaining
applications shall have full force and effect as if no judgment has been
entered.
(Ord. 88-34-511, 8-23-1988; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-6-47 – 1-6-49. RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: WELLHEAD PROTECTION CODE (§§ 1-6-50 — 1-6-60)
Section
   
1-6-50   Storage tanks
§ 1-6-50. STORAGE TANKS.
   (A)   As used in this article, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM (WELL). A source of water and a distribution
system, including treatment and storage facilities, whether publicly or
privately owned, serving two or more individual lots.
      HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance, including oil or its by-products,
that:
         (a)   Conveys toxic, lethal, or other injurious effects or which
causes sublethal harmful alterations to plant, animal, or aquatic life;
         (b)   May be injurious to human beings;
         (c)   Persists in the environment; and
         (d)   Any matter identified as a "hazardous waste" by the
Environmental Protection Agency or a "controlled hazardous substance" by the
Maryland Department of the Environment. For the purposes of this section,
excluding propane and natural gas.
      STORAGE TANK. A storage tank above or below ground with a capacity of 270
gallons or more, connected piping, ancillary equipment and containment system,
if any, other than a private 1-unit residence which stores oil within the
residence for personal use.
      WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA. The geographic boundaries of municipal and
community wellhead protection areas delineated by the sourcewater assessments
performed by the Maryland Department of the Environment, as amended.
   (B)   A permit shall be obtained from the Frederick County Office of Permits
and Inspections for the placement or installation of any hazardous substance
storage tank and a new permit obtained for any change in the substance stored
in the storage tank.
   (C)   (1)   A hazardous substance storage tank shall not be located within
500 feet of a community water supply system well.
      (2)   A hazardous substance storage tank to be located within a wellhead
protection area and more than 500 feet from a community water supply system
well, shall be placed above ground and be surrounded by a one hundred percent
(100%) catchment basin or double-walled containment and a spill protection
overfill alarm.
      (3)   A hazardous substance storage tank to be located within an area
outside the boundaries of the wellhead protection area, may be located
underground but shall meet all current state and federal requirements or may be
placed as described in subsection (2) above. In addition, if the tank is to be
placed underground, the county Community Development Division shall be
furnished with a report from a hydrogeologist which states: the nature of the
underlying soil, geologic structure, and aquifer, and the likelihood of
contamination of neighboring water sources in the event the contents of the
storage tank are discharged, and an estimate of the groundwater travel time
which might be expected from the location of the storage tank to the community
supply well; based on the report, or on its own studies or information or
expertise, the county government shall refuse to issue the permit if there is
undue danger to the public health, safety or general welfare in the opinion of
the county government or its consultant.
      (4)   All permits for hazardous substance storage tanks shall be reviewed
by the Community Development Division for compliance with the setback limiting
requirements of the Frederick County Code, including those set forth in this
paragraph.
   (D)   The applicant for a hazardous substance storage tank permit shall
submit its application to the Community Development Division.
   (E)   Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who directs or permits
any violations of any of the provisions of this section or who aids or assists
therein, either on his own behalf or in the interest of his employer or
principal shall, upon conviction thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction,
be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $100 or by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both for each separate offense. Every
day each violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable
as such.
   (F)   This section supplements other laws and regulations. Where this
article or any portion thereof imposes a greater restriction than is imposed by
other laws or regulations, the provisions of this article shall control.
However, nothing in this section relieves the applicant from compliance with
other sections of the Frederick County Code, the Maryland Code or Regulations
enacted thereunder, or federal law or regulation.
(Ord. 90-27-625, 6-22-1990; Ord. 07-16-456, 5-15-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
Cross references:
Other provisions relating to storage tanks, see §§
1-19-5.310,
1-19-7.610,
1-19-8.211,
1-19-8.352 and
1-19-11.100
§§ 1-6-51 – 1-6-60. RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: RIGHT TO FARM (§§ 1-6-61 — 1-6-66)
Section
   
1-6-61   Findings and policy
   
1-6-62   Definitions
   
1-6-63   Limitation of actions
   
1-6-64   Frederick County Agricultural Reconciliation Committee
   
1-6-65   Resolution of disputes and procedure for complaints, investigation and
declaration
   
1-6-66   Right to farm notice and real estate transfer disclosure
Cross reference:
   Agricultural land preservation districts, see §§
1-13-31 et seq.
§ 1-6-61. FINDINGS AND POLICY.
   (A)   In recognition that agriculture is the largest industry in Frederick
County and that it adds many positive benefits to the quality of life, it is
the declared policy of the county to preserve, protect and encourage the
development and improvement of its agricultural land for the production of food
and other agricultural products. When nonagricultural land uses extend into
agricultural areas, agricultural operations can become the subject of lawsuits.
As a result, agricultural operators are sometimes forced to cease or curtail
their operations. Others are discouraged from making investments in
agricultural improvements to the detriment of the economic viability of the
county’s agricultural industry as a whole. It is the purpose of this article to
reduce the loss to the county of its agricultural resources by limiting the
circumstances under which agricultural operations may be deemed to constitute a
nuisance, trespass, or other interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment
of land, including, but not limited to smoke, odors, flies, dust, noise,
chemicals, or vibration; provided that nothing in this article shall in any way
restrict or impede the authority of the state and of the county to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, nor shall it restrict or impede private
covenants.
   (B)   It is in the public interest to promote a more clear understanding
between agricultural operations and nonagricultural neighbors concerning the
normal inconveniences of agricultural operations which follow generally
accepted agricultural practices and do not endanger public health or safety.
   (C)   This article is not intended to and shall not be construed as in any
way modifying or abridging local, state or federal laws, including, but not
limited to, laws relating to health, safety, trespass onto agricultural
property, zoning, licensing requirements, environmental standards (including
those standards which relate to air and water quality and pesticide use), and
the like.
   (D)   An additional purpose of this article is to promote a good neighbor
policy by advising purchasers and users of property adjacent to or near
agricultural operations of the inherent potential problems associated with such
purchase or use. These potential problems include, but are not limited to,
noises, odors, dust, flies, chemicals, smoke, vibration, and hours of operation
that may accompany agricultural operations. It is intended that, through
mandatory disclosures, purchasers and users will better understand the impact
of living near agricultural operations and be prepared to accept attendant
conditions as the natural result of living in or near rural areas. However,
this article shall be effective regardless of whether disclosure was made in
accordance with §
1-6-66 herein.
(Ord. 96-23-175, § 1, 11-12-1996; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-62. DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply to this article.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND. All real property within the boundaries of Frederick
County that is lying in the Agricultural District or carried on the tax rolls
of the State Department of Assessments and Taxation as agricultural or all
other land that has been used as an agricultural operation continuously for 1
year.
   AGRICULTURAL OPERATION. Includes, but is not limited to, all matters set
forth in the definition of “operation” at Md. Cts. and Jud. Proc. Code Ann., §
5-308(a), as amended from time to time; the production of all matters
encompassed within the definition of “farm product” at Md. Agric. Code Ann., §
10-601(c), as amended from time to time; the cultivation and tillage of the
soil; the spreading of manure, lime, fertilizer and the like; composting;
spraying; production, harvesting and processing of agricultural crops; raising
poultry and other fowl; production of eggs; production of milk and dairy
products; production of livestock, including pasturage; production of bees and
their products; production of fruit, vegetables and other horticultural crops;
production of aquatic plants; aquaculture; production of timber; any commercial
agricultural procedure performed as incident to or in conjunction with such
operations, including preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market
or to carriers for transportation to market; usage of land in furtherance of
educational and social goals, (including, but not limited to 4-H clubs and
Future Farmers of America), agro-tourism and alternative agricultural
enterprises; and the like.
   GENERALLY ACCEPTED AGRICULTURAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Those methods used in
connection with agricultural operations which do not violate applicable
federal, state or local laws or public health, safety and welfare and which are
agricultural practices in the agriculture industry. GENERALLY ACCEPTED
AGRICULTURAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES include practices which are recognized as
generally accepted management practices and those methods which are authorized
by various governmental agencies, bureaus, and departments, such as the
University of Maryland Extension, the Frederick County Soil Conservation
District, the Natural Resource Conservation Service, and the like. If no
generally accepted agricultural management practice exists or there is no
method authorized by those agencies mentioned herein which governs a practice,
the practice is presumed to be a generally accepted agricultural management
practice.
(Ord. 96-23-175, § 2, 11-12-1996; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-15,
10-15-2024)
§ 1-6-63. LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
   (A)   A private action may not be sustained with respect to an agricultural
operation conducted on agricultural land on the grounds that the agricultural
operation interferes or has interfered with the use or enjoyment of property,
whether public or private, if the agricultural operation was, at the time the
interference is alleged to arise, conducted substantially in accordance with
generally accepted agricultural management practices.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section, no action alleging that
an agricultural operation has interfered with the reasonable use or enjoyment
of real property or personal well-being shall be maintained if the plaintiff
has not sought and obtained a final judgment of the Agricultural Reconciliation
Committee, as defined in §
1-6-64 herein.
(Ord. 96-23-175, § 3, 11-12-1996; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-64. FREDERICK COUNTY AGRICULTURAL RECONCILIATION COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby established the Frederick County
Agricultural Reconciliation Committee (FCARC), which shall arbitrate and
mediate disputes involving agricultural operations conducted on agricultural
lands and issue opinions on whether such agricultural operations are conducted
in a manner consistent with generally accepted agricultural management
practices.
   (B)   Number and composition. The FCARC shall be composed of 7 persons
appointed by the County Executive, subject to confirmation by the County
Council. The Committee shall be composed of 1 representative from each of the
following:
      (1)   The Frederick County Chapter of the Maryland Municipal League;
      (2)   A civic/homeowner’s association, who is a resident of Frederick
County;
      (3)   The Frederick County Farm Bureau;
      (4)   The Frederick County Pomona Grange;
      (5)   Maryland Cooperative Extension Service for Frederick County;
      (6)   The Frederick County Association of Realtors;
      (7)   A member representing the agribusiness community; and
      (8)   A member of the Agricultural Preservation Advisory Board shall
serve as an alternate member to the FCARC.
   (C)   (1)   The Committee members shall serve a 4- year term; however, the
initial appointments shall be as follows:
         (a)   Two members shall be chosen to serve a 4-year term;
         (b)   Two members shall be chosen to serve a 3-year term;
         (c)   Two members shall be chosen to serve a 2-year term;
         (d)   One member shall be chosen to serve a 1-year term;
         (e)   The alternate shall be chosen to serve a 4-year term.
      (2)   After these initial appointments, all terms shall be for a full 4-
year term.
   (D)   Meetings; compensation. The Committee shall meet at least 1 time per
year and shall serve as volunteers, with no monetary compensation.
(Ord. 96-23-175, § 4, 11-12-1996; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-65. RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES AND PROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINTS, INVESTIGATION
AND DECLARATION.
   (A)   Nuisances which affect public health.
      (1)   Complaints. A person may complain to the Frederick County Health
Department to declare that a nuisance which affects public health exists.
      (2)   Investigations. The health officer may investigate all complaints
of nuisance received against an agricultural operation. When a previous
complaint involving the same condition resulted in a determination by the
health officer that a nuisance condition did not exist, the health officer may
investigate the complaint but the health officer may also determine not to
investigate such a complaint. The Frederick County Health Department may
initiate any investigation without citizen complaint.
      (3)   Declaration of nuisance. If the health officer determines that a
nuisance exists, the Health Department may declare the existence of a nuisance.
In determining whether a nuisance condition exists in connection with an
agricultural operation, the health officer shall apply the criteria provided in
this article. Further, the health officer may consider the professional opinion
of the Frederick County Cooperative Extension Service of the University of
Maryland, or other qualified experts in the relevant field in determining
whether the agricultural operation being investigated is conducted in
accordance with generally accepted agricultural management practices.
   (B)   Resolution of disputes regarding agricultural operations.
      (1)   Should any controversy arise regarding an interference with the use
or enjoyment of property from agricultural operations conducted on agricultural
land, the parties to that controversy shall submit the controversy to the
Agricultural Reconciliation Committee, in writing, through the Frederick County
Planning Department.
      (2)   The FCARC will conduct its proceedings in an informal manner and
the rules of evidence shall not apply. The FCARC has the power, but is not
required hereunder, to hold hearings and to compel testimony under oath and the
production of documents. In each case before it, the FCARC shall issue orders
settling or otherwise resolving controversies arising out of agricultural
operations, including, but not limited to, the invasion of property and
personal rights by agricultural operations conducted on agricultural land.
      (3)   Four FCARC members shall constitute a quorum for purposes of
holding a hearing.
      (4)   If a hearing ends in a tie vote, no action shall be taken on the
complaint that formed the basis of the hearing.
      (5)   Orders of the FCARC shall be binding on the parties as a matter of
law, but their enforcement shall be suspended by operation of law if, within 30
days of the date of the Committee’s judgment, a party appeals such order to the
Circuit Court for Frederick County. Appeals from orders of the Committee shall
be by a trial de novo.
      (6)   If the FCARC or a court finds that the conduct of a party in
bringing or maintaining an action in connection with an agricultural operation
conducted on agricultural land was in bad faith or without substantial
justification, the FCARC or court may require that party to pay to the owner of
the agricultural operation (or any other party opponent) the costs of the
proceeding and the reasonable expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees,
incurred by that party in defending against the action.
(Ord. 96-23-175, § 5, 11-12-1996; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6-66. RIGHT TO FARM NOTICE AND REAL ESTATE TRANSFER DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   Real estate transfer disclosure statement. Upon any transfer of real
property by any means, the transferor shall provide the purchaser or lessee a
statement specifically advising the purchaser or lessee of the existence of
this right to farm ordinance, which shall be in substantially the form set
forth in Appendix A.
   (B)   Right to farm notice. In addition, because of the county’s desire to
maintain a good neighbor policy and the county’s desire to provide this
information to county real property owners, the Frederick County Treasurer
shall mail a copy of the “Right to Farm Notice” to all owners of real property
in Frederick County with the annual tax bill, beginning in fiscal year 1997-98,
in substantially the form set forth in Appendix B.
   (C)   Penalty for violation. Any person who violates any provision of this
section is guilty of an infraction punishable by a civil penalty not exceeding
$100. Failure to comply with any provision of the right to farm notice and real
estate transfer disclosure section shall not prevent the recording of any
document, or the title to real property or any mortgage or deed of trust made
in good faith or for value, and it shall not affect the application of this
article.
(Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Editor’s note:
   The real estate transfer disclosure statement and the right to farm notice
referred to above are contained in Appendices A and B of Ord. 96-23-175 and
have not been included herein, but can be found on file with the county.
ARTICLE VI: HUMAN TRAFFICKING (§§ 1-6-67 — 1-6-68)
Section
   
1-6-67   Landlord and tenant - human trafficking/prostitution
   
1-6-68   Lodging establishment - employee training
§ 1-6-67. LANDLORD AND TENANT - HUMAN TRAFFICKING/ PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   Use of apartment for prostitution, including human trafficking
prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, tenant, landlord, landlord
agent, management staff and/or property owner to knowingly sublease, assign,
transfer possession, or permit use of a room or apartment for the purposes of
any violation of the prostitution laws, including human trafficking laws of the
State of Maryland or Frederick County, or either.
      (2)   "Knowingly" means a landlord, landlord agent, management staff, or
property owner has been formally notified by law enforcement of facts
establishing the existence of a violation as described in section (1) herein
and takes no action regarding it.
      (3)   Anyone who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
per apartment, per occurrence and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine
of $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six months for each offense.
   (B)   Inquiries, complaints. Any inquiries or complaints regarding
prostitution and/or human trafficking to any Frederick County Government
personnel shall be directed to the Sheriff’s Office of the County.
   (C)   It is a defense to any prosecution under this section that the
landlord, landlord agent, management staff, or property owner provides evidence
that it has taken action to regain possession of the leased premises under the
following statutory provisions:
      (1)   MD. Real Property Code Ann. § 8-402 - Tenant hold overs,
      (2)   § 8-402.1 - Proceedings upon breach of lease, or
      (3)   MD. Real Property Code Ann. § 14-132. Wrongful detainer actions and
procedures.
(Bill No. 18-28, 10-23-2018)
§ 1-6-68. LODGING ESTABLISHMENT - EMPLOYEE TRAINING.
   (A)   Definitions.
      LODGING ESTABLISHMENT. An inn, hotel, motel or any other facility used
for occupancy with ten or more rooms, for the purpose of housing transient
guests, where overnight sleeping accommodations are provided.
   (B)   Lodging establishment registration; training; certification.
      (1)   Any person who owns or operates a lodging establishment within the
county shall be required to provide training to employees on how to identify
human trafficking activities and human trafficking victims.
      (2)   Beginning on May 1, 2019, each new employee of a lodging
establishment within the county shall complete a human trafficking training
program approved by a national hotel brand, a recognized national lodging
association, or other training approved by the Human Relations Department.
Employees hired prior to May 1, 2019 shall complete the human trafficking
training in this subsection by November 1, 2019.
      (3)   Beginning on November 1, 2019, lodging establishments registered
pursuant to this section, shall be required to annually certify to the
designated division of Frederick County Government that all of their employees
have completed the required training. The designated division shall issue
guidelines prescribing the process for annual certification within 120 days
after the effective date of this Bill.
   (C)   The Interagency Internal Audit Authority (IIAA) of Frederick County
shall include this training requirement as part of its audit of hotels and
lodging establishments.
   (D)   Penalties.
      (1)   A failure to provide training to employees on how to identify human
trafficking activities and human trafficking victims under section (B)(1) and
(B)(2) of this section shall be a Class A offense under §
1-1-9 of the Frederick County Code and subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and
shall be prosecuted in accordance with the provision of §
1-1-9.
      (2)   A failure to annually certify that all employees have completed the
required training under section (B)(3) shall be a Class A offense under §
1-1-9 of the Frederick County Code and subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and
shall be prosecuted in accordance with the provision of §
1-1-9.
(Bill No. 18-29, 10-23-2018)
CHAPTER 1-6A: MODERATELY PRICED DWELLING UNITS (§§ 1-6A-1 — 1-6A-13)
Section
   
1-6A-1   Reserved
   
1-6A-2   Reserved
   
1-6A-3   Definitions
   
1-6A-4   Income and eligibility standards
   
1-6A-5   Requirement to build MPDUs; agreements; alternatives
   
1-6A-5.1   Payment in lieu of building MPDU's; agreements
   
1-6A-5.2   Use of government affordable rental housing programs to satisfy the
MPDU requirements
   
1-6A-6   Waiver of requirements
   
1-6A-7   Maximum prices and rents of moderately priced dwelling units
   
1-6A-8   Sale or rental of moderately priced dwelling units
   
1-6A-9   Control of rents and resale prices; foreclosures
   
1-6A-10   Exceptions
   
1-6A-11   Governmental regulations; enforcement
   
1-6A-12   Appeals
   
1-6A-13   Applicability
§ 1-6A-1. RESERVED.
§ 1-6A-2. RESERVED.
§ 1-6A-3. DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, have the following
meanings.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture,
corporation, or any other entity or combination of entities, and any transferee
of all or part of the land at one location, who after this chapter takes
effect:
      (1)   Submits for approval or extension of approval a preliminary plan of
subdivision or site development plan, which plan provides for the development
of a total of 25 or more dwelling units (on public water and sewer) at one
location in one or more subdivisions, parts of subdivisions, resubdivisions,
site development plans, or stages of development, regardless of whether any
part of the land has been transferred to another party; or
      (2)   Submits to the Frederick County Planning Commission or to the
Director of the Department of Planning and Development Review a plan of housing
development for any type of site review or development approval required by
law, which plan includes construction or development of 25 or more dwelling
units (on public water and sewer) at one location.
   AREA MEDIAN INCOME (AMI). The area median income as determined by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the area that includes
Frederick County.
   AT ONE LOCATION. All adjacent land of the applicant if:
      (1)   The property lines are contiguous or nearly contiguous at any
point; or
      (2)   The property lines are separated only by a public or private
street, road, highway or utility right-of-way, or other public or private
right-of-way at any point; or
      (3)   The property lines are separated only by other land of the
applicant which is not subject to this chapter at the time of any permit, site
plan, development or subdivision application by the applicant.
   AVAILABLE FOR BUILDING DEVELOPMENT. All land:
      (1)   Owned by, or under contract to, the applicant;
      (2)   Zoned for any type of residential development to which a density
bonus provision applies;
      (3)   Which is already subdivided or is ready to be subdivided for
construction or development.
   CLOSING COSTS. Statutory charges for transferring title, fees for obtaining
necessary financing, title examination fees, title insurance premiums, house
location survey charges and fees for preparation of loan documents and deed of
conveyance.
   CONSUMER PRICE INDEX. That latest published version of the Consumer Price
Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) of the U.S. Department of Labor for the
Washington Metropolitan area.
   CONTROL PERIOD. The time an MPDU is subject to either resale price controls
and owner occupancy requirements or maximum rental limits, as provided in §
1-6A-9. Except as provided in §
1-6A-5.2, the control period is 40 years for both sale units and rental units,
and begins on the date of initial sale or rental. If a rental MPDU is sold to
an eligible person within the control period, the unit must be treated as a new
sale MPDU and a new control period must begin on the date of the sale.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   DATE OF ORIGINAL SALE. The date of settlement for purchase of a moderately
priced dwelling unit.
   DATE OF ORIGINAL RENTAL. The date the first lease agreement for a moderately
priced dwelling unit takes effect.
   DENSITY BONUS PROVISION. Any increase in density in a zoning classification
that allows residential development above the amount permitted in the base,
standard method or maximum allowable densities per acre under zoning for PUD’s
and other non-Euclidean zones.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Housing and Community Development.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, dumping,
extraction, dredging, grading, paving, storage of materials or equipment, land
excavation, land clearing, land improvement, landfill operation, or any
combination thereof. This term shall also include the subdivision of land as it
applies to existing properties located totally within a designated floodplain.
   DIRECTOR. Except as otherwise indicated, the head of the Department of
Housing and Community Development, or the Director’s designee.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building or part of a building that provides complete
living facilities for 1 family, including at a minimum facilities for cooking,
sanitation and sleeping.
   ELIGIBLE PERSON. A person or household who qualifies to participate in the
MPDU program.
   FREDERICK COUNTY MEDIAN INCOME (FCMI). The median income for Frederick
County only, as determined by the Director based on timely U.S. Census Bureau
data, which may be a percentage of the AMI determined by HUD.
   HOUSING INITIATIVE FUND. A fund established by the county to facilitate
affordable housing.
   MODERATE INCOME. Except as provided in §
1-6A-5.2, those levels of income, established by the Housing Director and
approved by the county, which prohibit or severely limit the financial ability
of persons to buy or rent housing in Frederick County.
   MODERATELY PRICED DWELLING UNIT or MPDU. A dwelling unit which is:
      (1)   Offered for sale or rent to eligible persons through the
Department, and sold or rented under this chapter, or
      (2)   Sold or rented under a federal, state or local government
affordable housing program designed to assist the construction or occupancy of
housing for families of moderate income, and designated by the Director as an
MPDU.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Frederick County Planning Commission.
   PRIORITY MARKETING PERIOD. The period an MPDU must by offered exclusively
for sale or rent to eligible persons, as provided in §
1-6A-8.
(Ord. 02-25-321, 11-21-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 15-06, 7-7-
2015; Bill No. 22-27, 10-18-2022)
§ 1-6A-4. INCOME AND ELIGIBILITY STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Director must establish standards of eligibility for the MPDU
program in regulations adopted by the county and must revise the standards when
changes in market conditions affect the ability of moderate-income households
to buy or rent housing. These standards must establish moderate-income levels
for varying sizes of households which will qualify a person or household to buy
or rent an MPDU. The Director may establish different income eligibility
standards for buyers and renters.
   (B)   In establishing standards of eligibility and moderate-income levels,
the Director must consider:
      (1)   The price established for the sale or rental of MPDUs under this
chapter;
      (2)   The term and interest rate that applies to the financing of MPDUs;
      (3)   The estimated levels of income necessary to carry a mortgage on an
MPDU; and
      (4)   Family size and number of dependents.
   (C)   A person who rents an MPDU and lawfully occupies it when the unit is
offered for sale may buy the unit, regardless of the person’s income at the
time of sale, if the person met all eligibility standards when the person first
rented the unit.
   (D)   To be eligible to buy an MPDU, a person and members of that person’s
household must not have owned any residential property during the previous 3
years. The Director may waive this restriction for good cause.
(Ord. 02-25-321, 11-21-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-27, 10-18-
2022)
§ 1-6A-5. REQUIREMENT TO BUILD MPDU’S; AGREEMENTS; ALTERNATIVES.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
1-6A-5.1 below, any applicant, in order to record a final plat of subdivision
or obtain a building permit, must submit to the Division of Planning and
Permitting, with the application for a permit, a written MPDU agreement
approved by the Director and the County Attorney. Each agreement must require
that:
      (1)   A specific number of MPDUs, not less than 12.5% of the total number
of dwelling units in the development, must be constructed on an approved time
schedule;
      (2)   In all developments MPDUs constructed must be equivalent in bedroom
count to all market rate units constructed. For example, if the market rate
units consist of 30% 3-bedroom units, 20% one-bedroom units, and 50% 2-bedroom
units, then the constructed MPDUs must also include the same percentages of
units with the same bedroom counts, to the extent practicable, as determined by
the Director.
   (B)   (1)   A one-to-one density bonus is provided when the development at
one location includes construction of at least 12.5% of the total number of
dwelling units in the development; and
         (a)   Is covered by a plan of subdivision; or
         (b)   Is covered by a plan of development or a site plan.
      (2)   A two-to-one density bonus may be approved by the Planning
Commission for MPDUs constructed in specified growth areas as identified in the
Livable Frederick Master Plan.
   (C)   Density bonuses are permitted as part of the MPDU program in the
following districts: Residential (MXD), R1, R3, R5, R8, R12, R16, PUD, Village
Center (VC), and MX. Density bonuses shall not be allowed if an applicant
elects to pay a "per square foot payment in lieu" as outlined in §
1-6A-5.1.
   (D)   In planned development zones and mixed use zones containing flexible
development standards, the number of MPDUs must not be less than either the
number of density bonus units or 12.5% of the total number of dwelling units,
whichever is greater.
   (E)   (1)   In exceptional cases, instead of building the required number of
MPDUs, an applicant may offer to:
         (a)   Build at least 10% more MPDUs at 1 or more other sites in the
same or an adjoining area in the county;
         (b)   Contribute to the Housing Initiative Fund an amount that will
produce at least 10% more MPDUs; or
         (c)   Do any combination of these alternatives that will result in
building at least 10% more MPDUs than required hereunder.
      (2)   If the Director finds that:
         (a)   In the project or subdivision originally proposed by the
applicant, an indivisible package of resident services and facilities to be
provided to all households would cost the occupants of the MPDUs so much that
it is likely to make the MPDUs effectively unaffordable by eligible households;
and
         (b)   An offer made by an applicant under subsection (E)(1) will
achieve at least 10% more MPDUs or units which moderate- income households can
more easily afford; and
         (c)   These public benefits outweigh the benefit of constructing MPDUs
in each subdivision throughout the county and acceptance of the applicant’s
offer will achieve the objective of providing a broad range of housing
opportunities throughout the county; the Director may accept the offer made by
the applicant instead of requiring the construction of MPDUs by the applicant.
If the applicant can feasibly build at least 10% more MPDUs at another site in
the county, the Director must not approve any other alternative under
subsection (E)(1).
      (3)   The procedures for considering and implementing alternative offers
must be established by regulation. To implement an offer, the applicant must
sign an agreement with the Director not later than the time provided in the
regulation.
   (F)   The MPDU agreements must be signed by the applicant, any other parties
having an interest in the property and all other parties whose signatures are
required by law for the effective and binding execution of contracts conveying
real property. The agreements must be executed in a manner that will enable
them to be recorded in the land records of the county. If the applicant is a
corporation, the agreements must be signed by a duly authorized officer on
behalf of the corporation. Partnerships, associations or corporations must not
evade this chapter through voluntary dissolution. The agreements may be
assigned if the county approves and if the assignees agree to fulfill the
requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   An MPDU agreement must be drafted prior to Planning Commission
approval of preliminary plans and site plans. The preliminary plan and site
plan must document the number, type, location, and staging of construction, or
otherwise document how the requirements of this chapter will be met. The DPP
must not record final subdivision plats and must not issue a building permit in
any subdivision or housing development in which MPDUs are required until the
applicant submits an executed MPDU agreement which applies to the entire
development. The MPDU agreement must include the number, type, location, and
plan for staging construction of all dwelling units and such other information
as the Department requires to determine the applicant’s compliance with this
chapter. The MPDU staging plan must be consistent with any applicable land use
plan, subdivision plan, or site plan. The staging plan included in the MPDU
agreement for all dwelling units must be sequenced so that:
      (1)   MPDUs are built along with other dwelling units;
      (2)   The pace of MPDU production must reasonably coincide with the
construction of market rate units;
      (3)   The constructed MPDUs must be equivalent in bedroom count to all
market rate units constructed or to be constructed; and
      (4)   The last building built must not contain only MPDUs. This
subsection applies to all developments, including any development covered by
multiple preliminary plans of subdivision.
   (I)   If an applicant does not build the MPDUs contained in the staging plan
along with or before other dwelling units, the Director of the Department of
Permits and Inspections must withhold any later building permit to that
applicant until the MPDUs contained in the staging plan are built.
   (J)   Recording of covenants. The applicant must execute and record
covenants assuring that:
      (1)   The restrictions of this chapter run with the land for the entire
period of control; and
      (2)   The covenants will bind the applicant, any assignee, mortgagee, or
buyer, and all other parties that receive title to the property. These
covenants must be senior to all instruments securing permanent financing except
when MPDUs are built under §
1-6A-5.2; and
   (K)   Later deeds. The grantor must state, in any deed or instrument
conveying title to an MPDU, that the conveyed property is an MPDU and is
subject to the restrictions contained in the covenants required under this
chapter during the control period until the restrictions are released.
   (L)   Letter of credit. The applicant must submit a letter of credit at the
time of permit application for 125% of the average value of 1 MPDU unit. Once
all MPDUs are completed the letter of credit will be released. Failure to
complete the MPDUs according to the staging plan will cause the letter of
credit to be forfeited and the funds will be deposited in the Housing
Initiative Fund.
   (M)   Subordinate lien. A lien must be placed on each individual MPDU
property at settlement secured by a second position deferred principal mortgage
in favor of the county. The dollar amount of the lien and mortgage will be 80%
of the difference between the market rate value of the MPDU and the MPDU sale
price (including settlement costs) at the time of initial purchase. (Example:
Market rate value $150,000 minus MPDU price including settlement costs
$100,000=$50,000 x 80% = $40,000).
(Ord. 02-25-321, 11-21-2002; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-20-586, 9-6-
2011; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 11-28-594, 11-22-2011; Ord. 12-08-603,
4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-08, 8-15-2016; Bill No. 17-
10, 6-13-2017; Bill No. 22-27, 10-18-2022)
§ 1-6A-5.1. PAYMENT IN LIEU OF BUILDING MPDU'S; AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   In lieu of the option specified under §
1-6A-5, an applicant may elect to pay a "per dwelling unit payment in lieu"
calculated as described below and included in a written MPDU agreement.
   (B)   Each MPDU agreement entered into pursuant to a payment in lieu
election must include the following:
      (1)   The per square foot payment in lieu for each dwelling unit in the
development, which shall be determined as described in subsection (C) below;
and
      (2)   The agreement shall specify that the per square foot payment in
lieu will be paid at the time of building permit application, based on the
then-current per square foot payment in lien.
   (C)   Determination of per square foot payment in lieu: The per square foot
payment in lieu for each dwelling unit in the development, which shall be
determined as follows:
      (1)   Multiply the "Affordability Gap" determined in subsection (D) below
by 12.5%, which results in the base fee per unit.
      (2)   The base fee per unit is then divided by the average square footage
of new dwelling units sold in the county in the preceding three (3) calendar
years.
      (3)   This results in the per square foot payment in lieu to be applied
to all dwelling unit types in the development. The per square foot payment in
lieu is $2.00 per square foot as of October 18, 2022. See subsection (I) below
- Triennial adjustment.
   (D)   The Affordability Gap is determined based on the following factors:
(1) the Frederick County Median Home Price for attached homes (townhouses,
multifamily) for the preceding calendar year; (2) the purchasing capacity of
the moderate income buyer earning 70% of Frederick County Median Income (FCMI),
based on prevailing FHA mortgage loan financing including down-payment
requirements; for the preceding three (3) calendar years; and (3) maintaining a
monthly housing cost burden at or below 30% of net monthly income for a
household earning 70% of AMI. The Affordability Gap will be adjusted on a
triennial basis. See subsection (I) below.
   (E)   The MPDU agreement must be signed by the applicant, any other parties
having an interest in the property and all other parties whose signatures are
required by law for the effective and binding execution of deeds conveying real
property. The MPDU agreement must be executed in a manner that will enable the
agreement to be recorded in the land records of the county. Partnerships,
associations or corporations shall not evade this chapter through voluntary
dissolution. The MPDU agreement shall run with and bind the land and all
subsequent owners of the land.
   (F)   An MPDU agreement that complies with this section must be approved by
the Director and the County Attorney and recorded in the land records prior to
signature and final approval of the site plan, preliminary plan or Phase II
plan for the proposed development.
   (G)   All MPDU payments in lieu shall be deposited into the County Housing
Initiative Fund.
   (H)   If the applicant chooses the payment in lieu option provided under
this section, the County Department of Permits and Inspections shall not accept
a building permit application for the development unless the applicant also
submits the per dwelling unit payment in lieu required under the MPDU
agreement.
   (I)   Triennial adjustment. On or before April 15, 2026, and on or before
April 15 every 3 years thereafter (2029, 2032, etc.), the per square foot
payment in lieu and the Affordability Gap shall be recalculated as of December
31 of the previous year, in accordance with the factors discussed in
subsections (C) and (D) above. The report may propose an adjustment be made by
the County Council. (Ord. 11-20-586, 9-6-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill
No. 16-08, 8-15-2016; Bill No. 17-10, 6-13-2017; Bill No. 22-27, 10-18-2022)
§ 1-6A-5.2. USE OF GOVERNMENT AFFORDABLE RENTAL HOUSING PROGRAMS TO SATISFY THE
MPDU REQUIREMENTS.
   Under certain circumstances, federal, state, or local government affordable
rental housing programs may be used to fulfill the MPDU requirements. When
these affordable rental housing programs are used to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, the following conditions must be met:
   (A)   Rental rates must be affordable to moderate income households. Maximum
household income for affordable rental units built under this section may not
exceed 60% of the AMI as determined by HUD.
   (B)   The Director must determine that:
      (1)   the controls on the rental rates will contribute to the long term
availability of moderately priced dwelling units in the county; and
      (2)   recorded covenants on the rental units will require a control
period of 40 years.
   (C)   If a rental development is financed, in whole or in part, through the
awarding of tax credits from the Maryland Department of Housing & Community
Development's Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) Program, then compliance
with the requirements of the LIHTC Program, including eligibility, income
limits, rental rates, and rules for operations, will be deemed to satisfy the
eligibility, income and rental rate provisions of this chapter and the county's
eligibility, rental rate and income regulations, except that the control period
for the rental units subject to the LIHTC program shall be extended to 40 years
to ensure long term affordability. In addition, if the rental development is
financed as provided in this subsection (C), an MPDU confirmation sheet, signed
by the applicant and the Director, may be used in place of an MPDU agreement.
   (D)   Subject to the approval of the Director, other federal, state or local
government affordable rental housing programs may be used to satisfy the
eligibility, income and rental rate provisions of this chapter and the county's
eligibility, rental rate and income regulations, provided that the control
period for the rental units subject to the program shall be extended to 40
years to ensure long term affordability.
(Bill No. 05-06, 7-7-15; Bill No. 22-27, 10-18-2022)
§ 1-6A-6. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The county, in order to assist in providing moderately priced housing
has enacted zoning standards in §§
1-19-8.620.1 through
8.620.6 of this Code, establishing density bonus provisions which increase the
allowable residential density above the maximum base density of the zoning
classification if MPDUs are built.
   (B)   Waiver of requirements. Any applicant who presents sufficient evidence
to the Director of the Department of Permits and Inspections in applying for a
building permit, or to the Planning Commission in submitting a preliminary plan
of subdivision for approval or requesting approval of a site or other
development plan, may be granted a waiver from part or all of §
1-6A-5. The waiver must relate only to the number of MPDUs to be built and may
be granted only if the Director of the Department of Planning and Development
Review, after consulting with the Department of Housing and Community
Development, finds that the applicant cannot attain the full density of the
zone, because of any requirements of the zoning ordinance or the administration
of other laws or regulations. When any part of the land that dwelling units
cannot be built on for physical reasons is used to compute permitted density,
the applicant’s inability to use the density bonus provisions is not in itself
grounds for waiving the MPDU requirements. Any waiver must be strictly
construed and limited.
(Ord. 02-25-321, 11-21-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-27, 10-18-
2022)
§ 1-6A-7. MAXIMUM PRICES AND RENTS OF MODERATELY PRICED DWELLING UNITS.
   Moderately priced dwelling units must not be sold or rented at prices or
rents that exceed the maximum prices or rents established under this section.
   (A)   Sales.
      (1)   Sales of MPDUs within each development subject to this section,
must meet the following requirements:
         (a)   One-third of the MPDUs for sale in each development must be sold
to a person whose income does not exceed 70% of the FCMI;
         (b)   One-third of the MPDUs for sale in each development must be sold
to a person whose income does not exceed 80% of the FCMI; and
         (c)   One-third of the MPDUs for sale in each development must be sold
to a person whose income does not exceed 90 % of the FCMI.
      (2)   The applicable sales price for each MPDU shall be determined based
on the 70%, 80% and 90% FCMI thresholds to ensure that, within each threshold
band, the respective buyer’s total monthly mortgage payment does not exceed 30%
of their threshold monthly income.
      (3)   The Director may allow an applicant to pay an increased sale price
for an MPDU when the Director finds, in exceptional cases, that a price
increase is justified to cover the cost of modifying the external design of the
MPDUs when a modification is necessary to reduce excessive marketing impact of
the MPDUs on the market rate units in the subdivision. The Director must
approve the amount of any increase for this purpose, which must not exceed 10%
of the allowable base price of the unit.
   (B)   Rentals. Note that this section does not apply to rental of MPDUs
under §
1-6A-5.2.
      (1)   The rent, excluding utilities when they are paid by the tenant, for
any MPDUs within each development subject to this section, shall be set as
follows:
         (a)   One-third of units must be rented at a rate equivalent to 30
percent of the monthly income of a household whose annual income does not
exceed 60% FCMI;
         (b)   One-third of units must be rented at a rate equivalent to 30
percent of the monthly income of a household whose annual income does not
exceed 70% FCMI; and
         (c)   One-third of units must be rented at a rate equivalent to 30
percent of the monthly income of a household whose annual income does not
exceed 80% FCMI;
      (2)   The Director, in setting the maximum rent for the rental units,
must consider the current cost of building MPDUs, available interest rates and
debt service for permanent financing, current market rates of return or
investments in residential rental properties, the value of the MPDU at the end
of the control period, and any other relevant information. The Director must
consult with the rental industry, employers and professional and citizen groups
to obtain statistical information and current general market and economic
conditions which may assist in setting a current maximum rent. The Director
must consider the extent to which, consistent with county codes and housing
standards, the cost of MPDU rental housing units can be reduced by the
elimination of amenities. The Director must also consider from time to time
changes in the income levels of persons of moderate income and their ability to
rent housing.
(Ord. 02-25-321, 11-21-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-27, 10-18-
2022)
§ 1-6A-8. SALE OR RENTAL OF MODERATELY PRICED DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Sale or rental to general public.
      (1)   Every moderately priced dwelling unit required under this chapter
must be offered to the general public for sale or rental to a good-faith
purchaser or renter to be used for his or her own residence, except units
offered for sale or rent by a designated housing agency or non-profit
corporation, whose purpose is to provide housing for persons of moderate
income.
      (2)   Before offering any moderately priced dwelling units, the applicant
must notify the Department of the proposed offering and the date on which the
applicant will be ready to begin the marketing to eligible persons. The notice
must set forth the number of units offered, the bedroom mix, the floor area for
each type, a description of the amenities offered in each unit and a statement
of the availability of each unit for sale or rent, including information
regarding any mortgage financing available to buyers of the designated unit.
The applicant must also give the Department a vicinity map of the offering, a
copy of the approved development, subdivision or site plan, as appropriate, and
such other information or documents as the Director finds necessary. The
Department must maintain a list of eligible persons of moderate income and, in
accordance with procedures established by the Director, must notify eligible
persons of the offering.
      (3)   After receiving the offering notice, the Department must determine
whether the offering notice is complete. If the Department finds that the
offering notice is complete, it will offer the units to eligible persons on a
lottery basis. The Department must notify the applicant when the 90 day
priority marketing period for the MPDUs may begin.
      (4)   The Director may establish a buyer and renter selection system that
considers household size, county residency, employment in the county, and
length of time since the person was certified for the MPDU program. Each
eligible person must be notified of the availability of any MPDU which would
meet that person’s housing needs, and be given an opportunity to buy or rent an
MPDU during the priority marketing period in the order of that person’s
selection priority ranking.
      (5)   The priority marketing period for new units ends 90 days after the
initial offering date approved by the Department. The priority marketing period
for resold or re-rented units ends 60 days after the Department notifies the
seller of the approved resale price or vacancy of the rental unit. The
Department may extend a priority marketing period when eligible persons are
interested in buying or renting a unit.
      (6)   Every buyer or renter of an MPDU must occupy the unit as his or her
primary residence during the control period. Each buyer and renter must certify
before taking occupancy that he or she will occupy the unit as his or her
primary residence during the control period. The Director may require an owner
who does not occupy the unit as his or her primary residence to offer the unit
for resale to an eligible person under the resale provisions of §
1-6A-9.
      (7)   During the initial control period after the original sale, and for
as long thereafter as the MPDU is owned by the initial MPDU owner, no liens
will be permitted, without the written approval of the Director, on the MPDU
property other than liens for unpaid real estate taxes or assessments for
infrastructure improvements, except for the original purchase money mortgage
and any liens validly recorded for unpaid homeowner association fees. Upon
application to and approval by the Director, subordinate liens may be placed,
if not prohibited by the purchase money mortgagee’s deed of trust, for
improvements to the MPDU property which would enhance the market value of the
property by at least 110% of the subordinate lien requested.
      (8)   An owner of an MPDU, except a housing agency or nonprofit
corporation designated by the Director, must not rent the unit to another party
unless the Director finds sufficient cause to allow temporary rental of the
unit under applicable regulations, which may include maximum rental levels. Any
MPDU owner who is allowed to rent a unit temporarily must agree to amend the
applicable MPDU covenants to extend the control period for a time equal to the
temporary rental period.
      (9)   Any rent obtained for an MPDU that is rented without the Director’s
authorization must be paid into the Housing Initiative Fund by the owner within
90 days after the Director notifies the owner of the rental violation. Any
amount unpaid after 90 days is grounds for a lien against the unit, and the
Director may obtain a judgment and record the lien.
      (10)   An applicant must not sell or lease any unit without first
obtaining a certificate of eligibility from the buyer or lessee. A copy of each
certificate must be furnished to the Department and maintained on file by the
Department. Before the sale by an applicant or by a designated housing agency
or nonprofit corporation to any buyer of any MPDU who does not possess a
certificate of eligibility, the applicant, agency or non-profit corporation
must ask the Department whether the certificates on file show that the proposed
buyer had previously bought another MPDU. A person must not buy a second MPDU
unless no first-time buyer is qualified to buy that unit. The Director may
waive this restriction for good cause.
      (11)   If an MPDU owner dies, at least 1 heir, legatee, or other person
taking title by will or by operation of law must occupy the MPDU during the
control period under this section, or the owner of record must sell the MPDU as
provided in §
1-6A-9.
   (B)   Designated housing development agency or nonprofit corporation.
      (1)   In view of the critical, long-term public need for housing for
families of moderate income, a housing development agency or nonprofit
corporation designated by the Director has the option to buy or lease, for its
own programs or programs administered by it, up to 40% of all MPDUs which are
not sold or rented under any other federal, state, or local program.
         (a)   The County may buy or lease up to 33-1/3% of the MPDUs not sold
or rented under any other federal, state, or local program. Any designated
agency or nonprofit corporation may buy or lease:
            1.   Any MPDUs in the first 33-1/3% that the County has not bought
or leased; and
            2.   The remainder of the 40%.
         (b)   This option may be assigned to persons of moderate income who
are eligible for assistance under any federal, state, or local programs. The
Director must adopt standards and priorities for designating nonprofit
corporations under this subsection. These standards must require the nonprofit
corporation to demonstrate its ability to operate and maintain MPDUs
satisfactorily on a long-term basis.
      (2)   The Department must notify the designated agency or nonprofit
corporation promptly after receiving notice from the applicant under subsection
(A) of the availability of MPDUs. If the designated agency exercises its
option, it must submit to the applicant, within 30 calendar days after the
Department notifies the agency under subsection (B), a notice of intent to
exercise its option for specific MPDUs covered by this option. Any MPDUs not
bought or leased under this subsection must be sold or rented only to eligible
persons under subsection (B) during the priority marketing period for eligible
persons to buy or lease.
      (3)   In exercising this option, any designated agency or nonprofit
corporation must designate the units by reference to number, type, size and
amenities of the units selected if the designation does not result in any 1
type of unit exceeding by more than 40% the total units of that type which are
sold or rented under this section, unless the applicant agrees otherwise. The
notice required under subsection (B)(2) must state which MPDUs are to be
offered for sale and which are to be offered for rent, and the designated
agency or nonprofit corporation may buy only units which are offered for sale
and may lease only units which are offered for rent. The designated agency or
nonprofit corporation must decide whether it will exercise its option within 45
days after it receives the original notice.
      (4)   The designated agency or non-profit corporation acquiring MPDUs for
the purpose of renting these units are responsible to the Department for the
management of these units so as not to adversely affect the community in which
they are located. Homeowner Associations may file a complaint in writing with
the Department. Complaints which are determined by the Department to be valid
and which are not resolved may result in the designated agency or non-profit
corporation forfeiture of the right to purchase future units.
(Ord. 02-25-321, 11-21-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-27, 10-18-
2022)
§ 1-6A-9. CONTROL OF RENTS AND RESALE PRICES; FORECLOSURES.
   (A)   Resale price and terms. Except for foreclosure proceedings, any MPDU
constructed or offered for sale or rent under this chapter must not be resold
during the control period for a price greater than the original selling price
plus:
      (1)   A percentage of the unit’s original selling price equal to the
increase in the cost of living since the unit was first sold, as determined by
the Consumer Price Index;
      (2)   The fair market value of improvements made to the unit between the
date of original sale and date of resale;
      (3)   An allowance for closing costs which were not paid by the initial
seller, but which will be paid by the initial buyer for the benefit of the
later buyer;
      (4)   A reasonable sales commission if the unit is not sold during the
priority marketing period to an eligible person from the Department’s
eligibility list. The resale price of an MPDU may be reduced if the physical
condition of the unit reflects abnormal wear and tear because of neglect,
abuse, or insufficient maintenance. Any personal property transferred in
connection with the resale of an MPDU must be sold at its fair market value. In
calculating the allowable resale price of an MPDU which was originally offered
for rent, the Department must estimate the price for which the unit would have
been sold if the unit had been offered for sale when it was first rented.
   (B)   Resale requirements during the control period.
      (1)   Any MPDU offered for resale during the control period must first be
offered exclusively for 60 days to the Department. The Department may buy a
unit when funds are available and the Director finds that the Department’s
buying and reselling the unit will increase opportunities for eligible persons
to buy the unit. If it does not buy the unit, the Department must notify
eligible persons and qualified non- profits of the availability of a resale
MPDU. The unit may be sold through either of the following methods:
         (a)   The Department may by lottery establish a priority order under
which eligible persons who express interest in buying the unit may buy it at
the approved resale price;
         (b)   The Department may notify the MPDU owner that the owner may sell
the unit directly to any eligible person under the resale provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   A resale MPDU may be offered for sale to the general public only
after:
         (a)   The priority marketing period expires; and
         (b)   All eligible persons who express an interest in buying it have
been given an opportunity to do so.
      (3)   The seller is required to submit to the Department, prior to sale,
for approval:
         (a)   A copy of the proposed sales contract, including a list and the
price of any personal property included in the sale;
         (b)   Signed copy of the settlement sheet; and
         (c)   An affidavit signed by the seller and buyer attesting to the
accuracy of all documents and conditions of the sale.
      (4)   A transfer of an MPDU does not comply with this chapter until all
required documents and affidavits have been submitted to and approved by the
Department.
   (C)   First sale after control period ends.
      (1)   If an MPDU originally offered for sale or rent is sold or resold
after its control period ends, the qualified non-profits have the right for 30
days after the offer is made to match any bona fide offer to buy an MPDU.
      (2)   When an MPDU is sold or resold after its control period ends, the
Department must terminate the MPDU controls and execute a release of the
restrictive covenants and subordinate lien.
   (D)   Initial and subsequent rent controls. Except as provided in §
1-6A-5.2, moderately priced dwelling units built or offered for rent under this
chapter must not be rented for 40 years after the original rental at a rent
greater than that established by regulation adopted by the county. Whenever any
moderately priced dwelling unit (other than those built, sold or rented under
any federal, state or local program offered by the County) is offered for rent
during the 40 year control period, it must be offered exclusively for 90 days
to eligible persons, as determined by the Department, for use as his or her own
residence. The County may assign its right to rent such units to persons of
moderate income who are eligible for assistance under any federal, state or
local program administered by an approved non-profit corporation or housing
agency.
   (E)   Purchase money mortgages. Purchase money mortgages for MPDUs will be
written such as to provide that in the event of foreclosure, pre-notification
to the Director is required of the mortgagee. In such event, the Director shall
have 30 days to determine whether to permit the foreclosure to occur in
accordance with § 1-6A-9(F), or if the Director determines that the waiting
list of eligible prospective MPDU purchasers warrants retaining the MPDU unit
in inventory, the Director is authorized to notify the foreclosing mortgagee
(if funding is available) that the Housing Initiative Fund (HIF) guarantees to
the mortgagee payoff of the principal and interest due on the purchase money
mortgage within 90 days, in return for the foreclosure action to be cancelled
with concurrent enforceable eviction acceptance being obtained from the
mortgagor MPDU owner. Should the latter not be obtainable, the foreclosure
would be permitted to proceed but with the condition that upon successful
foreclosure and eviction if necessary, the HIF pays the principal, interest and
incurred fees to the mortgagee, whereupon the title to the MPDU property is
passed to the HIF. The HIF will thereupon re-offer the property in accordance
with the MPDU program to eligible persons, with the requirement that the HIF is
made whole for monies spent in the process of retaining the property in the
MPDU program.
   (F)   Foreclosures or other court- ordered sales.
      (1)   If an MPDU is sold through a foreclosure or other court-ordered
sale, a payment must be made to the Housing Initiative Fund as follows.
         (a)   If the sale occurs during the first 15 years after the original
sale or rental, any amount of the foreclosure sale price which exceeds the
total of the approved resale price under subsection (A), reasonable foreclosure
costs, and liens filed under the Maryland Contract Lien Act, must be paid to
the Housing Initiative Fund. If the remaining balance under the original first
deed of trust or mortgage exceeds the resale price under subsection (A), then
the difference between the foreclosure sales price and the balance of the
original first deed of trust (plus reasonable foreclosure costs) must be paid
to the Fund.
         (b)   If the sale occurs after the first 15 years after the original
sale or rental, the payment to the Fund must be calculated under subsection
(C).
         (c)   If the MPDU is a rental unit, the resale price under subsections
(A) and (C) must be calculated using the maximum sale price in effect when the
unit was originally offered for rent.
         (d)   If the MPDU is sold subject to senior liens, the lien balances
must be included in calculating the sale price.
      (2)   All MPDU covenants and liens must be released after the required
payment is made into the Housing Initiative Fund.
   (G)   Waivers. The Director may waive the restrictions on the resale and re-
rental prices for MPDUs if the Director finds that the restrictions conflict
with regulations of federal or state housing programs and thus prevents
eligible persons from buying or renting units under the MPDU program.
   (H)   Bulk transfers. This section does not prohibit the bulk transfer or
sale of all or some of the rental MPDUs in a subdivision within 25 years after
the original rental if the buyer is bound by all covenants and controls on the
MPDUs.
   (I)   Compliance. The county must adopt regulations to promote compliance
with this section and prevent practices that evade controls on rents and sales
of MPDUs.
(Ord. 02-25-321, 11-21-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 15-06, 7-7-
2015; Bill No. 22-27, 10-18-2022)
§ 1-6A-10. EXCEPTIONS.
   Any existing site plan, preliminary subdivision plat or Phase II PUD plan
approved and having APFO approval prior to the effective date of this chapter
shall be exempt from the MPDU requirement as long as such approved plan or
plat, including any extension or modification thereof, remains valid.
Notwithstanding the above, if any revision or modification of an approved plan
which would otherwise be exempt from this chapter increases the density of the
project, the increased density shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 02-25-321, 11-21-2002; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-6A-11. GOVERNMENT REGULATIONS; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Department must maintain a list of all moderately priced dwelling
units constructed, sold or rented under this chapter; and the county may, from
time to time, adopt regulations necessary to administer this chapter.
   (B)   This chapter applies to all agents, successors and assigns of an
applicant. A building permit must not be issued, and a preliminary plan of
subdivision, development plan, or site plan must not be approved unless it
meets the requirements of this chapter. The Director of Permits and Inspections
may deny, suspend or revoke any building or occupancy permit upon finding a
violation of this chapter. Any prior approval of a preliminary plan of
subdivision, development plan or site plan may be suspended or revoked upon the
failure to meet any requirement of this chapter. An occupancy permit must not
be issued for any building to any applicant, or a successor or assign of any
applicant, for any construction that does not comply with this chapter.
   (C)   The Director is authorized to pursue any available remedy, legal or
equitable in nature, to enforce the requirements of this chapter or to prevent
or abate a violation of this chapter.
   (D)   The Director may take legal action to stop or cancel any transfer of
an MPDU if any party to the transfer does not comply with all requirements of
this chapter. The Director may recover any funds improperly obtained from any
sale or rental of an MPDU in violation of this chapter.
   (E)   In addition to or instead of any other available remedy, the Director
may take legal action to:
      (1)   Enjoin an MPDU owner who violates this chapter or any covenant
signed or order issued under this chapter from continuing the violation; or
      (2)   Require an owner to sell an MPDU owned or occupied in violation of
this chapter to an eligible buyer.
(Ord. 02-25-321, 11-21-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6A-12. APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any denial, suspension or revocation of a building
or occupancy permit or denial, suspension or revocation of approval of a
preliminary plan of subdivision, development plan, or site plan may appeal to
the Zoning Board of Appeals for a review of such action or decision.
(Ord. 02-25-321, 11-21-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-6A-13. APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter applies to all applicants and housing units developed by
applicants, regardless of when an MPDU was originally offered for sale or rent.
(Ord. 02-25-321, 11-21-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
CHAPTER 1-7: ELECTRICITY
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-7-1 — 1-7-15)
Section
   1-7-1 – 1-7-15      Reserved
§§ 1-7-1 –1-7-15. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: ELECTRICAL BOARD (§§ 1-7-16 — 1-7-35)
Section
   
1-7-16   Established
   
1-7-17   Members
   
1-7-18   Functions
Cross references:
   Buildings, see
Chapter 1-6
   Department of Permits and Inspections, see §
1-2-49 et seq.
   Electrical Board, see §
2-6-2
   Electrical regulations authorized, see §
2-6-1
§ 1-7-16. ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established an Electrical Board.
(1959 Code, § 43A-1) (Ord. 76-15-75, 11-15-1976; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-17. MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Electrical Board shall consist of 5 members appointed by the
County Executive, subject to confirmation by the County Council. The board
members shall be appointed for staggered 5 year terms of office. At the end of
a term, a member continues to serve until a successor qualifies and is
appointed. A member who is appointed after a term has begun will serve only for
the remainder of the term and until a successor qualifies and is appointed.
   (B)   At least 2 members of the Electrical Board may not be related to,
either by blood or marriage, or associated with any person or corporation who
is currently doing electrical work in the county or who has done electrical
work in the county within the year prior to the member’s date of appointment.
(1959 Code, § 43A-1, 43A-2) (Ord. 76-15-75, § I, 11-15-1976; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-
8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-18. FUNCTIONS.
   The Electrical Board shall advise the county and aid in the supervision and
enforcement of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the authority of
Chapter 317 of the Laws of Maryland 1976, and the Board shall act as an appeals
board concerning matters arising under the Electrical Code and any licensing
provisions, and is authorized to adopt its own rules of procedure and shall
perform such other related functions as delegated from time to time by the
county.
(1959 Code, § 43A-3) (Ord. 76-15-75, 11-15-1976; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Editor’s note:
   The above-mentioned act is §§
2-6-1 et seq.
§§ 1-7-19 – 1-7-35. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: ELECTRICAL CODE (§§ 1-7-36 — 1-7-80)
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
1-7-36   Short title
   
1-7-37   Definitions
   
1-7-38   Scope
   
1-7-39   Administration and enforcement
   
1-7-39.1   Qualifications; conduct
   
1-7-39.2   Duties
   
1-7-40   Minimum standards and requirements
   
1-7-41   General requirements
   
1-7-41.1   Reserved
   
1-7-42   Inspection of installations
   
1-7-43   Inspection of covered installations
   
1-7-44   Cut-in certificates
   
1-7-45   Defective installations and equipment
   
1-7-46   Emergency disconnections
   
1-7-47   Right of entry
   
1-7-48   Penalty
   
1-7-49   Civil electrical infractions
Division 2. Permits
   
1-7-61   Generally
   
1-7-62   Emergency work
   
1-7-63   Temporary installations
   
1-7-64   Fees
   
1-7-65   Refunding fees
   
1-7-66   Unlawful maintenance of installations
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 1-7-36. SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the “Electrical Code.”
(1959 Code, § 43-2) (Ord. 76-6-66, 4-5-1976; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-37. DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section.
   ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY. The Director of the Department of Permits and
Inspections, or an authorized agent of the Director.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY GOVERNING BODY. The County Council and County Executive of Frederick
County, Maryland.
   ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT. Includes electrical conductors, wiring, fittings,
devices, appliances, fixtures and apparatus.
   INSTALLATION. Includes installation of any electrical circuit or electrical
equipment or part thereof and shall include alterations, renewals or extensions
of the same.
   REASONABLY SAFE TO PERSONS AND PROPERTY. As applied to electrical
installations and electrical equipment, safe to use in the service for which
the installation or equipment is intended without unnecessary hazard to life,
limb or property.
(1959 Code, § 43-1) (Ord. 76-6-66, 5-5-1976; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010; Ord. 12-
13-608, 6-14-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-38. SCOPE.
   (A)    The provisions of this article shall apply to all electrical
equipment and the installation thereof for light, heat or power within or on
public or private buildings, structures or premises, including yards, carnival
and parking lots, and industrial substations, and all electrical equipment, and
the installation thereof, used for power supply to radio and television
transmitting and receiving systems in or on such buildings, structures or
premises in the county.
   (B)   The provisions of this article shall not apply to any electrical work
or equipment installed by or for any electric light or power company, railway
company, street railway company, telegraph or telephone company, where such
electrical work or equipment is owned and maintained by such company and is an
integral part of the plant or service used by such company in rendering its
service to the public.
   (C)   The provisions of this article shall not apply to installations in
mines, ships or railway cars or to automotive equipment.
   (D)   The provisions of this article shall not apply to installations or
equipment employed by the United States Government.
(1959 Code, § 43-3) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1976; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-39. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   This article shall be administered and enforced by the Department of Permits
and Inspections, hereinafter referred to as the "Department." The
qualifications of the Chief Electrical Inspector and all Electrical Inspectors
shall be as prescribed in the job descriptions on file in the Human Resources
Department of Frederick County, Maryland. Nothing herein shall prohibit County
Plumbing or Building Inspectors from performing residential electrical
inspections so long as the Inspectors are properly qualified, trained and
supervised.
(1959 Code, § 43-4) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1976; Ord. 94-23-118, 11-15-1994;
Ord. 08-28-504, 11-25-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-39.1. QUALIFICATIONS; CONDUCT.
   No person shall be appointed Chief Electrical Inspector unless he or she
shall hold a license as a Master Electrician in the state. No Electrical
Inspector, including the Chief Electrical Inspector, may be engaged in or
financially interested in the electric business or the sale of any electrical
supplies, nor act as an agent, whether directly or indirectly, for any person
so engaged.
(Ord. 08-28-504, 11-25-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-39.2. DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of all qualified inspectors to see that all work
covered by this chapter is executed by persons properly qualified under this
chapter and to report any violation to the proper officials for appropriate
action. Qualified Inspectors shall inspect all constructions controlled under
this chapter and see that it is done in accordance with the adopted code.
(Ord. 08-28-504, 11-25-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-40. MINIMUM STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The standards and requirements of this article and the National Electrical
Code herein referred to are hereby declared to be minimum standards and
requirements, and any electrical equipment or installation which is equal or
superior to such standards and requirements shall be deemed to be in compliance
therewith.
(1959 Code, § 43-5) (Ord.76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1976; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-41. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All electrical equipment and installations thereof shall be reasonably
safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this
article.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, conformity of
installations of electrical equipment with the regulations set forth in the
National Electrical Code, 2023 Edition, published by the National Fire
Protection Association, shall be prima facie evidence that such installations
are reasonably safe to persons and property, and said National Electrical Code
is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference in this chapter.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, conformity of electrical
equipment with the applicable standards of a nationally recognized testing
agency shall be prima facie evidence that such equipment is reasonably safe to
persons and property.
(1959 Code, § 43-6) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1976; Ord. —, 3-20-1979; Ord. 82-1-
245, 1-26-1982; Ord. 85-12-344, 3-26-1985; Ord. 87-20-452, 7-21-1987; Ord. 91-
00-001, 1-8-1991; Ord. 94-23-118, 11-15-1994; Ord. 96-14-166, 7-1-1996; Ord.
02-07-303, 4-4-2002; Ord. 05-32-393, 11-29-2005; Ord. 08-17-493, 6-17-2008;
Ord. 12-13-608, 6-14-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 15-04, 6-16-
2015; Bill No. 19-20, 1-21-2020; Bill No. 24-05, 5-21-2024)
§ 1-7-41.1. RESERVED.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 96-14-166, adopted July 1, 1996, deleted § 1-7-41.1, which contained
amendments to the National Electrical Code, 1993 Edition, and which derived
from Ord. 94-23-118, § 3, adopted Nov. 15, 1994.
§ 1-7-42. INSPECTION OF INSTALLATIONS.
   Upon the completion of each stage requiring inspection of an installation
the holder of the permit shall notify the Department which shall cause the
installation to be inspected.
(1959 Code, § 43-12) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1977; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-43. INSPECTION OF COVERED INSTALLATIONS.
   When any part of an installation is to be hidden from view by the permanent
placement of parts of a building, the person making the installation shall
notify the Department, and such installation shall not be concealed until it
has been inspected and approved by the Department; provided, that on large
installations where the concealment of electrical equipment proceeds
continuously the person installing the same shall give the Department notice
thereof so that inspections may be made periodically during the progress of the
work. The Department shall have the authority to remove or require the removal
of any structure that prevents proper inspection of any electrical equipment.
(1959 Code, § 43-13) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1977; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-44. CUT-IN CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   No electric light or power company shall supply electricity or power
to any electrical equipment for the installation of which a permit is required
hereunder, and no person shall connect any such electrical equipment to a
supply of electricity or power, except in accordance with a cut-in certificate
issued by the Department. If after inspection the Department finds the
installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this article, it shall
issue a cut- in certificate therefor, authorizing the use of the installation
and connection to the supply of electricity and power and shall send such
certificate to the electric light or power company supplying the same. Such
certificates may be issued for an entire installation or part thereof.
   (B)   Temporary cut-in certificates shall be issued for temporary
installations authorized pursuant to §
1-7-63, and such certificates shall set forth their expiration date, shall
expire upon such date unless extended, and shall be cancelled by the Director
of the Department at any time if the installation is not maintained in a safe
manner.
(1959 Code, § 43-15) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1977; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-45. DEFECTIVE INSTALLATIONS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   If upon inspection any installation for which a permit is required is
found to be in violation of the provisions of this article, the Department
shall notify the holder of the permit of the nature of such violation in
writing and the same shall be corrected within 10 days after such notice or
such other period of time as may be specified by the Department. If any
electrical equipment installed before or after the enactment of this article is
found by the administrative authority or authorized agent to be dangerous to
persons or property because defective or improperly used or installed, the
administrative authority or authorized agent shall notify the owner or lessee
of the property in writing, setting forth the nature of such dangerous
condition, and such person shall make such changes or repairs as are necessary
to put such equipment in a safe condition within 15 days or such longer period
as may be specified by the administrative authority or authorized agent.
   (B)   Upon failure of any person to comply with a notice issued pursuant to
subsection (A), any permit which has been issued for the installation of such
equipment shall be revoked by the administrative authority and no cut-in
certificate shall be issued, or if such certificate has previously been issued
it shall be revoked. If the equipment or installation is connected to a supply
of electricity or power, the administrative authority or authorized agent shall
have the authority to send notice to the electric light or power companies to
discontinue its supply of electricity or power to such equipment or
installation, and such supply of electricity or power shall be terminated
within 24 hours of the receipt of such notice.
   (C)   The administrative authority may refuse to issue new permits to any
person who has not: (1) corrected previous code violations or (2) recognized
their responsibility and agreed to correct such violations within a reasonable
time or (3) filed a proper appeal application if there is a dispute as to
whether there is a violation.
(1959 Code, § 43-15) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1977; Ord. 85-12-344, 3-26-1985;
Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-46. EMERGENCY DISCONNECTIONS.
   In cases of emergency where any electrical equipment, whether installed
before or after the enactment of this article, is an immediate threat to the
safety of persons or property, or where it may interfere with the fire
protection service of any Fire Department in the county, the administrative
authority or authorized agent shall have authority to cause the use of such
electrical equipment to be discontinued immediately and without notice to the
owner thereof.
(1959 Code, § 43-16) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1977; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-47. RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Any official or employee of the administrative authority shall have the
right during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises in the
discharge of the official's or employee's official duties for the purpose of
making any inspection or test of any electrical installation or equipment
contained therein, and no person shall hinder, impede, or interfere with any
such official or employee in the discharge of these official duties.
(1959 Code, § 43-17) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1977; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-48. PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 6 months,
or both fine and imprisonment. Each day of a violation shall be a separate
offense.
(1959 Code, § 43-19) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1977; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-49. CIVIL ELECTRICAL INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to §
2-2-29 of the Frederick County Code, any violation of any of the provisions of
this entire chapter, which is
Chapter 1-7 entitled "Electricity" is a civil infraction and shall be called a
civil electrical infraction. If, after investigation, a civil electrical
infraction is believed to exist, the administrative authority or authorized
agent shall deliver a citation or warning to the licensed electrical contractor
and others responsible for the infraction. If the administrative authority or
authorized agent is unable to locate that individual personally, the
administrative authority or authorized agent may post the citation or warning
in a conspicuous place on the property of the violation and mail a copy of same
to the person, which shall be sufficient for delivery under this section.
   (B)   The citation or warning, as provided for in this section, shall be in
writing and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the person charged or warned;
      (2)   The nature of the violation;
      (3)   The location of the violation;
      (4)   The date(s) of the violation;
      (5)   The amount or potential amount of fine assessed;
      (6)   The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid, or
violation corrected, if applicable;
      (7)   The person’s right to stand trial for the violation, if applicable;
      (8)   A certification by the Director or authorized agent attesting to
the truth of the matters set forth.
   (C)   Whenever an alleged or possible civil electrical infraction comes to
the attention of the administrative authority, the following procedures shall
apply.
      (1)   The administrative authority will investigate whether a violation
has occurred;
      (2)   If the administrative authority finds that a violation has
occurred, the administrative authority will issue a warning to the person(s)
responsible in the form and manner outlined in this section, with reasonable
time stated to abate or to prevent future infractions;
      (3)   If the violation continues or is allowed to occur after the
reasonable time stated, the administrative authority will issue a citation to
the person(s) responsible in the form and manner as outlined in this section.
Notwithstanding the provision of step (2) above, the administrative authority
may issue a citation at step (2) without prior issuance of a warning.
   (D)   A fine of $ 200 is hereby imposed upon any person responsible for a
civil electrical infraction for each violation. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall be considered a separate infraction. All fines shall
be payable to the Treasurer of Frederick County, Maryland, in the office of the
Department of Permits and Inspections.
   (E)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
offense by filing with the administrative authority a notice of intention to
stand trial. The notice shall be given at least 10 days before the date of
payment of the fines as set forth in the citation. Upon receipt of the notice
of intention to stand trial, the administrative authority shall forward to the
district court of Frederick County, Maryland, a copy of the citation and the
notice of intention to stand trial. Upon receipt of the citation, the district
court shall schedule the case for trial and notify the defendant of the trial
date. All fines, penalties, or forfeitures collected by the district court for
any civil electrical infractions shall be remitted to the Treasurer of
Frederick County, Maryland.
   (F)   If a person who receives a citation for an infraction fails to pay the
fine by the date of payment set forth on the citation and fails to file a
notice of intention to stand trial, a formal notice of the infraction shall be
sent to the person's last known address. If the citation is not satisfied
within 15 days from the date of the notice, the person shall be liable for a
fine of $400 for each infraction. If after 35 days the citation is not
satisfied, the administrative authority may request adjudication of the case
through the district court by the filing of civil judgment procedures.
   (G)   Adjudication of an infraction under this subsection is not a criminal
conviction, nor does it impose any civil disabilities ordinarily imposed by a
criminal conviction.
   (H)   In a proceeding before the district court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Code Ann., Local Government Article, Title 6. However, the
County Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute all civil electrical
infractions under this section.
   (I)   If a person is found by the district court to have committed a civil
electrical infraction, that person shall be liable for the costs of the
proceedings in the district court.
   (J)   Depending on the circumstances of each case and after consultation
with the County Attorney, the administrative authority has the discretionary
authority to reduce or suspend all or a portion of the fine payable through the
Permits and Inspections Office.
   (K)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit or prevent the
administrative authority, or any one else, from seeking other legal remedies,
such as injunctions or criminal prosecution.
   (L)   Provisions of this section are in addition to, not in lieu of those
penalties specified in other sections of this chapter, specifically §
1-7-48.
   (M)   The fines specified in this section can be modified at any time by
resolution of the county governing body after a duly advertised public hearing.
(Ord. 02-07-303, 4-4-2002; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§§ 1-7-50 – 1-7-60. RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. PERMITS
§ 1-7-61. GENERALLY.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
1-7-62 of this Code, no person shall make any installation of electrical
equipment which is subject to the provisions of this article without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Department.
   (B)   All applications for permits shall be in writing, shall be in such
form as may be prescribed by the Department and shall describe the work to be
done and the location thereof. The application shall be accompanied by such
plans, specifications and schedules as shall be necessary to determine whether
the installation will be in conformity with the provisions of this article.
   (C)   Each permit shall describe with particularity the installation to be
done thereunder, and no person shall install any electrical equipment other
than in accordance with the permit.
   (D)   No permit shall be required to repair portable electrical equipment or
lighting fixtures, or to repair or replace sockets, receptacles or snap
switches, or to make other minor repairs at existing outlets, or to repair
motors, or to replace motors with motors of the same electrical
characteristics.
   (E)   All electrical permits shall expire 1 year from the date issued except
where an extension has been granted. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit
shall be allowed to apply for a 1-year extension. The fee for an extension
shall be set by resolution of the county governing body.
   (F)   The administrative authority shall have the authority to suspend or
revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is
issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete
information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the
provisions of this code.
(1959 Code, § 43-8) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1976; Ord. 82-1-245, 1-26-1982;
Ord. 94-23-118, § 3, 11-15-1994; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010; Ord. 12-13-608, 6-
14-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-62. EMERGENCY WORK.
   When necessary to make emergency repairs or replacements to electrical
installations, or to make branch circuit extensions for switches, receptacles
or the like, incidental to such emergency work, such work may be done without a
permit, provided that the person doing the work must first inform the
administrative authority either orally or in writing if the administrative
authority’s office is open at the time of the emergency, giving the name and
address of the person performing the emergency work and the address where the
work is to be done, the nature thereof and when it is to be started. Such
person shall file an application for a permit covering such emergency work on
the first business day following the performance thereof.
(1959 Code, § 43-8) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1976; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-63. TEMPORARY INSTALLATIONS.
   A temporary permit shall be required in connection with electrical equipment
installed for a temporary use for a period not to exceed 6 months. Such permit
may be extended for an additional period of 6 months by the Department.
(Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1976; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-64. FEES.
   A fee for each electrical permit, inspection, and the like shall be paid in
accordance with the fee schedule for electrical permits as adopted by separate
resolution of the county governing body; but in no event shall the fees charged
be more than the costs incurred by the county.
(1959 Code, § 43-10) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1976; Ord. 82-1-245, 1-26-1982;
Ord. 85-12-344, 3-26-1985; Ord. 91-01-001, 1-8-1991; Ord. 91-20-020, 8-8-1991;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-65. REFUNDING FEES.
   Where no work has been done under a permit issued hereunder the holder of
the permit may deliver same to the Department and upon cancellation thereof
there shall be refunded a portion of the fees paid in accordance with the fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the county governing body.
(1959 Code, § 43-11) (Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1977; Ord. 94-23-118, § 4, 11-15-
1994; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-66. UNLAWFUL MAINTENANCE OF INSTALLATIONS.
   In the case of any electrical installation for which a permit is required,
it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or allow to be maintained such
electrical installation if it was installed after the effective date of this
article without a permit and does not conform to the requirements hereof.
(Ord. 76-6-66, § I, 4-5-1977; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-7-67 – 1-7-80. RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: ELECTRICIANS (§§ 1-7-81 — 1-7-102)
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
1-7-81   Penalties
Division 2. License/Registration
   
1-7-91   Required
   
1-7-92   Classes of licenses/registrations
   
1-7-93   Application for examination and issuance generally
   
1-7-94   Bond
   
1-7-95   Persons eligible for license examination
   
1-7-96   Fees generally
   
1-7-97   Examinations
   
1-7-98   Appeals from refusal of license to Board of Arbitration
   
1-7-99   Expiration
   
1-7-100   Suspension or revocation
   
1-7-101   Reserved
   
1-7-102   Exemptions
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 1-7-81. PENALTIES.
   Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 6
months, or both fine and imprisonment. Each calendar day the offense shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1959 Code, § 43B-X) (Ord. 77-11-88, 8-22-1977; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010; Ord.
14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-7-82 – 1-7-90. RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE/REGISTRATION
§ 1-7-91. REQUIRED.
   (A)   A registered master electrician cannot sign permits for more than
himself/herself or 1 company, not both, in Frederick County. In other words, he
or she can only be self-employed or be employed by 1 electrical company, not
both at the same time for the purposes of securing permits, whenever he or she
has at least 1 electrical permit outstanding in Frederick County.
   (B)   No person shall install, repair, maintain or erect any kind of
electrical wiring, conduits, or wiring to or repair of electrical elements or
circuits of machinery and fixed or stationary appliance, motors, fixtures,
signs, electrically operated heating equipment, elevators, or any other
electrically operated apparatus or device in, on, or about any premises in the
county without a license or registration issued in conformity with this
division.
(1959 Code, § 43B-1) (Ord. 77-11-88, 8-22-1977; Ord. 94-23-118, § 5, 11-15-
1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-02, 3-1-2022)
§ 1-7-92. CLASSES OF LICENSES/REGISTRATIONS.
   The following classes of licenses/registrations are hereby established.
   (A)   Master electrician-general. This registration may be issued to any
person eligible under this division. Such registration shall authorize the
registered person to perform or have electrical work performed under the
registered person’s supervision. The individual being registered can only
represent or trade as an individual or for 1 company under this registration
while more than 1 permit is outstanding in Frederick County.
   (B)   Master electrician-restricted.
      (1)   This license may be issued to any person determined to be qualified
by examination and shall permit the holder to install, maintain and repair low
voltage electrical equipment (50 volts or less) as specified in the license.
(1959 Code, § 43B-I) (Ord. 7-11-88, 8-22-1977; Ord. 94-23-118, § 12, 11-15-
1994; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-02, 3-
1-2022)
§ 1-7-93. APPLICATION FOR EXAMINATION AND ISSUANCE GENERALLY.
   (A)   The master electrician-restricted license application shall be made on
a form supplied by the county, which form shall show the following:
      (1)   The number of years the applicant has been engaged in electrical
work;
      (2)   The type or types of work in which the applicant has been engaged
and length of time for each;
      (3)   The name and address of present employer;
      (4)   The name and address of last previous employer.
   (B)   The Electrical Board is authorized to make a decision to issue a
license to an applicant who can certify successful completion of technical or
vocational education in lieu of, in whole or in part, field experience, upon
presentation of scholastic records.
   (C)   Any outstanding violations may be cause for rejection of application.
   (D)   A license is to be in an individual name only. Frederick County will
not license companies, only individuals.
(1959 Code, § 43B-IV(A)-(D)) (Ord. 77-11-88, 8-22-1977; Ord. 94-23-118, §§ 6,
13, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-02, 3-1-2022)
§ 1-7-94. BOND.
   A surety bond or cash bond in the amount of $10,000 from any firm or
individual licensed to do business in the state shall accompany all
applications for licenses required by this division except holders of State of
Maryland licenses. (After July 1, 1995, firm will not apply.) Such bond, upon
violation by the licensee of any of the requirements for electrical licensing
shall, in addition to any other penalties, be subject to forfeiture to the
county.
(1959 Code, § 43B-IV(F)) (Ord. 77-11-88, 8-22-1977; Ord. 94-23-118, § 7, 11-15-
1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-02, 3-1-2022)
§ 1-7-95. PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE EXAMINATION.
   (A)   The applicant for a master electrician- restricted license shall
satisfactorily establish that the applicant has been actively in charge of
electrical installation work under the supervision of a master electrician or
master electrician-general or master electrician- restricted in the particular
branch or branches applied for, for the period of at least 2 years, or
equivalent as determined by the Electrical Board and shall pass an examination
for low voltage electrical work (50 volts or less).
   (B)   An applicant may file an application to have their license deemed
inactive, but they must comply with all requirements for the type of license
for which the application is filed. The applicant shall not, however, be
required to supply a bond so long as the applicant's license is kept on an
inactive status and the applicant does not operate under the license.
(1959 Code, § 43B-III) (Ord. 77-11-88, 8-22-1977; Ord. 81-12-202, 5-12-1981;
Ord. 85-40-372, 9-24-1985; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 22-02, 3-1-2022)
§ 1-7-96. FEES GENERALLY.
   The fees for a license as an electrician shall be paid in accordance with
the fee schedule as adopted by separate resolution of the county governing
body.
(1959 Code, § 43B-VII) (Ord. 77-11-88; 8-22-1977; Ord. 81-12-202, 5-12-1981;
Ord. 82-7-251, 5-18-1982; Ord. 85-40-372, 9-24-1985; Ord. 91-20-020, 8-8-1991;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-97. EXAMINATIONS.
   (A)   To be eligible for an electrical license, any applicant for the master
electrician- restricted category shall satisfactorily pass an examination,
except as herein provided. Such examination shall be standard for each category
and qualification for passage shall be determined by the Electrical Board. The
questions for the examination will be determined by the Chairperson of the
Electrical Board, the Chief Electrical Inspector, and the administrative
authority. Examination and grading procedures shall be established and
publicized 30 days prior to each examination date and be available at all times
to an applicant or other interested party. Examination results shall be
available at the earliest possible date following the date of the examination
but not later than 45 days thereafter. Notice of the decision to grant or
refuse a master electrician-restricted license shall be sent by certified mail
to the person and/or firm or corporation for which the application was filed.
   (B)   There shall be reciprocity for licensees as stated under terms of Md.
Code, Business Occupations and Professions Article, Title 6, Electricians, as
amended or replaced.
   (C)   Examinations for a master electrician-restricted license shall be
given during the months of April and October each year, and special examination
may be provided at such other dates of which reasonable notice is given.
   (D)   A registration fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the county governing body shall be submitted prior to examination
date. Checks are to be made payable to the county. The fee is a nonrefundable
fee.
(1959 Code, § 43B-V) (Ord. 77-11-88, 8-22-1977; Ord. 85-40-372, 9-24-1985; Ord.
94-23-118, § 8, 11-15-1994; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 22-02, 3-1-2022)
§ 1-7-98. APPEALS FROM REFUSAL OF LICENSE TO BOARD OF ARBITRATION.
   Any person whose application for a license shall have been rejected by the
Electrical Board shall have the right to appeal to a Board of Arbitration,
which shall consist of 1 person selected by the person making the appeal, 1
person selected by the Board; these 2 shall select a third person, and the
decision of said Board of Arbitration or a majority of them shall be final and
binding upon all of the parties of said appeal; the members of said Board shall
be paid the sum of $5 each, which sum shall be deposited with the Board by the
person taking said appeal.
(1959 Code, § 43B-VI) (Ord. 77-11-88, 8-22-1977; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-7-99. EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Licenses and registrations issued pursuant to the provisions of this
division shall expire on June 30 of the next odd-numbered year.
   (B)   Any master electrician-restricted license not renewed within 90 days
after the due date shall not be reissued until an examination has been taken
and passed by the former license holder at the prescribed examination dates as
stated under §
1-7-97 and approval given for the reissuance of the license.
   (C)   For any expired registration not renewed within 90 days of the due
date, a new copy of a current, valid state license must be submitted for the
reinstatement of registration with Frederick County.
(1959 Code, § 43B-VII, 43B-VIII) (Ord. 7-11-88, 8-22-1977; Ord. 81-12-202, 5-
12-1981; Ord. 85-40-372, 9-24-1985; Ord. 94-23-118, 11-15-1994; Ord. 01-19-293,
10-16-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-02, 3-1-2022)
§ 1-7-100. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any registration or master electrician-restricted license may be
suspended or revoked by the Electrical Board after a hearing, provided at least
15 days' notice is given to the licensee/registered person before the hearing
and the reasons for the hearing are stated in said notice.
   (B)   Such suspension or revocation may be for one or more of the following
causes:
      (1)   Permitting any unlicensed or unregistered person to perform
electrical work under the authority of a master electrician license without the
control and supervision by the licensed master electrician;
      (2)   Performing or permitting the performance of defective or dangerous
work or work in violation of §
1-7-40, titled “Electrical Code,” either inside Frederick County or in any
other jurisdiction within the State of Maryland;
      (3)   Performing any work for which a permit for electrical work has not
been secured from the county;
      (4)   Violation of any of the provisions of this division;
      (5)   If the licensee or registration holder is representing more than 1
company or individual, including himself (herself) while at least 1 permit,
under his or her authority, is still active.
(1959 Code, § 43B-VIII) (Ord. 7-11-88, 8-22-1977; Ord. 81-12-202, 5-12-1981;
Ord. 94-23-118, § 10, 11-15-1994; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-02,
3-1-2022)
§ 1-7-101. RESERVED.
§ 1-7-102. EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this division shall not apply to:
      (1)   Utility companies regulated by the Public Service Commission of
Maryland when working on own property or on line side of meter or outside of
building when using doughnut type meters;
      (2)   Radio and television transmitting stations licensed and
commissioned by the Federal Communications Commission regulations;
      (3)   Federal, state and county employees when engaged in the performance
of their official duties only;
      (4)   The owner of a residential single-family dwelling or property
wherein the owner resides or is about to reside, who obtains a homeowner's
residential electrical permit. To obtain this permit the owner must sign a
homeowner's affidavit on file in the Office of Permits and Inspections and
successfully pass with a grade of 70% or more an examination, which will
consist of 10 code questions. This examination will be given in the Office of
Permits and Inspections and will be an open book examination but must be
completed without the assistance of any other person and within a two hour
timeframe. This examination will not be allowed to be taken outside of the
Office of Permits and Inspections. The questions for the examination will be
determined by the Chairperson of the Electrical Board, the Chief Electrical
Inspector, and the administrative authority. The owner will be required to
produce photo identification before being allowed to take the examination.
   (B)   Unless otherwise required under this division, no person engaged in
the manufacture, assembly or repair of electrical equipment manufactured by
such person or manufactured for such person by a parent or subsidiary
corporation shall be required to hold or to employ the holder of any of the
licenses or registrations provided for by these requirements solely by reason
of such manufacture, assembly or repair. All electrical installations for
machinery and equipment within such factories shall require a general
registration.
(1959 Code, § 43B-I; 1981, Chapter 475, § 1; 1992, Chapter 53, § 1) (Ord. 77-
11-88, 8-22-1977; Ord. 94-23-118, § 11, 11-15-1994; Ord. 10-14-549, 6-8-2010;
Ord. 12-13-608, 6-14-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-02, 3-1-
2022)
CHAPTER 1-7.1: ETHICS (§§ 1-7.1-1 — 1-7.1-11)
Section
   
1-7.1-1   Short title
   
1-7.1-2   Applicability
   
1-7.1-3   Definitions
   
1-7.1-4   Ethics Commission
   
1-7.1-5   Conflicts of interest
   
1-7.1-6   Financial disclosure; county elected officials and candidates to be
elected officials and other designated positions
   
1-7.1-7   Financial disclosure; employees and appointed officials
   
1-7.1-8   Lobbying
   
1-7.1-9   Exemptions and modifications
   
1-7.1-10   Enforcement
   
1-7.1-11   Retaliation prohibited
Statement of purpose and policy.
   (A)   Frederick County, recognizing that our system of representative
government is dependent in part upon the people maintaining the highest trust
in their public officials and employees, finds and declares that the people
have a right to be assured that the impartiality and independent judgment of
public officials and employees will be maintained.
   (B)   It is evident that this confidence and trust is eroded when the
conduct of the county's business is subject to improper influence and even the
appearance of improper influence.
   (C)   For the purpose of guarding against improper influence, the county
enacts this law to require elected officials, officials, employees and
individuals appointed to certain boards and commissions to disclose their
financial affairs and to set minimum standards for the conduct of county
business.
   (D)   It is the intent of the county that this chapter, except for its
provisions for criminal sanctions, be construed liberally to accomplish this
purpose.
(Ord. 11-26-592, 11-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-01, 3-1-
2016; Bill No. 18-14, 6-5-2018)
§ 1-7.1-1. SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the Frederick County Ethics Law.
(Ord. 11-26-592, 11-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-01, 3-1-
2016)
§ 1-7.1-2. APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter applies to all elected officials, County employees, and
appointees to County boards and commissions.
   (B)   This chapter does not apply to the State's Attorney, the Clerk of the
Circuit Court, the Register of Wills, and the Sheriff, who are covered by the
State Ethics Law. Members and employees of the Board of Education are also
excluded as they are covered by separate ethics regulations.
(Ord. 11-26-592, 11-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-01, 3-1-
2016)
§ 1-7.1-3. DEFINITIONS.
   The words used in this chapter have their normal accepted meanings except as
set forth below:
   BUSINESS ENTITY.
      (1)   A corporation, general or limited partnership, sole proprietorship,
joint venture, unincorporated association or firm, institution, trust,
foundation, or other organization, whether or not operated for profit.
      (2)   BUSINESS ENTITY does not include a governmental entity.
   COMMISSION. The Frederick County Ethics Commission established pursuant to §
1-7.1-4 of this chapter.
   COMMITTEE. The Independent Ethics Commission Nominating Committee,
established pursuant to §
1-7.1-4 of this chapter.
   COMPENSATION.
      (1)   Any money or thing of value, regardless of form, received or to be
received by any individual covered by this chapter from an employer for service
rendered.
      (2)   For the purposes of §
1-7.1-8 of this chapter, if lobbying is only a portion of a person's
employment, compensation means a prorated amount based on the time devoted to
lobbying compared to the time devoted to other employment duties.
   COUNCIL MEMBER. A member of the County Council.
   COUNTY COUNCIL. The County Council of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY EXECUTIVE. The County Executive of Frederick County, Maryland.
   DESIGNATED SECOND HOME.
      (1)   If an individual owns one second home, the individual's second
home; or
      (2)   If an individual owns more than one second home, any one second
home the individual identifies to the Commission as the individual's designated
second home.
   DOING BUSINESS WITH.
      (1)   Having or negotiating a contract that involves the commitment,
either in a single or combination of transactions of $5,000 or more of county
controlled funds;
      (2)   Being regulated by or otherwise subject to the authority of the
county; or
      (3)   Being registered as a lobbyist under §
1-7.1-8 of this chapter.
   ELECTED OFFICIAL. An individual who holds elective office as the County
Executive or a County Council member.
   GIFT.
      (1)   The transfer of anything of economic value regardless of the form
without adequate and lawful consideration.
      (2)   GIFT does not include the solicitation, acceptance, receipt, or
regulation of political campaign contributions regulated in accordance with the
provisions of Election Law Art. §§ 13-101 et seq., or any other provision of
state or local law regulating the conduct of elections or the receipt of
political campaign contributions.
   HOME ADDRESS.
      (1)   An individual's principal home; and
      (2)   An individual's designated second home, if any.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. A spouse and dependent children.
   INTEREST.
      (1)   A legal or equitable economic interest, whether or not subject to
an encumbrance or a condition, that is owned or held, in whole or in part,
jointly or severally, directly or indirectly.
      (2)   For purposes of §§
1-7.1-6 and
1-7.1-7 of this chapter, INTEREST includes any interest held at any time during
the reporting period.
      (3)   INTEREST does not include:
         (i)   An interest held in the capacity of a personal agent, custodian,
fiduciary, personal representative, or trustee, unless the holder has an
equitable interest in the subject matter;
         (ii)   An interest in a time or demand deposit in a financial
institution;
         (iii)   An interest in an insurance policy, endowment policy, or
annuity-contract under which an insurer promises to pay a fixed amount of money
either in a lump sum or periodically for life or a specified period;
         (iv)   A common trust fund or a trust that forms part of a pension or
profit sharing plan that has more than 25 participants and has been determined
by the Internal Revenue Service to be a qualified trust under the Internal
Revenue Code;
         (v)   A college savings plan under the Internal Revenue Code; or
         (vi)   A mutual fund or exchange-traded fund that is publicly traded
on a national scale unless the mutual fund or exchange-traded fund is composed
primarily of holdings of stocks and interests in a specific sector or area that
is regulated by the individual's department or agency.
   LOBBYING.
      (1)   Communicating in the presence of a County official or employee with
the intent to influence any official action of that official or employee; or
      (2)   Engaging in activities with the express purpose of soliciting
others to communicate with a County official or employee with the intent to
influence that official or employee.
   LOBBYIST. A person required to register and report expenses related to
lobbying under §
1-7.1-8 of this chapter.
   OFFICIAL. This includes an elected official, an official appointed to a
county position by the County Executive or the County Council, a county
employee and a member of a county board or commission:
      (1)   Whether or not paid in whole or in part with County funds; and
      (2)   Whether or not compensated.
   PERSON. Includes an individual or business entity.
   PRINCIPAL HOME. The sole residential property that an individual occupies as
the individual's primary residence, whether owned or rented by the individual.
   QUALIFIED RELATIVE. A spouse, parent, child, or sibling.
   QUASI-GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY. An entity that is created by State statute, that
performs a public function, and that is supported in whole or in part by the
State but is managed privately.
   SECOND HOME.
      (1)   A residential property that an individual occupies for some portion
of the filing year; and
      (2)   Is not a rental property or a time share.
(Ord. 11-26-592, 11-17-2011; Ord. 13-27-655, 12-5-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 16-01, 3-1-2016; Bill No. 17-06, 5-2-2017; Bill No. 18-14, 6-5-
2018; Bill No. 22-14, 9-6-2022)
§ 1-7.1-4. ETHICS COMMISSION.
   (A)   Appointments, terms, vacancies and compensation.
      (1)   There is a Frederick County Ethics Commission that consists of 7
members appointed by the County Executive subject to confirmation by the
Council.
      (2)   The appointments are for 3-year terms, except for the initial
appointments of the sixth and seventh members, who will serve for a term set by
the County, not to exceed 3 years. Members may be reappointed, but may not
serve more than 2 full consecutive 3-year terms.
      (3)   The County Executive must appoint 1 alternate member, who is
empowered to sit on the Commission in the absence of any member of the
Commission. The alternate's term is 3 years.
      (4)   Vacancies are to be filled for the unexpired term of any member
whose term becomes vacant.
      (5)   Members serve without compensation, but the county governing body
may provide for payment of necessary and proper expenses incurred while
performing official duties.
   (B)   Independent Ethics Commission Nominating Committee.
      (1)   (a)   Subject to the exception in subparagraph (1)(b), before the
County Executive appoints a member or alternate member to the Commission,
applicants for appointment must be interviewed and recommended for appointment
by the Committee, as provided in this paragraph.
         (b)   When a Commission member vacates the member's position before
the expiration of the member's term, the County Executive may appoint the
alternate member to fill the unexpired term without a referral to the Committee
for a recommendation.
      (2)   The Committee has five members, consisting of the following:
         (a)   A representative selected by the Frederick County League of
Women Voters, who serves as the Chair of the Committee;
         (b)   A current member of the Ethics Commission selected by the Ethics
Commission;
         (c)   The representative selected by the League of Women Voters will
select an additional three members from a list of community organizations or
agencies, which may include the following:
            (I)   A faculty member or dean from either Hood College or Mount
St. Mary's University;
            (ii)   A local religious or faith leader; or
            (iii)   A representative from the United Way.
      (3)   In order to serve on the Committee, members must meet the following
standards:
         (a)   Have demonstrated a commitment to nonpartisanship;
         (b)   Have no plans to run for office;
         (c)   Have not served as an elected official, candidate, campaign
chair or treasurer of a County or Municipal official campaign within the past
four years; and
         (d)   Have not served on a political central committee for at least
ten years.
      (4)   Committee members serve for a two-year term. A member continues to
serve until a successor is selected. A member may serve for more than one term.
The initial terms of the Committee members appointed under this paragraph must
be staggered.
      (5)   The duties of the Committee include:
         (a)   Making its recommendations within 60 days from the deadline for
receipt of applications;
         (b)   Establishing a methodology for evaluating applicants for
Commission vacancies;
         (c)   Developing and implementing a plan to recruit additional
applicants for Commission vacancies;
         (d)   Establishing procedures for interviewing applicants and
establishing such other procedures as necessary for the Committee to carry out
its duties;
         (e)   Recommending, to the extent possible, two names for each
Commission vacancy; and
         (f)   Providing a report of the Committee's activities to the County
Executive at the time the recommended nominees are presented. The report must
include:
            (I)   The methodology used to evaluate the applicants;
            (ii)   A list of the interview questions;
            (iii)    Recommendation from the Committee about the process
followed, including recommended procedural changes;
            (iv)   A summary of the overall process; and
            (v)   The basis for the Committee's recommendations.
      (6)   Committee recommendations to the County Executive require approval
by four Committee members.
      (7)   The County Executive must select a nominee from the applicants
recommended by the Committee.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Commission shall:
      (1)   Devise, receive, and maintain all forms required by this chapter;
      (2)   Develop procedures and policies for advisory opinion requests,
including the reconsideration of advisory opinions, and provide published
advisory opinions to persons subject to this chapter regarding the
applicability of the provisions of this chapter to them;
      (3)   Develop procedures and policies for the processing of complaints to
make appropriate determinations regarding complaints filed by any person
alleging violations of this chapter; and
      (4)   Conduct a public information program regarding the purposes and
application of this chapter.
   (D)   Oaths and subpoenas.
      (1)   The Commission may:
         (a)   Administer oaths;
         (b)   Issue subpoenas to require any person to respond under oath to
written questions; and
         (c)   Issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses to testify or to
produce verified copies of records or other tangible objects.
      (2)   County officials and employees are expected to comply with all
subpoenas from the Ethics Commission.
      (3)   A subpoena may be issued by the Commission upon the affirmative
vote of 6 members, and after a majority of the Commission determines that a
complaint has merit.
      (4)   A subpoena issued under this subsection may be judicially enforced.
   (E)   The County Attorney shall advise the Commission.
   (F)   The Commission shall certify to the State Ethics Commission on or
before October 1 of each year that the County is in compliance with the
requirements of Md. Code Ann., General Provisions Article, Title 5, Subtitle 8,
for elected local officials.
   (G)   The Commission shall determine if changes to this chapter are required
to be in compliance with the requirements of Md. Code Ann., General Provisions
Article, Title 5, Subtitle 8, and shall forward any recommended changes and
amendments to the county governing body for enactment.
   (H)   The Commission may adopt other policies and procedures to assist in
the implementation of the Commission's programs established in this chapter.
(Ord. 11-26-592, 11-17-2011; Ord. 13-27-655, 12-5-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 16-01, 3-1-2016; Bill No. 17-06, 5-2-2017)
§ 1-7.1-5. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   (A)   Participation prohibitions. Except as permitted by Commission
regulation or opinion, an official or employee may not participate in:
      (1)   Except in the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty
that does not affect the disposition or decision of the matter, any matter in
which, to the knowledge of the official or employee, the official or employee,
or a qualified relative of the official or employee has an interest.
      (2)   Except in the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty
that does not affect the disposition or decision with respect to the matter,
any matter in which any of the following is a party:
         (a)   A business entity in which the official or employee has a direct
financial interest of which the official or employee may reasonably be expected
to know;
         (b)   A business entity for which the official, employee, or a
qualified relative of the official or employee is an officer, director,
trustee, partner, or employee;
         (c)   A business entity with which the official or employee or, to the
knowledge of the official or employee, a qualified relative is negotiating
employment or has any arrangement concerning prospective employment;
         (d)   If the contract reasonably could be expected to result in a
conflict between the private interests of the official or employee and the
official duties of the official or employee, a business entity that is a party
to an existing contract with the official or employee, or which, to the
knowledge of the official or employee, is a party to a contract with a
qualified relative;
         (e)   An entity, doing business with the County, in which a direct
financial interest is owned by another entity in which the official or employee
has a direct financial interest, if the official or employee may be reasonably
expected to know of both direct financial interests; or
         (f)   A business entity that:
            (i)   The official or employee knows is a creditor or obligee of
the official or employee or a qualified relative of the official or employee
with respect to a thing of economic value and
            (ii)   As a creditor or obligee, is in a position to directly and
substantially affect the interest of the official or employee or a qualified
relative of the official or employee.
      (3)   A person who is disqualified from participating under subparagraphs
(1) or (2) of this paragraph shall disclose the nature and circumstances of the
conflict and may participate or act if:
         (a)   The disqualification leaves a body with less than a quorum
capable of acting;
         (b)   The disqualified official or employee is required by law to act;
or
         (c)   The disqualified official or employee is the only person
authorized to act.
      (4)   The prohibitions of subparagraphs (1) and (2) of this paragraph do
not apply if participation is allowed by regulation or opinion of the
Commission.
      (5)   A former regulated lobbyist who is or becomes subject to this
chapter as an employee or official, other than an elected official or an
appointed official, may not participate in a case, contract, or other specific
matter as an employee or official, other than an elected official or appointed
official, for one calendar year after the termination of the registration of
the former regulated lobbyist if the former regulated lobbyist previously
assisted or represented another party for compensation in the matter.
   (B)   Employment and financial interest restrictions. 
      (1)   Except as permitted by regulation of the Commission when the
interest is disclosed or when the employment does not create a conflict of
interest or appearance of conflict, an official or employee may not:
         (a)   Be employed by or have a financial interest in any entity:
            (i)   Subject to the authority of the official or employee or the
County division, agency, or board or commission with which the official or
employee is affiliated; or
            (ii)   That is negotiating or has entered into a contract with the
division, agency, or board or commission with which the official or employee is
affiliated; or
         (b)   Hold any other employment relationship that would impair the
impartiality or independence of judgment of the official or employee.
      (2)   This prohibition does not apply to:
         (a)   An official or employee who is appointed to a regulatory or
licensing authority pursuant to a statutory requirement that persons subject to
the jurisdiction of the authority be represented in appointments to the
authority;
         (b)   Subject to other provisions of law, a member of a board or
commission in regard to a financial interest or employment held at the time of
appointment, provided the financial interest or employment is publicly
disclosed to the appointing authority and the Commission;
         (c)   An official or employee whose duties are ministerial, if the
private employment or financial interest does not create a conflict of interest
or the appearance of a conflict of interest, as permitted by and in accordance
with regulations adopted by the Commission; or
         (d)   Employment or financial interests allowed by regulation of the
Commission if the employment does not create a conflict of interest or the
appearance of a conflict of interest or the financial interest is disclosed.
   (C)   Contracts with elected officials.
      (1)   In order to avoid actual conflicts of interest or the appearance of
conflicts of interest, the County may not knowingly enter into a contract where
one or more of the contracting parties is one of the following:
         (a)   An elected official or a qualified relative of an elected
official;
         (b)   A business entity in which an elected official or a qualified
relative of an elected official holds a direct financial interest; or
         (c)   A business entity in which the elected official or a qualified
relative of an elected official is an officer, director, trustee, partner or
employee.
      (2)   It is a violation of this subparagraph for an elected official to
enter into a contract prohibited in paragraph (C)(1) of this section.
   (D)   Post-employment limitations and restrictions.
      (1)   A former official or employee, including a former member of the
Board of County Commissioners, may not assist or represent any party other than
the county for compensation in a case, contract, or other specific matter
involving the county if that matter is one in which the former official or
employee significantly participated as an official or employee.
      (2)   For 1 year after the elected official leaves office, the former
elected official may not assist or represent another party for compensation in
a matter that is the subject of legislative action before the county governing
body.
   (E)   Contingent compensation. Except in a judicial or quasi-judicial
proceeding, an official or employee may not assist or represent a party for
contingent compensation in any matter before or involving the County.
   (F)   Use of prestige of office.
      (1)   An official or employee may not intentionally use the prestige of
office or public position:
         (a)   For the private gain of that official or employee or the private
gain of another; or
         (b)   To influence, except as part of the official duties of the
official or employee or as a usual and customary constituent service without
additional compensation, the award of a state or local contract to a specific
person.
      (2)   An official may not directly or indirectly initiate a solicitation
for a person to retain the compensated services of a particular regulated
lobbyist or lobbying firm.
      (3)   This paragraph does not prohibit the performance of usual and
customary constituent services by an elected official without additional
compensation.
      (4)   (a)   An official, other than an elected official, or employee may
not use public resources or the title of the official or employee to solicit a
contribution as that term is defined in the Election Law Article.
         (b)   An elected official may not use public resources to solicit a
contribution as that term is defined in the Election Law Article.
   (G)   Solicitation and acceptance of gifts.
      (1)   An official or employee may not solicit any gift.
      (2)   An official or employee may not directly solicit or facilitate the
solicitation of a gift, on behalf of another person, from an individual
regulated lobbyist.
      (3)   An official or employee may not knowingly accept a gift, directly
or indirectly, from a person that the official or employee knows or has the
reason to know:
         (a)   Is doing business with or seeking to do business with the County
division, agency, or board or commission with which the official or employee is
affiliated;
         (b)   Has financial interests that may be substantially and materially
affected, in a manner distinguishable from the public generally, by the
performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the official or
employee;
         (c)   Is engaged in an activity regulated or controlled by the
official's or employee's governmental unit; or
         (d)   Is a lobbyist with respect to matters within the jurisdiction of
the official or employee.
         (e)   Is an association, or any entity acting on behalf of an
association that is engaged only in representing counties or municipal
corporations.
      (4)   Subparagraph (5) of this paragraph does not apply to a gift:
         (a)   That would tend to impair the impartiality and the independence
of judgment of the official or employee receiving the gift;
         (b)   Of significant value that would give the appearance of impairing
the impartiality and independence of judgment of the official or employee; or
         (c)   Of significant value that the recipient official or employee
believes or has reason to believe is designed to impair the impartiality and
independence of judgment of the official or employee.
      (5)   Notwithstanding subparagraph (3) of subsection (G), an official or
employee may accept the following:    
         (a)   Meals and beverages consumed in the presence of the donor or
sponsoring entity;
         (b)   Ceremonial gifts or awards that have insignificant monetary
value;
         (c)   Unsolicited gifts of nominal value that do not exceed $20 in
cost or trivial items of informational value;
         (d)   Reasonable expenses for food, travel, lodging, and scheduled
entertainment of the official or the employee at a meeting which is given in
return for the participation of the official or employee in a panel or speaking
engagement at the meeting;
         (e)   Gifts of tickets or free admission extended to an elected
official to attend a charitable, cultural, or political event, if the purpose
of the gifts or admission is a courtesy or ceremony extended to the official's
office;
         (f)   A specific gift or class of gifts that the Commission exempts
from the operation of this subsection upon a finding, in writing, that
acceptance of the gift or class of gifts would not be detrimental to the
impartial conduct of the business of the County and that the gift is purely
personal and private in nature;
         (g)   Gifts from a person related to the official or employee by blood
or marriage, or any other individual who is a member of the household of the
official or employee; or
         (h)   An honorarium for speaking to or participating in a meeting,
provided that the offering of the honorarium is in no way related to the
official's or employee's official position.
   (H)   Disclosure of confidential information. Other than in the discharge of
official duties, an official or employee or former official or employee may not
disclose or use confidential information that the official or employee acquired
by reason of the official's or employee's public position or former public
position and that is not available to the public, for the economic benefit of
the official or employee or that of another person.
   (I)   Participation in procurement.
      (1)   An individual or a person that employs an individual who assists a
County division or agency in the drafting of specifications, an invitation for
bids, or a request for proposals for a procurement may not submit a bid or
proposal for that procurement or assist or represent another person, directly
or indirectly, who is submitting a bid or proposal for the procurement.
      (2)   The Commission may establish exemptions from the requirements of
this section for providing descriptive literature, sole source procurements,
and written comments solicited by the procuring division or agency.
(Ord. 11-26-592, 11-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-01, 3-1-
2016; Bill No. 18-14, 6-5-2018; Bill No. 22-14, 9-6-2022)
§ 1-7.1-6. FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE; COUNTY ELECTED OFFICIALS, CANDIDATES TO BE
ELECTED OFFICIALS AND OTHER DESIGNATED POSITIONS.
   (A)   (1)   This section applies to all elected officials, candidates to be
elected officials and the following designated positions:
         (a)   The Chief Administrative Officer;
         (b)   The County Attorney;
         (c)   The Directors appointed and confirmed pursuant to Section 412(a)
of the County Charter and any person holding a position which is a part of the
County Executive's local counterpart to the Governor's cabinet or Executive
Council unless any such person is separately required to file a financial
disclosure statement with the State;
         (d)   Members of the Planning Commission; and
         (e)   Members and alternate member of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (2)   Except as provided in paragraph (B) of this section, an elected
official or a candidate to be an elected official shall file the financial
disclosure statement required under this section:
         (a)   On a form provided by the Commission;
         (b)   Under oath or affirmation; and
         (c)   With the Commission.
      (3)   Deadlines for filing statements.
         (a)   An incumbent elected official shall file a financial disclosure
statement annually no later than April 30 of each year for the preceding
calendar year.
         (b)   An individual who is appointed to fill an elected official
vacancy and who has not already filed a financial disclosure statement shall
file a statement for the preceding calendar year within 30 days after
appointment.
         (c)   (i)   An elected official who, other than by reason of death,
leaves office shall file a statement within 60 days after leaving office.
            (ii)   The statement shall cover:
               a.   The calendar year immediately preceding the year in which
the elected official left office, unless a statement covering that year has
already been filed and
               b.   The portion of the current calendar year during which the
person held the office.
   (B)   Candidates to be an elected official.
      (1)   Except for an elected official who has filed a financial disclosure
statement under another provision of this section for the reporting period, a
candidate to be an elected official shall file a financial disclosure statement
each year beginning with the year in which the certificate of candidacy is
filed through the year of the election.
      (2)   A candidate to be an elected official shall file a statement
required under this section:
         (a)   In the year the certificate of candidacy is filed, no later than
the filing of the certificate of candidacy;
         (b)   In the year of the election, on or before the earlier of April
30 or the last day for the withdrawal of candidacy; and
         (c)   In all other years for which a statement is required, on or
before April 30.
      (3)   A candidate to be an elected official:
         (a)   May file the statement required under subparagraph (B)(2)(a) of
this paragraph with the Frederick County Board of Elections with the
certificate of candidacy or with the Commission prior to filing the certificate
of candidacy; and
         (b)   Shall file the statements required under subparagraphs (B)(2)(b)
and (c) of this paragraph with the Commission.
      (4)   If a statement that a candidate is required to file under this
section is overdue and not filed within 8 days after written notice of the
failure to file is provided by the Frederick County Board of Elections, the
candidate is deemed to have withdrawn the candidacy.
      (5)   The Frederick County Board of Elections may not accept any
certificate of candidacy unless a statement has been filed in proper form.
      (6)   Within 30 days of the receipt of a statement required under this
section, the Frederick County Board of Elections shall forward the statement to
the Commission or the office designated by the Commission.
   (C)   Public record.
      (1)   The Commission or office designated by the Commission shall
maintain all financial disclosure statements filed under this section.
      (2)   Financial disclosure statements shall be made available during
normal office hours for examination and copying by the public subject to
reasonable fees and administrative procedures established by the Commission.
      (3)   If an individual examines or copies a financial disclosure
statement, the Commission or the office designated by the Commission shall
record:
         (a)   The name and home address of the individual reviewing or copying
the statement and
         (b)   The name of the person whose financial disclosure statement was
examined or copied.
      (4)   Upon request by the official or employee whose financial disclosure
statement was examined or copied, the Commission or the office designated by
the Commission shall provide the official with a copy of the name and home
address of the person who reviewed the official's financial disclosure
statement.
      (5)   For statements filed after January 1, 2019, the Commission or the
office designated by the Commission may not provide public access to an
individual's home address that the individual has designated as the
individual's home address.
      (6)   The Commission or office designated by the Commission shall not
provide public access to information related to consideration received from:
         (a)   The University of Maryland Medical System;
         (b)   A governmental entity of the State or a local government in the
State; or
         (c)   A quasi-governmental entity of the State or local government in
the State.   
   (D)   Retention requirements. The Commission or the office designated by the
Commission shall retain financial disclosure statements for four years from the
date of receipt.
   (E)   An individual who is required to disclose the name of a business under
this section shall disclose any other names that the business is trading as or
doing business as.
   (F)   Contents of statement.
      (1)   Interests in real property.
         (a)   A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in real property wherever located.
         (b)   For each interest in real property, the schedule shall include:
            (i)   The nature of the property and the location by street
address, mailing address, or legal description of the property;
            (ii)   The nature and extent of the interest held, including any
conditions and encumbrances on the interest;
            (iii)   The date when, the manner in which, and the identity of the
person from whom the interest was acquired;
            (iv)   The nature and amount of the consideration given in exchange
for the interest or, if acquired other than by purchase, the fair market value
of the interest at the time acquired;
            (v)   If any interest was transferred, in whole or in part, at any
time during the reporting period, a description of the interest transferred,
the nature and amount of the consideration received for the interest, and the
identity of the person to whom the interest was transferred; and
            (vi)   The identity of any other person with an interest in the
property.
      (2)   Interests in corporations and partnerships.
         (a)   A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in any corporation, partnership, limited liability partnership,
or limited liability corporation, regardless of whether the corporation or
partnership does business with the County.
         (b)   For each interest reported under this paragraph, the schedule
shall include:
            (i)   The name and address of the principal office of the
corporation, partnership, limited liability partnership, or limited liability
corporation;
            (ii)   The nature and amount of the interest held, including any
conditions and encumbrances on the interest;
            (iii)   With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in
part, at any time during the reporting period, a description of the interest
transferred, the nature and amount of the consideration received for the
interest, and, if known, the identity of the person to whom the interest was
transferred; and
            (iv)   With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting
period:
               a.   The date when, the manner in which, and the identity of the
person from whom the interest was acquired and
               b.   The nature and the amount of the consideration given in
exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than by purchase, the fair
market value of the interest at the time acquired.
         (c)   An individual may satisfy the requirement to report the amount
of the interest held under subparagraph (F)(2)(b)(ii) of this paragraph by
reporting, instead of a dollar amount:
            (i)   For an equity interest in a corporation, the number of shares
held and, unless the corporation's stock is publicly traded, the percentage of
equity interest held or
            (ii)   For an equity interest in a partnership, the percentage of
equity interest held.
      (3)   Interests in business entities doing business with the County.
         (a)   A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in any business entity that does business with the County, other
than interests reported under paragraph (2) of this subparagraph.
         (b)   For each interest reported under this subparagraph, the schedule
shall include:
            (i)   The name and address of the principal office of the business
entity;
            (ii)   The nature and amount of the interest held, including any
conditions to and encumbrances in the interest;
            (iii)   With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in
part, at any time during the reporting period, a description of the interest
transferred, the nature and amount of the consideration received in exchange
for the interest, and, if known, the identity of the person to whom the
interest was transferred; and
            (iv)   With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting
period:
               a.   The date when, the manner in which, and the identity of the
person from whom the interest was acquired and
               b.   The nature and the amount of the consideration given in
exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than by purchase, the fair
market value of the interest at the time acquired.
      (4)   Gifts.
         (a)   A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
each gift in excess of $20 in value or a series of gifts totaling $100 or more
received during the reporting period from or on behalf of, directly or
indirectly, any one person who does business with or is regulated by the County
or from an association, or any entity acting on behalf of an association that
is engaged only in representing counties or municipal corporations.
         (b)   For each gift reported, the schedule shall include:
            (i)   A description of the nature and value of the gift and
            (ii)   The identity of the person from whom, or on behalf of whom,
directly or indirectly, the gift was received.
      (5)   Employment with or interests in entities doing business with the
County.
         (a)   A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all offices, directorships, and salaried employment by the individual or member
of the immediate family of the individual held at any time during the reporting
period with entities doing business with the County.
         (b)   For each position reported under this paragraph, the schedule
shall include:
            (i)   The name and address of the principal office of the business
entity;
            (ii)   The title and nature of the office, directorship, or
salaried employment held and the date it commenced; and
            (iii)   The name of each County division or agency with which the
entity is involved as indicated by identifying one or more of the three
categories of "doing business" as defined in §
1-7.1-3 of this chapter.
      (6)   Indebtedness to entities doing business with or regulated by the
official's or employee's department or agency.
         (a)   A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all liabilities, excluding retail credit accounts, to persons doing business
with or regulated by the official's or employee's department or agency owed at
any time during the reporting period:
            (i)   By the individual or
            (ii)   By a member of the immediate family of the individual if the
individual was involved in the transaction giving rise to the liability.
         (b)   For each liability reported under this paragraph, the schedule
shall include:
            (i)   The identity of the person to whom the liability was owed and
the date the liability was incurred;
            (ii)   The amount of the liability owed as of the end of the
reporting period;
            (iii)   The terms of payment of the liability and the extent to
which the principal amount of the liability was increased or reduced during the
year; and
            (iv)   The security given, if any, for the liability.
      (7)   Employment with the county. A statement filed under this section
shall include a schedule of the immediate family members of the individual
employed by the County in any capacity at any time during the reporting period.
      (8)   Sources of earned income.
         (a)   A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
the name and address of each place of employment and of each business entity of
which the individual or a member of the individual's immediate family was a
sole or partial owner and from which the individual or member of the
individual's immediate family received earned income, at any time during the
reporting period.
         (b)   A child's employment or business ownership need not be disclosed
if the County does not regulate, exercise authority over, or contract with the
place of employment or business entity of the child.
         (c)   For a statement filed on or after January 1, 2019, if the
individual's spouse is a lobbyist regulated by the County, the individual shall
disclose the entity that has engaged the spouse for lobbying purposes.
      (9)   Relationship with University of Maryland Medical System, state or
local government, or quasi-governmental entity.
         (a)   An individual shall disclose the information specified in
General Provisions Article § 5-607(j)(1), Annotated Code of Maryland, for any
financial or contractual relationship with:
            (i)   The University of Maryland Medical System;
            (ii)   A governmental entity of the State or a local government in
the State; or
            (iii)   A quasi-governmental entity of the State or local
government in the State.
         (b)   For each financial or contractual relationship reported, the
schedule shall include:
            (i)   A description of the relationship;
            (ii)   The subject matter of the relationship; and
            (iii)   The consideration.
      (10)   A statement filed under this section may also include a schedule
of additional interests or information that the individual making the statement
wishes to disclose.
   (G)   For the purposes of subparagraphs (F) (1), (2), and (3) of this
section, the following interests are considered to be the interests of the
individual making the statement:
      (1)   An interest held by a member of the individual's immediate family,
if the interest was, at any time during the reporting period, directly or
indirectly controlled by the individual;
      (2)   An interest held, at any time during the applicable period, by:
         (a)   A business entity in which the individual held a 10% or greater
interest;
         (b)   A business entity described in section (a) of this subsection in
which the business entity held a 25% or greater interest;
         (c)   A business entity described in section (b) of this subsection in
which the business entity held a 50% or greater interest; and
         (d)   A business entity in which the individual directly or
indirectly, through an interest in one or a combination of other business
entities, holds a 10% or greater interest.
      (3)   An interest held by a trust or an estate in which, at any time
during the reporting period:
         (a)   The individual held a reversionary interest or was a beneficiary
or
         (b)   If a revocable trust, the individual was a settlor.
   (H)   (1)   The Commission shall review the financial disclosure statements
submitted under this section for compliance with the provisions of this section
and shall notify an individual submitting the statement of any omissions or
deficiencies.
      (2)   The Commission may take appropriate enforcement action to ensure
compliance with this section.
(Ord. 11-26-592, 11-17-2011; Ord. 13-27-655, 12-5-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 16-01, 3-1-2016; Bill No. 18-14, 6-5-2018; Bill No. 22-14, 9-6-
2022)
§ 1-7.1-7. FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE; EMPLOYEES AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS.
   (A)   This section only applies to the following appointed officials and
employees:
      (1)   Officials and employees. All employees who are classified on the
Frederick County Government wage and salary plan at grade 16 and above unless
exempted by the Commission.
      (2)   Members of the following boards and commissions. *
         (a)   Advisory Plumbing Board.
         (b)   Agricultural Preservation Advisory Board.
         (c)   Agricultural Reconciliation Committee.
         (d)   Board of Gaming Appeals.
         (e)   Deferred Compensation Committee.
         (f)   Electrical Board
         (g)   Ethics Commission.
         (h)   Historic Preservation Commission.
         (i)   Interagency Internal Audit Authority.
         (j)   OPEB Trust Investment Committee.
         (k)   Police Accountability Board.
         (l)   Retirement Plan Committee.
* Members who are required to file financial disclosure statements under other
ethics laws are not required to file financial disclosure statements under this
chapter.
   (B)   A statement filed under this section shall be filed with the
Commission under oath or affirmation.
   (C)   On or before April 30 of each year during which an official or
employee holds office, an official or employee shall file a statement
disclosing gifts received during the preceding calendar year from any person
that contracts with or is regulated by the County, including the name of the
donor of the gift and the approximate retail value at the time of receipt.
   (D)   An official or employee shall disclose employment and interests that
raise conflicts of interest or potential conflicts of interest in connection
with a specific proposed action by the employee or official sufficiently in
advance of the action to provide adequate disclosure to the public.
   (E)   The Commission shall maintain all disclosure statements filed under
this section as public records available for public inspection and copying as
provided in §
1-7.1-6(C) and (D) of this chapter.
   (F)   For statements filed after January 1, 2019, the Commission or the
office designated by the Commission may not provide public access to an
individual's home address that the individual has designated as the
individual's home address.
(Ord. 11-26-592, 11-17-2011; Ord. 13-27-655, 12-5-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 16-01, 3-1-2016; Bill No. 18-14, 6-5-2018; Bill No. 22-14, 9-6-
2022)
§ 1-7.1-8. LOBBYING.
   (A)   Except as provided in paragraphs (B) and (C) of this section, a person
or entity who engages in lobbying as defined in §
1-7.1-3 shall file a lobbying registration with the Commission if the person or
entity, during the calendar year:
      (1)   Expends, exclusive of personal travel and subsistence expenses, in
excess of $2,500 in furtherance of this activity;
      (2)   Is compensated in excess of $2,500 in connection with this
activity; or
      (3)   Spends $100 or more cumulatively on gifts to or for officials or
employees or their spouses or dependent children.
   (B)   The following activities are exempt from regulation under this
section:
      (1)   Professional services in drafting bills or in advising and
rendering opinions to clients as to the construction and effect of proposed or
pending legislation when these services do not otherwise constitute lobbying
activities;
      (2)   Appearances before the County Council upon its specific invitation
or request if the person or entity engages in no further or other activities in
connection with the passage or defeat of County Council actions;
      (3)   Appearances before a County agency upon the specific invitation or
request of the agency if the person or entity engages in no further or other
activities in connection with the passage or defeat of any agency action;
      (4)   Appearance as part of the official duties of a duly elected or
appointed official or employee of the State or a political subdivision of the
State, or of the United States, and not on behalf of any other entity;
      (5)   Actions of a publisher or working member of the press, radio, or
television in the ordinary course of the business of disseminating news or
making editorial comment to the general public who does not engage in further
or other lobbying that would directly and specifically benefit the economic,
business, or professional interests of the person or entity or the employer of
the person or entity;
      (6)   Appearances by an individual before the County Council at the
specific invitation or request of a registered lobbyist if the person performs
no other lobbying act and notifies the County Council that the person or entity
is testifying at the request of the lobbyist;
      (7)   Appearances by an individual before a County agency at the specific
invitation or request of a registered lobbyist if the person or entity performs
no other lobbying act and notifies the agency that the person or entity is
testifying at the request of the lobbyist;
      (8)   The representation of a bona fide religious organization solely for
the purpose of protecting the right of its own members to practice the doctrine
of the organization; and
      (9)   Appearance as part of the official duties of an officer, director,
member, or employee of an association engaged exclusively in lobbying for
counties and municipalities and not on behalf of any other entity.
   (C)   Limited exemption - employer of a lobbyist.
      (1)   A person or entity who compensates one or more lobbyists and who
would otherwise be required to register as a lobbyist is not required to file a
registration and submit lobbying reports if the person or entity reasonably
believes that all expenses incurred in connection with the lobbying activities
will be reported by a properly registered person or entity acting on behalf of
the person or entity.
      (2)   A person or entity exempted under this paragraph becomes subject to
this section immediately upon failure of the lobbyist to report any information
required under this section.
   (D)   (1)   The registration filed under this section shall be filed on or
before the later of the beginning of the calendar year in which the person or
entity expects to lobby or within 5 days of first engaging in lobbying
activities in the calendar year.
      (2)   The registration filed under this section:
         (a)   Shall be dated and on a form developed by the Commission;
         (b)   Shall include:
            (i)   The lobbyist's full and legal name and permanent address;
            (ii)   The name, address, and nature of business of any person or
entity on whose behalf the lobbyist acts; and
            (iii)   The written authorization of any person or entity on whose
behalf the lobbyist acts or an authorized officer or agent, who is not the
lobbyist, of the person or entity on whose behalf the lobbyist acts;
         (c)   A statement of whether the person or entity on whose behalf the
lobbyist acts is exempt from registration under paragraph (C) of this section;
         (d)   The identification, by formal designation, if known, of matters
on which the lobbyist expects to act;
         (e)   Identification of the period of time within a single calendar
year during which the lobbyist is authorized to engage in these activities,
unless terminated sooner; and
         (f)   The full legal signature of the lobbyist and, when appropriate,
the person or entity on whose behalf the lobbyist acts or an agent or
authorized officer of the person or entity on whose behalf the lobbyist acts.
   (E)   A lobbyist shall file a separate registration for each person or
entity that has engaged or employed the lobbyist for lobbying purposes.
   (F)   A lobbyist may terminate the lobbyist's registration by providing
written notice to the Commission and submitting all outstanding reports and
registrations.
   (G)   A person or entity may not engage in lobbying activities on behalf of
another person or entity for compensation that is contingent upon the passage
or defeat of any County Council action or the outcome of any County Executive
action.
   (H)   Activity report.
      (1)   A lobbyist shall file with the Commission or the office designated
by the Commission:
         (a)   By July 31, one report concerning the lobbyist's lobbying
activities covering the period beginning January 1 through June 30; and
         (b)   By January 31, one report covering the period beginning July 1
through December 31.
      (2)   A lobbyist shall file a separate activity report for each person or
entity on whose behalf the lobbyist acts.
      (3)   If the lobbyist is not an individual, an authorized officer or
agent of the entity shall sign the form.
      (4)   The report shall include:
         (a)   A complete and current statement of the information required to
be supplied with the lobbyist's registration form.
         (b)   Total expenditures on lobbying activities in each of the
following categories:
            (i)   Total compensation paid to the lobbyist not including
expenses reported under items (ii) - (ix) of this subparagraph;
            (ii)   Office expenses of the lobbyist;
            (iii)   Professional and technical research and assistance not
reported in item (i) of this subparagraph;
            (iv)   Publications which expressly encourage persons to
communicate with County officials or employees;
            (v)   Names of witnesses, and the fees and expenses paid to each
witness;
            (vi)   Meals and beverages for County officials and employees;
            (vii)   Reasonable expenses for food, lodging, and scheduled
entertainment of County officials or employees for a meeting which is given in
return for participation in a panel or speaking engagement at the meeting;
            (viii)   Other gifts to or for officials or employees or their
spouses or dependent children; and
            (ix)   Other expenses.
   (I)   Special gift report.
      (1)   (a)   With the 6-month activity report required under paragraph (H)
of this section, a lobbyist shall report, except for gifts reported in
subparagraph (H)(4)(b)(vii) of this section, gifts from the lobbyist with a
cumulative value of $75 or more during the reporting period to an official,
employee, or member of the immediate family of an official or employee.
         (b)   The lobbyist shall report gifts under this paragraph regardless
of whether the gift was given in connection with lobbying activities.
      (2)   The report shall include the date, beneficiary, amount or value,
and nature of the gift.
   (J)   Notification to official or employee and confidentiality.
      (1)   If any report filed under this section contains the name of an
official or employee or a member of the immediate family of an official or
employee, the Commission shall notify the official or employee within 30 days.
      (2)   The Commission shall keep the report confidential for 60 days
following receipt by the Commission.
      (3)   Within 30 days of the notice required under subparagraph (1) of
this paragraph, the official or employee may file a written exception to the
inclusion in the report of the name of the official, employee, or member of the
immediate family of the official or employee.
   (K)   The Commission may require a lobbyist to submit other reports the
Commission determines to be necessary.
   (L)   The Commission or office designated by the Commission shall maintain
all registrations and reports filed under this section.
   (M)   (1)   The Commission shall review the registrations and reports filed
under this section for compliance with this section and shall notify persons
engaging in lobbying activities of any omissions or deficiencies.
      (2)   The Commission may take appropriate enforcement action to ensure
compliance with this section.
   (N)   Annual report.
      (1)   The Commission shall compute and make available a subtotal under
each of the ten required categories in subparagraph (H)(4)(b) of this section.
      (2)   The Commission shall compute and make available the total amount
reported by all lobbyists for their lobbying activities during the reporting
period.
   (O)   The Commission shall make lobbying registrations and reports available
during normal business hours for examination and copying subject to reasonable
fees and procedures established by the Commission.
(Ord. 11-26-592, 11-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-01, 3-1-
2016; Bill No. 18-14, 6-5-2018)
§ 1-7.1-9. EXEMPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
    The Commission may grant exemptions and modifications to the provisions of
§§
1-7.1-5 and
1-7.1-7 of this chapter to employees and to appointed members of County boards
and commissions, when the Commission finds that an exemption or modification
would not be contrary to the purposes of this chapter, and the application of
this chapter would:
   (A)   Constitute an unreasonable invasion of privacy and
   (B)   Significantly reduce the availability of qualified persons for public
service.
(Ord. 11-26-592, 11-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-01, 3-1-
2016)
§ 1-7.1-10. ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Commission may:
      (1)   Assess a late fee of$5 per day up to a maximum of$500 for a failure
to timely file a financial disclosure statement required under §
1-7.1-6 and §
1-7.1-7 of this chapter;
      (2)   Assess a late fee of $10 per day up to a maximum of$1,000 for a
failure to file a timely lobbyist registration or lobbyist report required
under §
1-7.1-8 of this chapter; and
      (3)   Issue a cease and desist order against any person found to be in
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this chapter,
the Commission may:
         (a)   Issue an order of compliance directing the respondent to cease
and desist from the violation;
         (b)   Issue a reprimand; or
         (c)   Recommend to the appropriate authority other appropriate
discipline of the respondent, including censure or removal if that discipline
is authorized by law.
      (2)   If the Commission finds that a respondent has violated §
1-7.1-8 of this chapter, the Commission may:
         (a)   Require a respondent who is a registered lobbyist to file any
additional reports or information reasonably related to the information that is
required under §
1-7.1-8 of this chapter;
         (b)   Impose a fine not exceeding $5,000 for each violation; and
         (c)   Suspend the registration of an individual registered lobbyist if
the Commission finds that the lobbyist has knowingly and willfully violated §
1-7.1-8 of this chapter or has been convicted of a criminal offense arising
from lobbying activities.
   (C)   (1)   Upon request of the Commission, the County Attorney may file a
petition for injunctive or other relief in the Circuit Court of Frederick
County, or in any other court having proper venue for the purpose of requiring
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   (a)   The court may:
            (i)   Issue an order to cease and desist from the violation;
            (ii)   Except as provided in subparagraph (2)(b) of this paragraph,
void an official action taken by an official or employee with a conflict of
interest prohibited by this chapter when the action arises from or concerns the
subject matter of the conflict and if the legal action is brought within 90
days of the occurrence of the official action, if the court deems voiding the
action to be in the best interest of the public; or
            (iii)   Impose a fine of up to $5,000 for any violation of the
provisions of this chapter, with each day upon which the violation occurs
constituting a separate offense.
         (b)   A court may not void any official action appropriating public
funds, levying taxes, or providing for the issuance of bonds, notes, or other
evidences of public obligations.
   (D)   In addition to any other enforcement provisions in this chapter, a
person who the Commission or a court finds has violated this chapter:
      (1)   Is subject to termination or other disciplinary action and
      (2)   May be suspended from receiving payment of salary or other
compensation pending full compliance with the terms of an order of the
Commission or a court.
   (E)   A County official or employee found to have violated this chapter is
subject to disciplinary or other appropriate personnel action, including
removal from office, disciplinary action, suspension of salary, or other
sanction.
   (F)   (1)   Any person who knowingly and willfully violates §
1-7.1-8 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, is
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 1
year, or both.
      (2)   If the person is a business entity and not a natural person, each
officer and partner of the business entity who knowingly authorized or
participated in the violation is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
is subject to the same penalties as the business entity.
   (G)   A finding of a violation of this chapter by the Commission is public
information. If the Commission finds that an official or employee who was the
subject of an ethics complaint has violated this chapter, the name of the
official or employee is public information and must be included in the
Commission's written decision.
(Ord. 11-26-592, 11-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-01, 3-1-
2016; Bill No. 18-14, 6-5-2018)
§ 1-7.1-11. RETALIATION PROHIBITED.
   An official or employee may not retaliate against an individual for
reporting or participating in an investigation of a potential violation of the
local ethics law or ordinance.
(Bill No. 16-01, 3-1-2016; Bill No. 22-14, 9-6-2022)
CHAPTER 1-8: FINANCE AND TAXATION
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-8-1 — 1-8-20)
Section
   
1-8-1   Depositories for county funds
   
1-8-2   Authorization for disbursements and check signature authority
   
1-8-3   Property tax credits
   
1-8-4   Discount of taxes
   
1-8-5   Payment of county taxes in arrears
   
1-8-6   Interest rate for redemption of tax sale property
   
1-8-7   Evidence required for reimbursement of fees and costs on redemption
   
1-8-8    Homestead property tax credit
   
1-8-9   Limited business personal property tax
   
1-8-10   Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund
Cross references:
   Financing of water, sewer or drainage projects, see §§
2-13-13 et seq.;
   Loan for capital improvement of schools, see §
2-2-27;
   Local laws relating to budget procedures, see §
2-7-46;
   Local laws relating to finance and taxation, see
Chapter 2-7;
   Local law relating to special assessments for roads, §§
2-11-73 et seq.;
   Tax levy authorized to support fire company, see §§
2-8-1 et seq.;
   Tax levy for certain organizations, see §
2-2-26;
   Tax levy for law library, see §
2-5-29;
   Tax on automobile trailer parks, see §§
1-17-71 et seq.;
   Tax to support library, see §
2-2-25
§ 1-8-1. DEPOSITORIES FOR COUNTY FUNDS.
   The County Finance Director may designate the banks in which county funds
shall be deposited.
(1959 Code, § 33-1) (Ord. 02-27-323, 11-19-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR DISBURSEMENTS AND CHECK SIGNATURE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Director of Finance may authorize disbursements from the county
payroll account or the general disbursement account.
   (B)   The County Executive, either by actual signature or facsimile
signature, shall sign a check drawn upon the county payroll account or general
disbursement account.
(1959 Code, § 33-5) (Ord. 89-52-583, 9-5-1989; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-3. PROPERTY TAX CREDITS.
   Pursuant to Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article § 9-312, the following rules
and regulations are adopted governing county property tax credits under such §
9-312.
   (A)   Any person, organization or entity eligible for a tax credit under §
9-312 shall file with the County an application for a tax credit for each
taxable year. Such application may be made at any time up to October 1 of any
given taxable year; provided, that if no application is received on or before
that date, any credit hereunder shall not be allowed. Any application shall be
made under oath or affirmation.
   (B)   Application shall be made on forms prepared by the County. These rules
and regulations shall not govern any tax credit for property in any historical
district, but tax credits for any property within an historical district shall
be governed by the regulations adopted by the County on April 7, 1975.
   (C)   These rules and regulations shall be administered by the County
Executive.
   (D)   Notice of each credit that the taxpayer is entitled to under Tax
Property Article § 9-312 shall be given to the taxpayer at the time the tax
bill is sent.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the credit allowed, if
the applicant is eligible, shall be the total assessed value of the property
multiplied by the County ordinary tax rate.
   (F)   In the event a qualified applicant pays more County taxes than due for
a tax year in which the applicant is qualified for a tax credit under Md. Code
Ann., Tax Property § 9-312, the County Treasurer is hereby authorized to refund
any County taxes collected in excess of the amount due as determined by the
County.
   (G)   In the event an applicant is determined by the County to be eligible
under the law and these regulations for a tax credit and the taxes for the
taxable year have not been paid, the County Treasurer is hereby directed to
give a credit on the County taxes due in an amount calculated as provided in
paragraph (E), and the administrative assistant is authorized and directed to
issue a tax credit certificate on a form to be devised by him which shall be
accepted by the County Treasurer as evidence of any credit due under this
section, and the County Treasurer shall collect only any amount due for taxes
after deducting the amount of the tax credit.
(1959 Code, § 33-16) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-8-4. DISCOUNT OF TAXES.
   (A)   Discounts shall be allowed on the payment of annual county property
tax and special district tax due July 1 of each year as follows.
      (1)   A discount of 1% shall be allowed if such taxes are paid in July of
the year in which they are due.
      (2)   A discount of 0.5% shall be allowed if such taxes are paid in
August of the year in which they are due.
      (3)   There shall be no discount if such taxes are paid in September,
October, November or December of the year in which they are levied.
   (B)   The discount for supplemental roll property tax bills shall be 1% if
such taxes are paid within 30 days of the billing date.
   (C)   The discount on public utility property tax bills shall be 1% if such
taxes are paid within 30 days of the billing date.
(1959 Code, §§ 33-10, 33-11) (Ord. 91-16-016, 6-18-1991; Ord. 91-18-018, 7-2-
1991; Ord. 07-09-449, 4-12-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to provide for discounts, see Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property § 10-
301.
§ 1-8-5. PAYMENT OF COUNTY TAXES IN ARREARS.
   After 30 days notice of sale has been mailed to property owners in
accordance with Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article § 14-812, the County
Treasurer shall accept only cash, cashier’s check, certified check or money
order for the payment of such county taxes which are in arrears.
(1959 Code, § 33-15) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-6. INTEREST RATE FOR REDEMPTION OF TAX SALE PROPERTY.
   The interest rate to redeem property sold for taxes is hereby fixed at 8%
per annum, provided that the interest rate established herein shall be
applicable beginning with the redemption of properties sold at the May, 1998,
tax sale and thereafter, unless changed by the county governing body.
(Ord. 76-11-71, 11-22-1976; Ord. 80-27-179, 9-9-1980; Ord. 98-05-207, 4-21-
1998; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to set such interest rates, see Md. Code Ann., Tax Property
Article §§ 14-820 and 14-828
§ 1-8-7. EVIDENCE REQUIRED FOR REIMBURSEMENT OF FEES AND COSTS ON REDEMPTION.
   In order to be reimbursed for expenses incurred in any action or in
preparation for any action to foreclose a right of redemption, under Md. Code
Ann., Tax Property Article, § 14-843, the plaintiff or the holder of a
certificate of sale issued by the Treasurer, pursuant to a tax sale, shall
provide proof, in a manner satisfactory to the Treasurer, of services received
or expenses incurred.
(Ord. 98-05-207, 4-21-1998; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-8. HOMESTEAD PROPERTY TAX CREDIT.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by the Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article
§ 9-105, the Frederick County homestead tax credit percentage for all tax years
beginning on or after June 30, 2006, shall be 105%.
(Ord. 05-15-376, 6-23-2005; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-9. LIMITED BUSINESS PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX.
   (A)   That subclass of personal property set forth in the Md. Code Ann.,
Tax-Property Article, § 8-101(c)(6), specifically being "machinery and
equipment, other than operating personal property of a public utility, that is
used to generate (i) electricity or steam for sale; or (ii) hot or chilled
water for sale that is used to heat or cool a building" is subject to property
tax.
   (B)   Pursuant to the authority granted by the Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property
Article, § 6-202, property tax is imposed upon the assessment of that personal
property identified in subsection (A) above.
   (C)   Further pursuant to the authority granted by the Md. Code Ann., Tax-
Property Article, § 7-514, the percent of assessment for personal property
described in Tax-Property Article, § 7-237, that is subject to Frederick County
personal property tax shall be 65% for the taxable year beginning July 1, 2008;
60% for the taxable year beginning July 1, 2009; 55% for the taxable year
beginning July 1, 2010; and thereafter the maximum percent of assessment
allowed by state law.
(Ord. 08-04-480, 2-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-10. COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AND REPAIR FUND.
   (A)   Pursuant to Md. Code Ann., Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article, §
1-322, the county hereby establishes a Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund
(the "Fund").
   (B)   The Fund consists of distributions from the Comptroller pursuant to
Md. Code Ann., Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article, § 1-322.
   (C)   The Fund may be used only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Funding community-based initiatives intended to benefit low-income
communities;
      (2)   Funding community-based initiatives that serve disproportionately
impacted areas, as defined in Md. Code Ann., Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Article, § 36-101; and
      (3)   Any related administrative expenses.
   (D)   Money may not be expended from the Fund for law enforcement agencies
or activities.
   (E)   Money expended from the Fund is supplemental to and may not supplant
funding that otherwise would be appropriated for preexisting local government
programs.
(Bill No. 24-08, 6-18-2024)
§§ 1-8-11 – 1-8-20. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: ANNUAL BUDGET (§§ 1-8-21 — 1-8-45)
Section
   
1-8-21   Position of budget officer created
   
1-8-22   Budget schedule
   
1-8-23   Budget manual and instruction
   
1-8-24   Instructions for submission of work programs
   
1-8-25   Submission of data and information
   
1-8-26   When budget to be adopted
   
1-8-27   Formal budget document
   
1-8-28   Public hearings
   
1-8-29   Annual preparation, manner of adoption; fixing of charges
   
1-8-30   Bond issue
Editor’s note:
   Res. 79-37, § 12, adopted Oct. 9, 1979, rescinded Res. 79-3, §§ 1 through 5,
7 through 11, adopted Jan. 3, 1979, from which former Art. II was derived.
Sections 1 through 11 of Ord. 79-37, not specifically amendatory of the code
and pertaining to similar subject matter, have been included as a new Art. II
at the discretion of the editor.
§ 1-8-21. POSITION OF BUDGET OFFICER CREATED.
   The position of budget officer is hereby established to assist in the
preparation of all county budgets.
(Res. 79-37, § 3, 10-9-1979; Ord. 97-13-191, 8-7-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-8-22. BUDGET SCHEDULE.
   The budget officer shall prepare a budget schedule for approval by the
county governing body for budget preparation, submission of estimates, review
presentation, public hearings, enactment and other related budget and
accounting matters.
(Res. 79-37, 10-9-1979; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-23. BUDGET MANUAL AND INSTRUCTION.
   The budget officer shall be responsible for preparing a budget manual and
instructions for all county departments, agencies and any individual or group
to which the county appropriates funds.
(Res. 79-37, § 4, 10-9-1979; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-24. INSTRUCTIONS FOR SUBMISSION OF WORK PROGRAMS.
   The budget officer shall provide instructions for the submission of
departmental and agency work programs and other justification with the budget
estimates.
(Res. 79-37, § 5, 10-9-1979; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-25. SUBMISSION OF DATA AND INFORMATION.
   Any department, board, commission, agency or court or any private
organization, corporation or individual seeking county funds shall submit to
the budget officer such justification, financial data or other information as
the county shall require, and after expenditure of the appropriation, if any,
shall submit such information or be subject to an audit as the county may
direct.
(Res. 79-37, § 11, 10-9-1979; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-26. WHEN BUDGET TO BE ADOPTED.
   Budgets shall be adopted by the county governing body prior to the beginning
of a fiscal year. Budgets for new sewer and water systems to be operated by the
county shall be adopted prior to initiation to the system.
(Res. 79-37, § 2, 10-9-1979; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-27. FORMAL BUDGET DOCUMENT.
   (A)   The budget officer shall present a formal budget document which shall:
      (1)   Be available to the public for inspection upon request and a
summary of which will be available for public distribution;
      (2)   Be a comprehensive financial plan showing all receipts and
expenditures for all funds for the immediate past and current year and current
requests;
      (3)   Set forth county fiscal policy and significant changes in the
policy;
      (4)   State the debt service requirements;
      (5)   Contain any other information the county governing body may deem
advisable and be balanced as to revenues and expenditures for all funds.
   (B)   The document shall include a current expense budget, a capital budget
and a capital program. The capital program shall set forth clearly the plan of
proposed capital projects to be undertaken in the ensuing fiscal year and the
next 5 fiscal years and the proposed means of financing the same. The capital
budget shall include a statement of the receipts anticipated during the ensuing
fiscal year from all borrowing and other sources for capital projects.
(Res. 79-37, §§ 6, 7, 10-9-1979; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-28. PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   Public hearings as required by law on the budget shall be scheduled by the
budget officer with approval of the County Executive or County Council,
depending on which office is required to hold a public hearing. A summary of
the approved and enacted budget will be reproduced and available to the public
upon request.
(Res. 79-37, § 8, 10-9-1979; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-29. ANNUAL PREPARATION, MANNER OF ADOPTION; FIXING OF CHARGES.
   A budget shall be prepared annually in accordance with the above schedule
and the budget shall be adopted by an appropriation ordinance and the fixing of
levies, fees and charges shall be by an ordinance adopted by the county
governing body. Such levies, fees and charges shall be levied to keep the
budget in balance.
(Res. 79-37, § 9, 10-9-1979; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-30. BOND ISSUE.
   The county governing body may also adopt resolutions pursuant to enabling
laws to provide for projects to be financed from borrowing or the issuance of
bonds.
(Res. 79-37, § 10, 10-9-1979; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-8-31 – 1-8-45. RESERVED.
Editor's note:
   Sections 1-8-31 and 1-8-32, which set out provisions relating to the
Frederick and New Market Fire and Rescue tax districts, and §§ 1-8-33, 1-8-35
and 1-8-37, setting out provisions relating to the Middletown, Libertytown and
Lewistown-Independent Ambulance tax districts, have been redesignated as a new
Art. V to this chapter, §§ 1-8-151 through 1-8-155, with the consent of the
county. This redesignation was done in order to provide for better
classification and to facilitate the indexing, reference, use, and expansion of
this material.
ARTICLE III: RESERVED
Section
   1-8-46 - 1-8-47      Reserved
ARTICLE III.A: RECORDATION TAX (§§ 1-8-51 — 1-8-60)
Section
   
1-8-51   Recordation tax rate and allocation of proceeds
§ 1-8-51. RECORDATION TAX RATE AND ALLOCATION OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   Definitions. In this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated.
      AG.  The Agriculture Article of the Maryland Code Annotated.
      CODE. The Frederick County Code.
      COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
      CRITICAL FARMS PROGRAM. The Frederick County Critical Farms Program,
created by Ord. 94-02-097, codified at §
1-13-34 of the Code.
      FREDERICK COUNTY AGRICULTURAL LAND PRESERVATION PROGRAM. The Frederick
County Agricultural Land Preservation Program created on May 28, 1991, pursuant
to the provisions of AG § 2-512.
      HOUSING INITIATIVE FUND. A fund established by the County to facilitate
affordable housing. See §
1-6A-3 of the Code.
      INSTRUMENT OF WRITING. The meaning set forth in TP § 12-101(j).
      MARYLAND AGRICULTURAL LAND PRESERVATION FOUNDATION PROGRAM. The Maryland
Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation Program established and codified in
AG §§ 2-501 et seq.
      NR. The Natural Resources Article of the Maryland Code Annotated.
      PROCEEDS FROM THE RECORDATION TAX. The proceeds the County receives from
the recordation tax after any payment required by law to the State of Maryland.
      RECORDATION TAX. The recordation tax authorized by TP §§ 12-102 et seq.
      RURAL LEGACY PROGRAM. The Rural Legacy Program established and codified
in NR §§ 5-9A-01 et seq.
      TP. The Tax-Property Article of the Maryland Code Annotated.
   (B)   Recordation tax rate. Pursuant to TP § 12-103(B)(1), the County hereby
sets the recordation tax rate at $7 for each $500 or fraction of $500 of
consideration payable or of the principal amount of the debt secured for an
instrument of writing. The consideration includes the amount of any mortgage or
deed of trust assumed by the grantee(s).
   (C)   Allocation of unrestricted proceeds from the recordation tax. For
fiscal year 2021 48.710%, for fiscal year 2022 48.290%, and for fiscal year
2023 and thereafter 47.860% of the proceeds from the recordation tax shall be
unrestricted and shall go to the County General Fund.
   (D)   Allocation of restricted proceeds from the recordation tax. The County
hereby restricts for fiscal year 2021 51.290%, for fiscal year 2022 51.710% and
for fiscal year 2023 and thereafter 52.140% of the proceeds from the
recordation tax. The use of the funds from the restricted portion of the
proceeds from the recordation tax is limited as follows.
      (1)   25.000% of the proceeds from the recordation tax shall be used for:
         (a)   The County’s matching contribution toward the purchases of
agricultural land preservation easements under the Maryland Agricultural Land
Preservation Fund Program as set forth in AG §§ 2-501 et seq.;
         (b)   The purchase of development rights and to guarantee loans that
are collateralized by development rights for agricultural lands under the
Frederick County Agricultural Land Preservation Program pursuant to AG § 2-512
(E)(2);
         (c)   The purchase of options to purchase development rights easements
pursuant to §
1-13-34(H) of the Critical Farms Program and to purchase development rights
easements pursuant to §
1-13-34(I) of the Critical Farms Program;
         (d)   The purchase of development rights, easements, or fee estates
under the Rural Legacy Program;
         (e)   Other agricultural land preservation programs approved by the
County; or
         (f)   Some combination of the above programs including: setting aside
$500,000 annually for agriculture diversification economic development grants;
rural historic preservation; and first-time homebuyer assistance. Amounts
allotted to each purpose will be established annually in the budget.
      (2)   10.710% of the proceeds from the recordation tax shall be used for
the County’s acquisition and development of recreational and open space land.
      (3)   14.290% of the proceeds from the recordation tax shall be used to
support school construction to include, but not be limited to, payment of debt
service on general obligation debt issued to fund school construction.
      (4)   For fiscal year 2021 1.290%, for fiscal year 2022 1.710%, and for
fiscal year 2023 and thereafter 2.140% of the proceeds from the recordation tax
shall be deposited into the Housing Initiative Fund and used to facilitate
affordable housing in the County.
(Ord. 00-06-248, 5-23-2000; Ord. 06-07-403, 3-21-2006; Ord. 07-13-453, 4-24-
2007; Ord. 11-24-590, 11-3-2011; Ord. 14-06-661, 6-17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-
13-2014; Bill No. 17-02, 3-21-2017; Bill No. 19-12, 9-3-2019; Bill No. 20-03,
3-17-2020; Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-2022)
Cross reference:
   Critical farms program, see §
1-13-34
§§ 1-8-52 – 1-8-60. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III.B: PROPERTY TAX CREDIT (§§ 1-8-61 — 1-8-70)
Section
   
1-8-61   Property tax credit
   
1-8-62   Agricultural preservation land property tax credit
   
1-8-63   Agricultural building property tax credit
   
1-8-64   Property tax credit for surviving spouse of a fallen emergency worker
   
1-8-65   Local supplement to homeowners property tax credit
   
1-8-66   Senior citizens' local supplement to homeowners property tax credit
   
1-8-67   Elderly individuals and uniformed service members property tax credit
   
1-8-68   Disabled veterans property tax credit
   
1-8-69   Tax credit for day care providers
§ 1-8-61. PROPERTY TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   A property tax credit against the county property tax imposed on real
property is hereby granted pursuant to Maryland Code Annotated, Tax Property
Article, § 9-221.
   (B)   This real property tax credit is available only to the owner-occupied
property of a homeowner as defined in Maryland Code Annotated, Tax Property
Article, § 9-105 with a property assessment on the July 1, 2021, real estate
taxes and fees bill of $328,512 or less as reduced by the amount of any
assessment on which a property tax credit is granted under Md. Code Ann., Tax
Property Article, § 9-105.
   (C)   The amount of this property tax credit shall be $175.00 for the July
1, 2021 through June 30, 2022 tax year for each owner-occupied property of a
homeowner as defined in Maryland Code Annotated, Tax Property Article, § 9-105.
This real property tax credit will be paid by check to the property owner on
record as of July 1, 2021, with the Maryland Department of Assessments and
Taxation. In the event the net Frederick County real property tax is less than
$175.00 a credit in the amount of the net county real property tax will be paid
by check to the property owner on record as of July 1, 2021, with the Maryland
Department of Assessments and Taxation. In no event shall this property tax
credit reduce a homeowners' net county real property tax to less than zero or
entitle a homeowner to a refund of the amount of unused credit.
(Ord. 12-19-614, 8-2-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 21-11, 11-16-
2021)
§ 1-8-62. AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION LAND PROPERTY TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   Definitions. All terms used in this section shall have the same
meaning as provided in Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article, particularly § 9-
312.
   (B)   Grant of agricultural preservation land property tax credit.
      (1)   The county hereby grants, by law, a property tax credit for county
property tax imposed on agricultural preservation land satisfying the criteria
of this section.
      (2)   The amount of the agricultural preservation land property tax
credit shall be 100% of any county property tax imposed.
   (C)   Qualifications.
      (1)   To qualify for this agricultural preservation land tax credit, the
real property must be either:
         (a)   Subject to an easement or other interest that is permanently
conveyed or assigned to the county or a Maryland state agency to preserve the
agricultural use of the real property; or
         (b)   Designated by the county as being within an agricultural
preservation district under the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation
Foundation program.
      (2)   The agricultural preservation land tax credit shall apply only to
land and no buildings or other improvements shall be eligible for the
agricultural preservation land tax credit.
      (3)   A residence and 1 acre around the residence shall not be eligible
for the agricultural preservation land property tax credit.
   (D)   Duration. The agricultural preservation land property tax credit shall
remain in effect until the property no longer satisfies the criteria in this
section.
   (E)   Applicability of tax credit. The agricultural preservation land
property tax credit applies only to county property tax and does not apply to
any other tax, including any special taxing district tax, fire and rescue
district tax, electric lighting district tax or any tax imposed by the state, a
municipality or any other governmental entity.
(Ord. 02-24-320, 11-12-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-63. AGRICULTURAL BUILDING PROPERTY TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   Definitions. All terms used in this section shall have the same
meaning as provided in Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article, particularly § 9-
312.
   (B)   Grant of agricultural building property tax credit.
      (1)   The county governing body hereby grants, by law, a property tax
credit against the county property tax imposed on a farm building satisfying
the criteria of this section.
      (2)   The amount of the agricultural building property tax credit shall
be 100% of any county property tax imposed.
   (C)   Qualifications. To qualify for the agricultural building property tax
credit:
      (1)   The agricultural building must be located on land that qualifies
for an agricultural use assessment; and
      (2)   The agricultural building must be used in connection with an
activity that is recognized by the Maryland Department of Assessments and
Taxation as an approved agricultural activity.
   (D)   Exemptions.
      (1)   The agricultural building property tax credit applies only to
agricultural buildings, so land is not eligible for the agricultural building
property tax credit.
      (2)   A building used for a residential purpose or for any other purpose
not qualifying under §
1-8-63(C) is not eligible for the agricultural building property tax credit.
   (E)   Applicability of tax credit. The agricultural building property tax
credit applies only to the county real property tax and does not apply to any
other tax, including any special taxing district tax, fire and rescue district
tax, electric lighting district tax or any tax imposed by the state, a
municipality or any other governmental entity.
   (F)   Agency designated. The Frederick County Community Development Division
is hereby designated as the county agency to administer the agricultural
building property tax credit.
(Ord. 02-24-320, 11-12-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-64. PROPERTY TAX CREDIT FOR SURVIVING SPOUSE OF A FALLEN EMERGENCY
WORKER.
   (A)   Definitions. In this section the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
      DWELLING.  
         (a)   Real property that:
            1.   Is the legal residence of a surviving spouse; and
            2.   Is occupied by not more than two families.
         (b)   DWELLING includes the lot or curtilage and structures necessary
to use the real property as a residence.
      FALLEN EMERGENCY WORKER.  
         (a)   An individual who dies:
            1.   As a result of or in the course of employment as a law
enforcement officer; or
            2.   While in the active service of a fire, rescue, or emergency
medical service.
         (b)   FALLEN EMERGENCY WORKER does not include an individual whose
death was the result of the individual’s own willful misconduct or abuse of
alcohol or drugs.
      SURVIVING SPOUSE. A surviving spouse, who has not remarried, of a fallen
emergency worker.
   (B)   Credit. In accordance with § 9-210 of the Tax Property Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, an owner of real property may receive a property
tax credit under this section against the county property tax imposed on a
dwelling if the owner is a surviving spouse of a fallen emergency worker and:
      (1)   The dwelling was owned by the fallen emergency worker at the time
of the fallen emergency worker’s death;
      (2)   The fallen emergency worker or the surviving spouse was domiciled
in the state as of the date of the fallen emergency worker’s death and the
dwelling was acquired by the surviving spouse within two years of the fallen
emergency worker’s death; or
      (3)   The dwelling was acquired after the surviving spouse qualified for
a credit for a former dwelling under subsection (1) or (2) above, to the extent
of the previous credit.
   (C)   Amount of credit. The amount of the tax credit is equal to 100% of the
county property tax imposed on the dwelling.
   (D)   Term of credit. The tax credit continues for five years, without
further application by the surviving spouse.
   (E)   Application. A surviving spouse:
      (1)   Is eligible for the tax credit beginning in the first taxable year
after the date of the fallen emergency worker’s death; and
      (2)   May apply for the tax credit on or before September 30 in the
taxable year for which the credit is requested to begin.
   (F)   Administration.
      (1)   The director of finance shall establish procedures to administer
the tax credit established in this section.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (D) of this section, the director of
finance may require an individual who receives a tax credit under this section
to provide evidence of continued eligibility for the credit.
(Ord. 04-01-345, 2-17-2004; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Editor's note:
   This section was renumbered from § 1-8-62, as provided in Ordinance 04-01-
345.
§ 1-8-65. LOCAL SUPPLEMENT TO HOMEOWNERS PROPERTY TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   This tax credit supplement shall be known as the "local supplement to
homeowners property tax credit" and is authorized by, and subject to, the
provisions set forth in the Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article, §§ 9-215 and
9-104, except as specifically amended herein.
   (B)   Except as otherwise expressly stated in this section, all eligibility
requirements, statutory definitions, restrictions and procedures that apply to
the homeowners property tax credit granted under Md. Code Ann., Tax Property
Article, § 9-104 also apply to this local supplement to homeowners property tax
credit.
   (C)   Definitions:
      (1)   SDAT means the Maryland State Department of Assessments and
Taxation, the agency responsible for determining the assessed value of real
property in the State of Maryland and for administering Md. Code Ann., Tax
Property Article, § 9-104 homeowners property tax credit and for local
supplements to this homeowners tax credit.
      (2)   TOTAL REAL PROPERTY TAX means the product of the sum of all
property tax rates on real property, including special taxing districts such as
those for fire and rescue and lighting services, but not including state and
municipal district rates, for the taxable year on a dwelling, multiplied by the
lesser of the assessed value of the dwelling as determined by SDAT or $300,000,
and then reduced by any property tax credit granted under Md. Code Ann., Tax
Property Article, § 9-105.
   (D)   The amount of the local supplement to the homeowners property tax
credit is the total real property tax on a dwelling, less:
      (1)   The percentage of the combined gross income of the homeowner
calculated under subsection (E) below, and
      (2)   The property tax credit granted under Md. Code Ann., Tax Property
Article, § 9-104.
   (E)   The allowable percentage of combined gross income is:
      (1)   0% of the first $9,000;
      (2)   5% of the next $1,000;
      (3)   2.5% of the next $2,000;
      (4)   5% of the next $4,000;
      (5)   7.5% of the next $28,000; and
      (6)   10% of any combined gross income over $44,000.
   (F)   For purposes of this local supplement to homeowners property tax
credit the limitation on the assessed value of a dwelling taken into account in
determining total real property tax shall be the lesser of the assessed value
as determined by SDAT or $300,000.
   (G)   The local supplement to homeowners property tax credit for home
purchasers is the amount of the credit multiplied by a fraction where the
numerator of the fraction is the number of days in the taxable year that the
home purchaser actually occupies or expects to actually occupy the dwelling as
his or her principal residence and the denominator is 365 days.
   (H)   This local supplement to homeowners property tax credit shall be a
credit from the county real property tax imposed pursuant to Md. Code Ann., Tax
Property Article, § 6-202 and shall also include the tax of special taxing
districts including, but not limited to the tax for fire and rescue and
lighting services, imposed pursuant to Maryland or Frederick County law.
   (I)   This local supplement to homeowners property tax credit is to be
administered by SDAT with respect to its application and determination of
eligibility of homeowners. Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article, § 9-215
requires that Frederick County reimburse SDAT for the reasonable cost of
administering this local supplement to homeowners property tax credit. To the
extent that Frederick County rules or regulations may be required with respect
to this local supplement to homeowners property tax credit, authority to
promulgate these rules and regulations is delegated to the Director, Division
of Finance, Frederick County Government.
   (J)   A person who knowingly submits a false or fraudulent application, or
withholds information, to obtain a tax credit under this section must repay
Frederick County for all amounts credited and all accrued interest and
penalties that would apply to those amounts as overdue taxes and, in addition,
is subject to all fines and other penalties as may be provided by law.
Frederick County may enforce this section by appropriate legal action. A person
who violates this section is liable for all court costs and expenses of the
county in any civil action brought by Frederick County against the violator.
(Ord. 05-06-367, 5-12-2005; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-66. SENIOR CITIZENS' LOCAL SUPPLEMENT TO HOMEOWNERS PROPERTY TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   This tax credit supplement shall be known as the "senior citizens'
local supplement to homeowners property tax credit" and is authorized by, and
subject to, the provisions of the Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article, §§ 9-
104, 9-215 and 9-245, except as specifically amended herein.
   (B)   Except as otherwise expressly stated in this section, all eligibility
requirements, statutory definitions, restrictions and procedures that apply to
the homeowners property tax credit granted under Md. Code Ann., Tax Property
Article, § 9-104, also apply to this senior citizens' local supplement to
homeowners property tax credit.
   (C)   Eligibility for this senior citizens' local supplement.
      (1)   Taxpayers must be at least 65 years old as of the end of the
calendar year preceding the taxable year for which the senior citizens' local
supplement tax credit is sought; and
      (2)   Taxpayers must not have a combined gross household income exceeding
$100,000.00.
         (a)   If taxpayers have a combined gross household income of
$50,000.00 or less, the amount of the senior citizens' local supplement to the
homeowners property tax credit is equal to 50% of the net Frederick County real
property tax after adjustment for all other credits and exemptions.
         (b)   If taxpayers have a combined gross household income greater than
$50,000.00, but not more than $100,000.00, the amount of the senior citizens'
local supplement to the homeowners property tax credit is equal to 30% of the
net Frederick County real property tax after adjustment for all other credits
and exemptions.
         (c)   The amount of the combined gross household income that shall be
applied to subsection (C)(2), including (C)(2)(a) and (C)(2)(b), shall be
adjusted each year following the effective date of this bill, to reflect
changes in the Consumer Price Index. The adjusted value of each combined gross
household income value stated in subsection (C)(2) shall be determined by
multiplying the income amount by a fraction:
            1.   The numerator of which is the Consumer Price Index (as defined
in subsection (C)(2)(c)4. below) as of January of the year for which the
adjustment is being made.
            2.   The denominator of which is the Consumer Price Index (as
defined in subsection (C)(2)(c)4. below) as of January of the preceding year
for which the adjustment is being made.
            3.   The adjustment shall not result in a negative change to the
combined gross household income value. Should the adjustment be lower, the
combined gross household income shall remain the same as the previous year.
            4.   Consumer Price Index: Adjustments to the combined gross
household income will be based on the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage
Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W) Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-
WV, All Items, 1982-84=100, published bi-monthly by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics. In the event the Bureaus of Labor Statistics abandons publication
of the above-referenced index, the Frederick County Treasury Department shall
adopt any other index which, in its judgment, provides an accurate measure of
cost-of-living changes, pending amendment to this §
1-8-66.
   (D)   The amount of this senior citizens' local supplement tax credit may
not exceed the amount due for net Frederick County real property tax. This
senior citizens' local supplement tax credit does not apply to other than
county real property tax; it does not apply to excise or other taxes such as
fire or to special assessments. This property tax credit is only granted on the
taxes resulting from the first $400,000.00 of assessed value of the property.
   (E)   The property tax credit authorized by this section shall apply only in
taxable years beginning on or after July 1, 2024.
   (F)   This senior citizens' local supplement to homeowners property tax
credit is to be administered by the Maryland Department of Assessments and
Taxation ("SDAT") with respect to its application and determination of
eligibility of homeowners. Frederick County shall reimburse SDAT for the
reasonable cost of administering this senior citizens' local supplement to
homeowners property tax credit as required by the Md. Code Ann., Tax Property
Article, § 9-215. To the extent that Frederick County rules or regulations may
be required with respect to this senior citizens' local supplement to
homeowners property tax credit, authority to promulgate these rules and
regulations is delegated to the Director, Division of Finance, Frederick County
Government.
   (G)   A person who knowingly submits a false or fraudulent application, or
withholds information, to obtain a tax credit under this section must repay
Frederick County for all amounts credited and all accrued interest and
penalties that would apply to those amounts as overdue taxes and, in addition,
is subject to all fines and other penalties as may be provided by law.
Frederick County may enforce this section by appropriate legal action. A person
who violates this section is liable for all court costs and expenses of the
county in any civil action brought by Frederick County against the violator.
(Ord. 12-01-596, 1-3-2012; Ord. 14-02-657, 4-29-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 18-07, 5-15-2018; Bill No. 23-03, 5-2-2023)
§ 1-8-67. ELDERLY INDIVIDUALS AND UNIFORMED SERVICE MEMBERS PROPERTY TAX
CREDIT.
   (A)   Under the authority in Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article § 9-258 the
County grants a property tax credit against the County property tax imposed on
the dwelling of an eligible individual.
   (B)   (1)    In this section the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (2)   (a)   "Dwelling" means:
            (i)   A house that is:
               A.    Used as the principal residence of the homeowner; and
               B.    Actually occupied or expected to be actually occupied by
the homeowner for more than 6 months of a 12-month period beginning with the
date of finality for the taxable year for which the property tax credit under
this section is sought; and
            (ii)   The lot or curtilage on which the house is erected.
         (b)   "Dwelling" includes:
            (i)   A condominium unit that is occupied by an individual who has
a legal interest in the condominium;
            (ii)   An apartment in a cooperative apartment corporation that is
occupied by an individual who has a legal interest in the apartment; and
            (iii)   A part of real property used other than primarily for
residential purposes, if the real property is used as a principal residence by
an individual who has a legal interest in the real property.
      (3)   "Eligible individual" means:
         (a)   An individual who is at least 65 years old, has lived in the
same dwelling for at least the preceding 30 years, and has a combined gross
household income of $80,000 or less;
         (b)   An individual who is at least 65 years old and is a retired
member of the uniformed services of the United States as defined in 10 U.S.C. §
101, the military reserves, or the National Guard;
         (c)   A surviving spouse, who is at least 65 years old and has not
remarried, of a retired member of the uniformed services of the Unites States
as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101, the military reserves, or the National Guard;
         (d)   An individual who:
            (i)   Is an active duty, retired or honorably discharged member of
the uniformed services of the United States as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101, the
military reserves, or the National Guard; and
            (ii)   Has a service connected disability; or
         (e)   A surviving spouse of an individual described under item
subsection (B)(3)(d) of this section who has not remarried.
         (f)   The amount of the combined gross household income that shall be
applied to subsection (B)(3)(a), shall be adjusted each year following the
effective date of this bill, to reflect changes in the Consumer Price Index.
The adjusted combined gross household income value stated in subsection (B)(3)
(a) shall be determined by multiplying the income amount by a fraction:
            1.   The numerator of which is the Consumer Price Index (as defined
in (B)(3)(f)4. below) as of January 1 of the year for which the adjustment is
being made.
            2.   The denominator of which is the Consumer Price Index (as
defined in subsection (B)(3)(f)4. below) as of January 1 of the preceding year
for which the adjustment is being made.
            3.   The adjustment shall not result in a negative change to the
combined gross household income value. Should the adjustment be lower, the
combined gross household income shall remain the same as the previous year.
            4.   Consumer Price Index: Adjustments to the combined gross
household income will be based on the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage
Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W) Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-
WV, All Items, 1982-84=100, published bi-monthly by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics. In the event the Bureaus of Labor Statistics abandons publication
of the above-referenced index, the Frederick County Treasury Department shall
adopt any other index which, in its judgment, provides an accurate measure of
cost-of-living changes, pending amendment to this §
1-8-66.
   (C)   (1)   The property tax credit allowed under this section is:
         (a)   20% of the County property tax imposed on the property net of
any property tax credit granted under Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article, § 9-
105; and
         (b)   Granted for as long as the eligible individual continues to
satisfy all the requirements.
      (2)   The property tax credit authorized by this section shall apply only
in taxable years beginning on or after July 1, 2023.
   (D)   A property tax credit under this section may not be provided in any
taxable year in which a property tax credit under §
1-8-66 or §
1-8-68 is allowed.
   (E)   This property tax credit shall be calculated only on the lesser of:
      (1)   $400,000; or
      (2)   The assessed value of the dwelling reduced by the amount of any
assessment on which a property tax credit is granted under Md. Code Ann., Tax
Property Article, § 9-105.
   (F)   (1)   To be eligible for this property tax credit, a property owner
must submit an application to the County Treasurer on or before October 1 of
each taxable year in which this property tax credit is sought.
      (2)   An application must:
         (a)   Be on the form that the County Treasurer requires;
         (b)   Demonstrate that the taxpayer satisfies all requirements for
this credit; and
         (c)   Applicants who are applying under subsections (B)(3)(d) or (B)
(3)(e) as a retired or honorably discharged member of the uniformed services of
the United States as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101, the military reserves, or the
National Guard, or surviving spouse thereof, must provide the following
information:
            (i)   A copy of the veteran's discharge certificate; and
            (ii)   On the form provided by the County, a certification of the
applicant's disability from the Department of Veterans Affairs.
         (d)   Applicants who are applying under subsections (B)(3)(d) or (B)
(3)(e) as an active member of the uniformed services of the United States as
defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101, the military reserves, or the National Guard, or
surviving spouse thereof, must provide documentation satisfactory to the
Treasurer that verifies the service-connected disability.
   (G)   The County Treasurer may adopt guidelines, regulations, or procedures
to administer this section.
   (H)   (1)   This property tax credit applies only to County property tax and
does not apply to any other tax, including any special taxing district tax,
fire and rescue district tax, electric lighting district tax or any tax imposed
by the State, a municipality or any other governmental entity.
      (2)   The amount of this property tax credit may not exceed the amount
due for net Frederick County real property tax.
(Bill No. 18-03, 5-1-2018; Bill No. 18-18, 9-4-2018; Bill No. 21-13, 1-18-2022;
Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-2022; Bill No. 23-04, 5-2-2023)
§ 1-8-68. DISABLED VETERANS PROPERTY TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   Definitions. In this section the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      DISABLED VETERAN. An individual who:
         (a)   Is honorably discharged or released under honorable
circumstances from active military, naval, or air service as defined in 38
U.S.C. § 101; and
         (b)   1.   Has been declared by the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs to have a permanent service-connected disability of at least 50% that
results from blindness or any other disabling cause that:
               (i)   Is reasonably certain to continue for the life of the
veteran; and
               (ii)   Was not caused or incurred by misconduct of the veteran.
            2.   Has been declared by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
to have a nonpermanent service-connected disability of 100% that results from
blindness or any other disabling cause that was not caused or incurred by
misconduct of the veteran.
      DWELLING HOUSE.
         (a)   Real property that is:
            1.   The legal residence of a disabled veteran; and
            2.   Occupied by not more than two families; and
         (b)   Includes the lot or curtilage and structures necessary to use
the real property as a residence.
   (B)   Creation. A tax credit against county property taxes levied on a
dwelling house owned by an eligible disabled veteran or the eligible spouse of
a deceased disabled veteran is hereby granted pursuant to Md. Code Ann., Tax
Property Article, § 9-265.
   (C)   Eligibility. A disabled veteran or a disabled veteran's surviving
spouse is eligible for a county property tax credit under this section if:
      (1)   The dwelling house is owned by:
         (a)   A disabled veteran; or
         (b)   A surviving spouse of a disabled veteran, if:
            1.   The dwelling house was owned by the disabled veteran at the
time of the disabled veteran's death; and
            2.   The surviving spouse meets the requirements of this section;
and
      (2)   The disabled veteran's federal adjusted gross income for the
immediately preceding taxable year does not exceed $100,000; and
      (3)   The application requirements of subsection (E) of this section are
met.
   (D)   Calculation. The property tax credit provided in this section shall
equal:
      (1)   Fifty percent of the county property tax imposed on the dwelling
house if the disabled veteran's service-connected disability rating is at least
75% and the disabled veteran does not qualify for a property tax exemption
pursuant to Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article, § 7-208; or
      (2)   Twenty-five percent of the county property tax imposed on the
dwelling house if the disabled veteran's service-connected disability rating is
at least 50% but not more than 74%.
   (E)   Application.
      (1)   A disabled veteran or a surviving spouse of a disabled veteran
shall apply for the property tax credit under this section by providing to the
County Treasurer:
         (a)   A copy of the disabled veteran's discharge certificate from
active military, naval, or air service; and
         (b)   On the form provided by the County, a certification of the
disabled veteran's disability from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs.
      (2)   The disabled veteran's certificate of disability may not be
inspected by individuals other than:
         (a)   The disabled veteran; or
         (b)   Appropriate employees of the County.
   (F)   Duration. The tax credit shall be available each taxable year that a
disabled veteran is eligible as determined in subsection (C). An application
must be filed each taxable year that the credit is sought.
   (G)   Surviving spouse. The surviving spouse of an eligible disabled
veteran, who has not remarried, shall be eligible to apply for the property tax
credit following the death of the eligible disabled veteran.
   (H)   Time for filing of application. An application for, or renewal of, the
tax credit created by this section shall be filed on or before October 1 of
each taxable year for which the tax credit is being sought. If the application
or renewal is filed after October 1, the credit shall be disallowed that year
but shall be treated as an application or renewal for a tax credit for the
following taxable year.
   (I)   Termination of credit.
      (1)   The tax credit created by this section shall terminate on the
sooner of the disabled veteran, or the surviving spouse of a disabled veteran:
         (a)   No longer meeting the eligibility requirement in subsection (C)
and (G), as appropriate; or
         (b)   No longer residing in or owning the dwelling house for which the
tax credit was granted.
      (2)   When a disabled veteran or surviving spouse of a disabled veteran
no longer meets the eligibility requirements of this section, they shall notify
the Treasurer that the dwelling house is no longer eligible for this tax
credit.
(Bill. No. 21-07, 5-25-2021; Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-2022; Bill No. 23-02, 3-21-
2023; Bill No. 25-02, 3-18-2025)
§ 1-8-69. TAX CREDIT FOR DAY CARE PROVIDERS.
   (A)   Definitions. Improvement means an addition to or modification of real
property which adds to the assessed valuation of the property as determined by
the State Department of Assessments and Taxation.
   (B)   Credit. As authorized by, and subject to, the provisions set forth in
the Annotated Code of Maryland, Tax-Property Article, § 9-213, Frederick
County, Maryland hereby establishes a tax credit against the county property
tax imposed on an improvement of real property if the improvement is:
      (1)   Completed after July 1, 2023; and
      (2)   Used exclusively for a day care center that is:
         (a)   Registered as a family child care home under Title 9.5, Subtitle
3, of the Education Article;
         (b)   Licensed as a child care center under Title 9.5, Subtitle 4, of
the Education Article;
         (c)   Licensed as a day care center for the elderly under Title 14,
Subtitle 2 of the Health - General Article; or
         (d)   Licensed as a day care center for adults under Title 14,
Subtitle 3 of the Health - General Article.
   (C)   Amount of credit. The amount of the credit authorized under this
section shall not exceed in each year the lesser of:
      (1)   $3,000; or
      (2)   The amount of the county property tax attributable to that portion
of property for which the credit was granted.
   (D)   Duration. The county property tax credit shall run for a period not to
exceed five consecutive tax years following the initial application and
qualification for this tax credit.
   (E)   Application. An application for, or renewal of, the tax credit created
by this section shall be filed on or before October 1 of each taxable year for
which the tax credit is being sought. If the application or renewal is filed
after October 1, the credit shall be disallowed that year but shall be treated
as an application or renewal for a tax credit for the following taxable year.
The tax credit is non-transferable to a new property owner.
   (F)   Additional tax credits. The property owner is eligible to receive this
credit in addition to other homeowner tax credits, except those prohibited by
Tax-Property Article, § 9-213. At no time shall the amount of any combined
credits be greater than the net county tax.
   (G)   Administration. The County Treasurer may adopt guidelines, regulations
or procedures to administer this section.
(Bill No. 23-22, 1-2-2024)
§ 1-8-70. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III.C: BUILDING EXCISE TAX (§§ 1-8-71 — 1-8-100)
Section
   
1-8-71   Establishment of tax
   
1-8-72   Definitions
   
1-8-73   Amount of tax
   
1-8-74   Payment of tax
   
1-8-75   Exemptions
   
1-8-76   Change in use
   
1-8-77   Development Road Improvement Fund
   
1-8-78   Municipalities
   
1-8-79   Appeals
   
1-8-80   Enforcement
   
1-8-81   Annual reports
§ 1-8-71. ESTABLISHMENT OF TAX.
   In accordance with Chapter 690, Laws of Maryland, 2001, §
2-7-131 of this code, there is a building excise tax on all new construction in
Frederick County, which tax will finance capital projects or indebtedness
incurred for capital projects for additional or expanded public road
facilities.
(Ord. 01-22-296, 12-18-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-72. DEFINITIONS.
   Words and phrases used in this article shall have their usual meaning,
unless otherwise defined in this section.
   APPLICANT. The individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity
whose signature appears on the building permit application.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.  Building does not include a temporary structure, as defined
in the Frederick County Building Code.
   CAPITAL PROJECTS FOR ADDITIONAL OR EXPANDED ROAD FACILITIES. All capital
projects for roads, bridges and intersection improvements in the Frederick
County Capital Improvements Program.
   CONSTRUCTION. Construction of a building which requires a building permit.
Where the building replaces an existing building, “construction” does not
include replacement of a building due to casualty or loss within 1 year of that
casualty or loss, or replacement of a mobile home on a site, except to the
extent that the gross square footage of the replacement building or replacement
mobile home exceeds the gross square footage of the building or mobile home
being replaced.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY COUNCIL. County Council of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY EXECUTIVE. County Executive of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY GOVERNING BODY. County Council and County Executive of Frederick
County, Maryland.
   DIRECTOR OF FINANCE. The Director of Finance for Frederick County or
designee.
   DIRECTOR OF PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS. The Director of Permits and Inspections
for Frederick County or designee.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for 1 or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   FARM CONSTRUCTION. Construction intended to be actively used for farm or
agricultural use.
   FARM OR AGRICULTURAL USE. As defined in the Frederick County Zoning
Ordinance.
   GROSS SQUARE FOOT. The entire square footage of the construction and is the
same as calculated for building permit purposes under the Frederick County
Code. It includes all finished and unfinished areas of the construction.
   HABITABLE STRUCTURE. A structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION. Construction of a residential
building containing more than 1 dwelling unit.
   NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION. Any construction other than residential
construction.
   RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION. A building which contains 1 or more dwelling
units, including boarding houses, but not including institutional uses or
transient accommodations such as hotels, country inns or bed and breakfast
inns. RESIDENTIAL includes all areas that are contained within a residential
building such as attached garages or home occupations, but does not include
nonresidential uses in mixed use structures.
   RESIDENTIAL ADDITION CONSTRUCTION. Construction of a residential addition to
a residential building where the work requires a building permit and where the
addition increases the number of gross square feet of the residential building.
   STATE HIGHWAY. Any public highway owned by the State of Maryland.
(Ord. 01-22-296, 12-18-2001; Ord. 07-02-442, 1-16-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-8-73. AMOUNT OF TAX.
   (A)   The amount of the building excise tax shall be:
      (1)   Residential construction:
         (a)   For the first 700 gross square feet of residential construction,
no building excise tax shall be assessed;
         (b)   For each additional gross square foot of residential
construction in excess of 700 square feet and up to residential construction of
1400 square feet: $0.00 per gross square foot of residential construction;
         (c)   In addition to the amount in subsection (A)(1)(b), for each
additional gross square foot of residential construction in excess of 1400
square feet: $0.00 per gross square foot of residential construction;
         (d)   For multifamily residential construction, any gross square
footage of multifamily residential construction not within a dwelling unit
shall be allocated on a pro rata basis to each dwelling unit within the
building. The amount of the tax shall be calculated for each dwelling unit as
provided in subsections (a), (b) and (c) based on the gross square footage of
the dwelling unit plus the dwelling unit’s pro rata share of any gross square
footage not within a dwelling unit.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction: $0.00 per gross square foot of
nonresidential construction.
   (B)   Calculation of amount. The amount of building excise tax to be paid by
an applicant shall be determined by the Director of Permits and Inspections.
(Ord. 01-22-296, 12-18-2001; Ord. 11-23-589, 11-1-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-8-74. PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (A)   Building excise tax paid before issuance of building permit. An
applicant for a building permit shall pay the building excise tax before the
issuance of a building permit.
   (B)   Refunds.
      (1)   The Director of Finance shall refund to the applicant the building
excise tax paid if the building permit is cancelled or expires.
      (2)   If, upon appeal by an applicant who has paid the building excise
tax, the Chief Administrative Officer determines that the Director of Permits
and Inspections has erred in calculating the building excise tax, the Director
of Finance shall refund to the applicant the difference between the amount of
building excise tax paid by the applicant and the correct amount.
(Ord. 01-22-296, 12-18-2001; Ord. 03-12-335, 7-15-2003; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-8-75. EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Farm construction. Farm construction is not subject to the building
excise tax so long as the construction continues to be actively used for farm
or agricultural use. Should the construction be used for some purpose other
than active farm or agricultural use, then the building excise tax shall be
remitted to the Director of Finance at the then existing amount of the building
excise tax.
   (B)   Government construction. No building excise tax shall be imposed on
construction by the State of Maryland, the county, any municipality or the
federal government.
   (C)   Residential addition construction. No building excise tax shall be
imposed on residential addition construction unless the residential addition
construction increases by 100% or more the gross square footage of a
residential building for which a building permit has been issued. The building
excise tax shall be imposed on that portion of any residential addition
construction which exceeds 100% of the gross square footage of the residential
building for which a building permit has been issued.
   (D)   Residential accessory structures. No building excise tax shall be
imposed on residential accessory structures that are not habitable.
(Ord. 01-22-296, 12-18-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-76. CHANGE IN USE.
   (A)   If the Director of Permits and Inspections determines that a building
permit application is for a change in use, then the building excise tax shall
be imposed based on the use applied for in the building permit application, a
credit shall be granted for any building excise tax previously paid for this
construction. No refund shall be granted if the credit for any building excise
tax previously paid exceeds the building excise tax imposed.
   (B)   No building excise tax shall be imposed for a change in use of a
building existing on February 3, 2002. Except, however, the building excise tax
shall be imposed as provided in this article to the extent the gross square
footage of the construction increases.
(Ord. 01-22-296, 12-18-2001; Ord. 03-12-335, 7-15-2003; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-8-77. DEVELOPMENT ROAD IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   (A)   Establishment of fund. The Director of Finance shall establish an
account to be known as the Development Road Improvement Fund. All receipts from
building excise taxes shall be deposited in the Development Road Improvement
Fund. Interest earned by money in the Development Road Improvement Fund shall
accrue to the Development Road Improvement Fund.
   (B)   Use of Development Road Improvement Fund. Funds from the Development
Road Improvement Fund shall be expended only to pay for capital projects or
indebtedness incurred for capital projects for additional or expanded public
road facilities.
   (C)   County match. Before the county may expend funds from the Development
Road Improvement Fund, the county must match at least the same amount of funds
for capital projects for additional or expanded public road facilities.
   (D)   State highway match. Before the county may expend funds from the
Development Road Improvement Fund for a road project on a state highway, at
least the same amount of funds must be obtained from other sources for a
capital project for additional or expanded public road facilities on the same
road project on the state highway that is within Frederick County.
(Ord. 01-22-296, 12-18-2001; Ord. 07-02-442, 1-16-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-8-78. MUNICIPALITIES.
   (A)   Building excise tax applicable. This building excise tax shall apply
to all construction in Frederick County, including construction within the
boundaries of a municipality.
   (B)   Identical municipal building excise tax.
      (1)   If a municipal corporation has imposed a tax on construction
specifically devoted and limited by law to use for capital projects for
additional or expanded public road facilities, the county may not impose or
collect a building excise tax on the same construction within the municipal
corporation.
      (2)   An applicant shall apply for this by making a written request with
the Director of Permits and Inspections before the issuance of the building
permit.
      (3)   The Director of Permits and Inspections shall either grant or deny
the request.
   (C)   Collection within municipal corporation. A municipal corporation shall
assist the county in the collection of this building excise tax within the
municipal corporation by either:
      (1)   Collecting the tax prior to the issuance of a building permit and
remitting the tax monthly to the Director of Finance; or
      (2)   Requiring the tax to be paid to the Director of Finance prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
(Ord. 01-22-296, 12-18-2001; Ord. 07-02-442, 1-16-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-8-79. APPEALS.
   (A)   Administrative appeals. An applicant aggrieved by a decision regarding
the calculation of the amount of building excise tax, the granting or denial of
an exemption, or otherwise interpreting or applying this building excise tax
may appeal the decision to the Chief Administrative Officer within 30 days of
the Director’s decision, provided that either:
      (1)   Processing of the building permit is delayed pending the decision
of the Chief Administrative Officer; or
      (2)   The applicant pays the building excise tax prior to filing the
appeal.
   (B)   Burden of proof. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to
demonstrate that the decision is erroneous.
   (C)   Judicial review. Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Chief
Administrative Officer may file for judicial review of the decision in
accordance with Maryland Rules 7-201 and following. The decision of the circuit
court may be appealed to the court of special appeals or, upon certiorari, to
the court of appeals in accordance with the Maryland Rules. The county may file
a responsive pleading and be a party to or file for judicial review in the
circuit court, or take an appeal to the court of special appeals, or, upon
certiorari, to the court of appeals, of any decision made under this article.
(Ord. 01-22-296, 12-18-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-80. ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Misdemeanor. It is unlawful for any person or entity to enlarge, alter
or change any use of property or to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, make, put together or convert any building in the county, or
attempt to do so, or cause the same to be done, without first paying any
building excise tax imposed by this article. Any person or entity who shall so
violate this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined up to $500 or imprisoned for up to 30 days, or be both
fined and imprisoned. Each day that the violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (B)   Action to enforce. In the event the building excise tax is not paid as
required, the County Attorney may institute an action to recover the building
excise tax and enjoin the use of the property until the building excise tax is
paid. The person who fails so to pay shall be responsible for the costs of such
suit, including reasonable attorney’s fees.
   (C)   Lien and enforcement same as county real property taxes. If not paid
as required by this article, the building excise tax shall constitute a lien
against the property being developed and shall be levied, collected, and
enforced in the same manner as are county real property taxes, and shall have
the same priority and bear the same interest and penalties as county real
property taxes for lien purposes.
(Ord. 01-22-296, 12-18-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-81. ANNUAL REPORTS.
   The Director of Finance shall prepare and submit an annual report on or
before October 31 of each year to the county governing body, which shall
include the following information for the prior fiscal year:
   (A)   Total amount of building excise taxes collected;
   (B)   Amount of funds appropriated from the Development Road Improvement
Fund;
   (C)   Amount of funds expended from the Development Road Improvement Fund;
   (D)   Amount of funds from county sources appropriated for capital projects
for roads, bridges, highways and intersection improvements in the Frederick
County Capital Improvement Program;
   (E)   Funds remaining in the Development Road Improvement Fund.
(Ord. 01-22-296, 12-18-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-8-82 – 1-8-100. RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: LIGHTING DISTRICTS (§§ 1-8-101 — 1-8-150)
Section
   
1-8-101   Braddock Heights Electric Lighting District
   
1-8-102   New Addition Electric Lighting District
   
1-8-103   Libertytown Electric Lighting District
   
1-8-104   Electric lighting district tax rates
Editor’s note:
   Res. 91-107, adopted and effective July 2, 1991, repealed former Art. III,
“Admissions Tax,” §§ 1-8-46 through 1-8-50, derived from Code 1959, § 33-14,
and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. III, §§ 1-8-46, 1-8-47.
§ 1-8-101. BRADDOCK HEIGHTS ELECTRIC LIGHTING DISTRICT.
   (A)   A special taxing district for electric lighting is established and
identified as the Braddock Heights Electric Lighting District.
   (B)   The boundaries of the Braddock Heights Electric Lighting District are
established and shown on the official Electric Lighting District Map on file
with the county.
(Ord. 95-10-134, § 1-8-51, 6-20-1995; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-102. NEW ADDITION ELECTRIC LIGHTING DISTRICT.
   (A)   A special taxing district for electric lighting is established and
identified as the New Addition Electric Lighting District.
   (B)   The boundaries of the New Addition Electric Lighting District are
established and shown on the official Electric Lighting District Map on file
with the county.
(Ord. 96-04-156, § 1-8-53, 2-20-1996; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-103. LIBERTYTOWN ELECTRIC LIGHTING DISTRICT.
   (A)   A special taxing district for electric lighting is established and
identified as the Libertytown Electric Lighting District.
   (B)   The boundaries of the Libertytown Electric Lighting District are
established and shown on the official Electric Lighting District Map on file
with the county.
(Ord. 96-05-157, § 1-8-52, 2-20-1996; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-104. ELECTRIC LIGHTING DISTRICT TAX RATES.
   (A)   A special district tax shall be levied on all assessable real property
within the established electric lighting districts as follows.
      (1)   Braddock Heights: $0.013 per $100 of assessed value.
      (2)   Libertytown: $0.014 per $100 of assessed value.
      (3)   New Addition: $0.014 per $100 of assessed value.
   (B)   The tax rates established shall continue in effect each year hereafter
until changed by the county governing body.
(Ord. 96-08-160, 4-2-1996; Ord. 04-06-350, 5-25-2004; Ord. 05-08-369, 5-17-
2005; Ord. 06-14-410, 5-16-2006; Ord. 07-15-455, 5-15-2007; Ord. 11-07-573, 5-
19-2011; Ord. 13-04-632, 5-9-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 15-02,
4-30-2015; Bill No. 20-02, 3-3-2020; Bill No. 24-03, 4-16-2024)
§§ 1-8-105 – 1-8-150. RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: FIRE AND RESCUE DISTRICT (§§ 1-8-151 — 1-8-160)
Section
   
1-8-151   Urban Fire and Rescue Tax District
   
1-8-152   Suburban Fire and Rescue Tax District
Editor’s note:
   Article V has been created in order to provide for better classification and
to facilitate the indexing, reference, use and expansion of the material
contained herein. Its provisions had previously been designated as §§ 1-8-31
through 1-8-33 and 1-8-35 and 1-8-37 and have been redesignated with the
consent of the county.
§ 1-8-151. URBAN FIRE AND RESCUE TAX DISTRICT.
   (A)   A special taxing district for fire and rescue services is established
and identified as the Urban Fire and Rescue Tax District.
   (B)   The Urban Fire and Rescue Tax District will be those areas of
Frederick County designated as urban, the boundaries of which are established
and shown on the official Fire and Rescue Tax District Map on file with the
county.
   (C)   The amount of the special district tax in the Urban Fire and Rescue
Tax District is zero cents per $100 of assessed value. A special district tax
in this amount is levied on all assessable real property within the Urban Fire
and Rescue Tax District.
(Ord. 89-24-555, 6-6-1989; Ord. 00-10-252, 5-30-2000; Ord. 01-08-282, 5-22-
2001; Ord. 03-06-329, 5-20-2003; Ord. 06-13-409, 5-15-2006; Ord. 13-11-639, 6-
20-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-152. SUBURBAN FIRE AND RESCUE TAX DISTRICT.
   (A)   A special taxing district for fire and rescue services is established
and identified as the Suburban Fire and Rescue Tax District.
   (B)   The Suburban Fire and Rescue Tax District will be those areas of
Frederick County designated as suburban, the boundaries of which are
established and shown on the official Fire and Rescue Tax District Map on file
with the county.
   (C)   The amount of the special district tax in the Suburban Fire and Rescue
Tax District is zero cents per $100 of assessed value. A special district tax
in this amount is levied on all assessable real property within the Suburban
Fire and Rescue Tax District.
(Ord. 89-24-555, 6-6-1989; Ord. 95-11-135, 6-20-1995; Ord. 00-12-254, 5-30-
2000; Ord. 01-08-282, 5-22-2001; Ord. 03-06-329, 5-20- 2003; Ord. 05-10-371, 5-
17-2005; Ord. 13-11-639, 6-20-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-8-153 – 1-8-160. RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: HOTEL RENTAL TAX (§§ 1-8-161 — 1-8-168)
Section
   
1-8-161   Definitions
   
1-8-162   Tax levied
   
1-8-163   Identification and collection; tax held in trust
   
1-8-164   Filing of returns
   
1-8-165   Adoption of regulations
   
1-8-166   Distribution of revenue
   
1-8-167   Failure to pay tax; lien
   
1-8-168   Security
§ 1-8-161. DEFINITIONS.
   In this article, the following words have the meanings indicated:
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY COUNCIL. County Council of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY EXECUTIVE. County Executive of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY GOVERNING BODY. County Council and County Executive of Frederick
County, Maryland.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Finance for Frederick County.
   HOTEL. Any individual, corporation, company, association, firm, partnership
or similar entity which owns or operates an establishment that offers sleeping
accommodations for compensation. HOTEL also includes an apartment, cottage,
hostelry, inn, motel, rooming house, or tourist home. HOTEL does not include a
facility with ten or fewer sleeping rooms in its main building and no more than
20 additional sleeping rooms in auxiliary structures on the facility’s
property.
   HOTEL RENTAL TAX. The tax authorized under this article.
   TOURISM COUNCIL. The Tourism Council of Frederick County, Inc.
   TRANSIENT CHARGE. A hotel charge for sleeping accommodations for a period
not exceeding 90 consecutive days. The transient charge shall be measured by an
individual’s stay at a hotel, irrespective of who actually pays the hotel for
these accommodations. TRANSIENT CHARGE does not include any hotel charge for
services or for accommodations other than sleeping accommodations and does not
include a charge for a stay if the stay exceeds 90 consecutive days.
   TREASURER. The Treasurer of Frederick County with all the duties and
responsibilities as prescribed by law. The Treasurer is directly responsible to
the Director of Finance for Frederick County.
(Ord. 04-11-355, 7-15-2004; Ord. 06-27-423, 8-15-2006; Ord. 14-08-663, 6-19-
2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-162. TAX LEVIED.
   A tax of 5% is hereby imposed on each transient charge paid to a hotel
located in Frederick County.
(Ord. 04-11-355, 7-15-2004; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-13, 8-30-
2016)
§ 1-8-163. IDENTIFICATION AND COLLECTION; TAX HELD IN TRUST.
   (A)   A hotel shall:
      (1)   Give the person who is required to pay a transient charge a bill
that identifies the transient charge as a separate item from any other charge;
and
      (2)   Collect the hotel rental tax from the person who pays the transient
charge.
   (B)   A hotel holds hotel rental tax collected in trust for Frederick County
until the hotel pays the tax to Frederick County as required under this
article.
(Ord. 04-11-355, 7-15-2004; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-164. FILING OF RETURNS.
   (A)   A hotel shall complete, sign and file a hotel rental tax return with
the Treasurer on or before the 21st day of each month.
   (B)   A hotel rental tax return shall be filed on the form prescribed by the
Director which shall contain all information required, including the amount of
transient charges paid to the hotel during the prior calendar month and the
hotel rental tax required to be collected during the prior calendar month.
   (C)   A hotel shall pay to the Treasurer of Frederick County the tax
collected for a calendar month with the return that covers that month.
   (D)   A hotel may receive for administrative costs a discount equal to 1.5%
of the gross amount of hotel rental tax collected if, on or before the due
date, the hotel:
      (1)   Files the hotel rental tax return; and
      (2)   Pays the hotel rental tax.
(Ord. 04-11-355, 7-15-2004; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-165. ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS.
   To provide for orderly, systematic and thorough administration of the hotel
rental tax, the Director may adopt regulations not inconsistent with this
article and which conform to the applicable provisions and regulations for the
sales and use tax as established under Md. Code Ann., Tax-General Article,
Title 11.
(Ord. 04-11-355, 7-15-2004; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-166. DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUE.
   (A)   Hotel rental tax revenue shall be used first to pay for hotel rental
tax administrative costs of the county.
   (B)   The remaining balance of hotel rental tax revenue shall be paid to the
Tourism Council with a portion of the balance designated by the county to be
used for a visitor center.
   (C)   At least every 4 years the internal auditor of the county shall
conduct an audit of the financial records of the Tourism Council and report the
findings to the county governing body.
(Ord. 04-11-355, 7-15-2004; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 19-11, 7-16-
2019)
§ 1-8-167. FAILURE TO PAY TAX; LIEN.
   (A)   If a hotel fails to pay the hotel rental tax as required by this
article, the hotel shall pay interest on the unpaid tax from the date on which
the hotel is required to pay the tax to the date that the tax is paid. The
interest rate for each month or fraction of a month is 0.5%.
   (B)   If a hotel fails to pay the hotel rental tax within one month after
the payment is due under this article, the hotel shall pay a tax penalty of 10%
of the unpaid tax.
   (C)   Unpaid hotel rental tax is a lien against the real and personal
property of the hotel owing the tax and is collectible in the same manner as
the property tax may be collected under Md. Code Ann., Tax- Property Article.
   (D)   Unpaid hotel rental tax may also be collected by distraint. In
addition, Frederick County may file a civil action to collect unpaid hotel
rental tax.
(Ord. 04-11-355, 7-15-2004; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-168. SECURITY.
   (A)   To protect hotel rental tax revenue, the Director may require a hotel
to file security with Frederick County in such amount as the Director believes
necessary. Such security shall be:
      (1)   A bond issued by a surety company that is authorized to do business
in the state and approved by the Maryland Insurance Commissioner as to solvency
and responsibility;
      (2)   Cash; or
      (3)   Securities approved by the Director.
   (B)   If security is required, the Director shall notify the hotel of the
amount of security required. Within five days after a hotel receives notice of
the required security, the hotel shall:
      (1)   File the security; or
      (2)   Submit a written request for a hearing on the security requirement.
   (C)   If a hearing is requested, the Director shall hold a hearing to
determine the necessity, propriety, and amount of the security. The
determination of the Director, acting on behalf of Frederick County, is final,
and the hotel shall comply within 15 days after the hotel receives notice of
the determination.
   (D)   Without notice to a hotel that files security as required under this
article, the Director at any time may:
      (1)   Apply the cash to the hotel rental tax due; or
      (2)   Sell the security and apply the proceeds of the sale to the hotel
rental tax due.
(Ord. 04-11-355, 7-15-2004; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE VII: BROWNFIELDS PROPERTY TAX CREDIT (§§ 1-8-201 — 1-8-300)
Section
   
1-8-201   Brownfields property tax credit
§ 1-8-201. BROWNFIELDS PROPERTY TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authorization contained in Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property
Article, § 9-229, the county elects to participate in the Brownfields
Revitalization Incentive Program established under Md. Code Ann., Economic
Development Article § 5-335, and to provide a Brownfields property tax credit
for the taxable year beginning July 1, 2002.
   (B)   There is a Frederick County Brownfields property tax credit against
the tax on real property of a qualified Brownfields site as defined in Md. Code
Ann., Economic Development Article § 5-301, in an amount equal to 50% of the
property tax attributable to the increase in the assessment of the qualified
Brownfields site, including improvements added to the site during the credit
period, over the assessment of the qualified Brownfields site before the
voluntary cleanup or corrective action plan.
   (C)   The credit shall apply in each of the 5 taxable years immediately
following the first revaluation of the property after completion of a voluntary
cleanup or corrective action plan of a qualified Brownfields site.
   (D)   The credit is subject to the requirements and limitations set forth in
Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property Article, § 9-229.
   (E)   Pursuant to the requirement contained in Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property
Article, § 9-229(C)(2), for each year of the credit period, the county shall
contribute to the Maryland Economic Development Assistance Fund established
under Md. Code Ann., Economic Development Article § 5-310, an amount equal to
30% of the property tax attributable to the increase in the assessment of the
qualified Brownfields site during the credit period, over the assessment of the
qualified Brownfields site before the voluntary cleanup or corrective action
plan.
(Ord. 02-09-305, 4-23-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-8-202 – 1-8-300. RESERVED.
ARTICLE VIII: REHABILITATED PROPERTY TAX CREDIT (§§ 1-8-301 — 1-8-400)
Section
   
1-8-301   Property tax credit
   
1-8-302   Golden Mile Tax Credit District
   
1-8-303   Rehabilitated vacant commercial structures tax credit
   
1-8-304   Revitalization area rehabilitated structures tax credit
§ 1-8-301. PROPERTY TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   The county will provide property tax credit, for not more than 10
years after rehabilitation, for properties located in designated areas, under
such terms as specified during the creation of the designated district.
   (B)   The tax credit is subject to the provisions set forth in the Md. Code
Ann., Tax- Property Article, § 9-236.
(Ord. 03-10-333, 6-17-2003; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-302. GOLDEN MILE TAX CREDIT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Properties within Frederick city and:
      (1)   Located along West Patrick Street (Route 40) between Route 15 and
Bowers Road, Baughmans Lane, and Hillcrest Drive; and
      (2)   Zoned B-3, B-1, and B-0 as of June 17, 2003 shall constitute the
Golden Mile Tax Credit District; and the boundaries of the Golden Mile Tax
Credit District are established and shown in yellow on the map on file with the
county and attached to the ordinance set forth in this section as Exhibit A.
   (B)   Properties within the Golden Mile Tax Credit District which are
rehabilitated shall be eligible for property tax credit against the county
property taxes imposed, under the following conditions:
      (1)   Existing non-residential structures are repaired or altered to
increase the usefulness and condition of the property; and
      (2)   Rehabilitation projects must have or provide pedestrian and
vehicular connections to adjacent commercial properties approved by the City of
Frederick Planning Department Director.
   (C)   The property tax credit will be determined based upon the lesser of:
      (1)   The increase in the assessed valuation of the property attributable
to the rehabilitation project, over the assessed value before the property was
rehabilitated; or
      (2)   The cost expended for the rehabilitation project.
   (D)   The property shall be eligible for tax credit for no longer than 7
years after the completion of the rehabilitation project.
   (E)   The amounts of the tax credit will be calculated based upon the
schedules set forth below upon completion of the construction of the
rehabilitation project:
      (1)   Projects that begin rehabilitation construction in calendar year
2003:
2003 Tax Credit Schedule
Years Based on Cost of Rehabilitation Project/Change in Assessed Value
      < $1.0 million $1.0 to $4.0 million > $4.0 million
2003 Tax Credit Schedule
Years Based on Cost of Rehabilitation Project/Change in Assessed Value
      < $1.0 million $1.0 to $4.0 million > $4.0 million
1     100%           100%                 100%
2     100%           100%                 100%
3     100%           100%                 100%
4     100%           100%                 100%
5     75%            100%                 100%
6     50%            66%                  100%
7     25%            33%                  50%
8     0%             0%                   0%
 
      (2)   Projects that begin rehabilitation construction in calendar year
2004 through December 31, 2010:
2004+ Tax Credit Schedule
Years Based on Cost of Rehabilitation Project/Change in Assessed
      < $1.0 million $1.0 to $4.0 million > $4.0 million
2004+ Tax Credit Schedule
Years Based on Cost of Rehabilitation Project/Change in Assessed
      < $1.0 million $1.0 to $4.0 million > $4.0 million
1     100%           100%                 100%
2     100%           100%                 100%
3     100%           100%                 100%
4     80%            100%                 100%
5     60%            75%                  100%
6     40%            50%                  66%
7     20%            25%                  33%
8     0%             0%                   0%
 
      (3)   Projects that begin rehabilitation construction after December 31,
2010 shall not be eligible for tax credits under this program.
   (F)   The property owner shall file each year an application for the tax
credit allowed under this section.
(Ord. 03-10-333, 6-17-2003; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-303. REHABILITATED VACANT COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   This real property tax credit shall be known as the rehabilitated
vacant commercial structures tax credit and is authorized, and subject to, the
provisions set forth in the Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article, § 9-236.
   (B)   To be eligible to participate in this program, a vacant structure
(sometimes hereafter referred to as “property” or “properties”) may be located
anywhere within Frederick County, assuming the following qualifying
requirements are satisfied.
   (C)   To qualify for a rehabilitated vacant commercial structures tax
credit, a structure must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The structure must be used, or have been used, for non-residential
purposes and be located in a zone permitting commercial or industrial use.
      (2)   A single occupant structure must have been completely vacant for a
period of not less than 18 of the previous 24 months prior to the commencement
of rehabilitation or application for this rehabilitated vacant commercial
structures tax credit.
      (3)   A multiple tenant structure, such as but not limited to a shopping
center, may qualify if the portion of the structure to be rehabilitated is
vacant and actively listed for lease or sale with a commercial broker for a
period of not less than 18 of the previous 24 months prior to the commencement
of rehabilitation or application for this rehabilitated vacant commercial
structures tax credit.
      (4)   Only rehabilitation of existing structures is eligible — new
construction is not eligible.
      (5)   The structure (whether a single occupant building or a multiple
tenant structure) must have been constructed no fewer than 5 years prior to the
submission of an application by the property owner pursuant to subsection (I)
below.
      (6)   Where a structure is being used, or has been used, for both
residential and non-residential use, and the structure otherwise qualifies,
this rehabilitated vacant commercial structures tax credit shall only be
available for the rehabilitated non-residential portion of the structure.
   (D)   Qualifying structures shall not be eligible for the rehabilitated
vacant commercial structures real property tax credit for longer than 7
consecutive years after first qualifying for this property tax credit. The
first tax year the tax credit shall become available for a qualifying structure
shall be the first tax year in which its County property taxes would otherwise
have increased due to the qualifying rehabilitation project (the “first tax
year”). The last tax year this County property tax credit shall be available
shall be the sixth tax year that follows the first tax year.
   (E)   The amount of this tax credit will be calculated based upon the
schedule set forth below upon completion of the construction of the
rehabilitation project:
Tax Credit Schedule
Years Based on Cost of Rehabilitation Project/Change in Assessed Value
      < $1.0 million $1.0 to $4.0 million > $4.0 million
Tax Credit Schedule
Years Based on Cost of Rehabilitation Project/Change in Assessed Value
      < $1.0 million $1.0 to $4.0 million > $4.0 million
1     100%           100%                 100%
2     100%           100%                 100%
3     100%           100%                 100%
4     80%            100%                 100%
5     60%            75%                  100%
6     40%            50%                  66%
7     20%            25%                  33%
8     0% exempt      0% exempt            0% exempt
 
   (F)   The amount of a tax credit granted under this rehabilitated vacant
commercial structures tax credit may not exceed the property tax increase
attributable to the increase in the assessment of the real property over the
assessment before the real property is rehabilitated. This property tax credit
will be determined based upon the lesser of:
      (1)   The increase in the assessed value of the property attributable to
the rehabilitation project, over the assessed value before the property was
rehabilitated; or
      (2)   The cost expended for the rehabilitation project.
   (G)   The owners of otherwise qualifying properties shall provide pedestrian
and vehicular connections to adjacent commercial properties acceptable to the
County; failure to do so at any time shall render a property ineligible for
continued participation in this tax credit program.
   (H)   This property tax credit shall be a credit only from the County real
property tax imposed pursuant to Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article § 6-202
and shall not be a credit from any special taxing district tax including, but
not limited to tax for fire and rescue services, imposed pursuant to Maryland
or Frederick County law.
   (I)   Property owners shall file annually (on or before April 30 of each
calendar year) an application for the tax credit allowed under this provision
with the County Treasurer; failure to do so shall mean that an otherwise
qualifying property shall not be entitled to receive this tax credit for the
following tax year (July 1 through June 30).
(Ord. 05-03-364, 2-15-2005; Ord. 05-05-366, 4-26-2005; Ord. 10-02-537, 2-23-
2010; Ord. 11-15-581, 6-16-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-21,
10-25-2022)
§ 1-8-304. REVITALIZATION AREA REHABILITATED STRUCTURES TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   This Frederick County real property tax credit shall be known as the
Frederick County revitalization area rehabilitated structures tax credit and is
authorized by, and subject to, the provisions set forth in the Md. Code Ann.,
Tax Property Article § 9-236.
   (B)   To qualify for and remain eligible to participate in this Frederick
County real property tax credit program, a structure must be located within a
designated revitalization area; be actually improved, renovated or
rehabilitated (collectively "rehabilitation") as intended by this program; and
neither the structure nor the real property on which it is located may be
receiving any other Frederick County tax credit.
   (C)   To further qualify for this revitalization area rehabilitated
structures tax credit, a structure must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The structure must be located in a designated revitalization area
as provided for in §
1-8-304(M) below of this tax credit.
      (2)   The structure must be lawfully used, or have been used, for non-
residential purposes prior to rehabilitation for commercial or industrial
purposes.
      (3)   If a structure had previously been used for residential purposes,
the permitted and actual use of the structure must have received a change of
use approval from all relevant local authorities and the actual use of the
structure must have changed lawfully to commercial or industrial use prior to
the commencement of rehabilitation and application for this tax credit.
      (4)   Both single and multiple tenant structures are eligible to qualify
for this tax credit, assuming all other eligibility requirements are met.
      (5)   Only rehabilitation of existing structures is eligible. New
construction is not eligible.
      (6)   The structure (whether a single occupant building or a multiple
tenant structure) must have been constructed no fewer than five years prior to
rehabilitation of the structure and submission of an application by the
property owner for this tax credit.
      (7)   Where a structure is being used, or has been used, for both
residential and non-residential use, and the structure otherwise qualifies,
this tax credit shall only be available for the rehabilitated non- residential
portion of the structure.
   (D)   Qualifying structures shall be eligible for this revitalization area
rehabilitated structures tax credit for 7 consecutive years after first
qualifying for this property tax credit. The first tax year the tax credit
shall become available for a qualifying structure shall be the first tax year
in which its county property taxes would otherwise have increased due to the
qualifying rehabilitation project (the "first tax year"). The last tax year
this county property tax credit shall be available shall be the sixth tax year
that follows the first tax year.
   (E)   The amount of this tax credit will be the following percentage of the
lesser of either the increase in assessed value attributable to the
rehabilitation or of the actual cost of the rehabilitation:
      (1)   100% in the first, second and third qualifying taxable years.
      (2)   80% in the fourth qualifying taxable year.
      (3)   60% in the fifth qualifying taxable year.
      (4)   40% in the sixth qualifying taxable year.
      (5)   20% in the seventh qualifying taxable year.
   (F)   The amount of a tax credit granted under this program may not exceed
the property tax increase attributable to the increase in the assessment of the
structure over the assessment before the structure is rehabilitated. This
property tax credit will be determined based upon the lesser of:
      (1)   The increase in the assessed value of the property attributable to
the rehabilitation, over the assessed value before the property was
rehabilitated; or
      (2)   The actual cost expended for the rehabilitation.
   (G)   Projects that begin rehabilitation construction more than 5 years
after the geographical revitalization area in which they are located has been
designated for inclusion in this tax credit program shall not be eligible for
tax credits under this program. Qualifying structures that have been accepted
into this tax credit program before such 5 year period expires shall continue
to receive those tax credits as provided for above, assuming these structures
otherwise remain eligible for this program.
   (H)   For purposes of this property tax credit program, "commercial" or
"industrial" use shall mean general retail, business, automobile, and personal
services; wholesaling, processing, manufacturing and solid waste operations;
and similar commercial and industrial activities, all of which are lawfully
engaged in, which are not deemed to be a home-occupation.
   (I)   This property tax credit shall be a credit only from the county real
property tax imposed pursuant to Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property Article, § 6-202
and shall not be a credit from any special taxing district tax including, but
not limited to tax for fire and rescue services, imposed pursuant to Maryland
or Frederick County law.
   (J)   Property owners shall file annually (on or before April 30 of each
calendar year) an application, signed under oath or affirmation, for this tax
credit with the county treasurer; failure to do so shall mean that the
otherwise qualifying property shall not be entitled to receive this tax credit
for the following tax year (July 1 through June 30).
   (K)   In addition to terminating as provided elsewhere in this section, any
tax credit granted under this provision shall also terminate:
      (1)   At the moment ownership of the qualifying structure or real
property on which it sits is transferred or conveyed in any manner whatsoever,
except that this provision shall not apply simply because the structure or real
property is subject to a mortgage or deed of trust granted as part of a
financing of the property;
      (2)   At the moment in which the qualifying structure is substantially
destroyed;
      (3)   At the moment the qualifying structure or real property on which it
sits ceases to be used in whole or part for commercial or industrial purposes;
or
      (4)   At the end of the sixth tax year after the first tax year this
property tax credit was granted.
   (L)   To the extent this tax credit terminates other than at the end of a
tax year, the property owner shall repay, without demand, Frederick County the
amount of the tax credit received for that tax year. Interest shall accrue from
the moment the tax credit ends at the rate established for overdue property
taxes. To the extent permitted by law, any unrepaid tax credit is a lien on the
real property that had received the tax credit and may be collected in the same
manner as unpaid property taxes may be collected under the Md. Code Ann., Tax-
Property Article.
   (M)   This Frederick County revitalization area rehabilitated structures tax
credit shall apply to the following designated revitalization areas as of the
specified effective dates:
      (1)   Effective October 1, 2012, those areas located within the Town of
Middletown zoned general commercial or town commercial as shown on the map
attached to Ordinance 12-21-616 as Exhibit "A", a copy of which is on file with
the Frederick County Treasurer, are hereby collectively designated as the
Middletown revitalization area for purposes of this tax credit authorized under
Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property Article § 9-236.
(Ord. 12-21-616, 9-13-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-8-305 – 1-8-400. RESERVED.
ARTICLE IX: BOND RATING ENHANCEMENT RESERVE (§§ 1-8-401 — 1-8-405)
Section
   
1-8-401   Establishment and purposes
   
1-8-402   Reserve treatment in annual report
   
1-8-403   Designation of fund balance
   
1-8-404   Build up of reserve
   
1-8-405   Expenditure and restoration of reserve
§ 1-8-401. ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSES.
   (A)   There is a bond rating enhancement reserve.
   (B)   The purposes of the bond rating enhancement reserve are:
      (1)   To enhance, preserve and safeguard the bond rating of Frederick
County.
      (2)   To protect the financial integrity of Frederick County.
      (3)   To designate fund balance for this bond rating enhancement reserve
that is not to be expended absent extreme circumstances.
(Ord. 03-14-337, 9-25-2003; Ord. 09-13-517, 5-19-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-8-402. RESERVE TREATMENT IN ANNUAL REPORT.
   The bond rating enhancement reserve shall appear as a designation of fund
balance in the general fund balance sheet of the comprehensive annual financial
report (CAFR).
(Ord. 03-14-337, 9-25-2003; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-403. DESIGNATION OF FUND BALANCE.
   The county may designate fund balance to be placed into the bond rating
enhancement reserve.
(Ord. 03-14-337, 9-25-2003; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-404. BUILD UP OF RESERVE.
   (A)   It is the intent of the county governing body that the bond rating
enhancement reserve shall be at an amount no less than 3% of the general fund
expenditures and transfers to the Board of Education, the Frederick Community
College, and the Frederick County public libraries for the prior fiscal year.
   (B)   To begin to build the bond rating enhancement reserve to at least 3%,
the county has designated $2 million of fund balance as of June 30, 2003 to the
bond rating enhancement reserve.
(Ord. 03-14-337, 9-25-2003; Ord. 09-13-517, 5-19-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-8-405. EXPENDITURE AND RESTORATION OF RESERVE.
   (A)   To carry out the purposes of this ordinance, fund balance placed in
the bond rating enhancement reserve is intended to remain in the reserve and is
not to be expended for any other purpose except as provided in this section.
   (B)   The bond rating enhancement reserve may be expended only if the county
governing body:
      (1)   Holds a duly advertised public hearing, and
      (2)   Adopts an ordinance with a specific finding that the expenditure of
these bond enhancement reserves is necessary because of extreme circumstances.
   (C)   Extreme circumstances exist if (1) unexpected expenditures are
required in excess of the expenditures and contingency fund provided for in the
annual budget or (2) the county governing body determines that the expenditures
are necessary to address budget needs.
   (D)   Any withdrawals from the bond rating enhancement reserve may be
restored to the reserve as the county deems appropriate.
(Ord. 03-14-337, 9-25-2003; Ord. 09-13-517, 5-19-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
ARTICLE X: ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT PROPERTY TAX CREDIT (§ 1-8-411)
Section
   
1-8-411   Arts and entertainment property tax credit
§ 1-8-411. ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT PROPERTY TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   Establishment. The Downtown Frederick Arts and Entertainment Property
Tax Credit is hereby established.
   (B)   Boundaries. This Downtown Frederick Arts and Entertainment Property
Tax Credit shall apply only within the Downtown Frederick Arts and
Entertainment District. The boundaries of the Downtown Frederick Arts and
Entertainment District are shown on a map that is on file in the Office of the
County Director of Treasury and a copy of the map is attached to and made a
part of Ordinance 04-14-358 as Exhibit A.
   (C)   Qualifications. To qualify for the Downtown Frederick Arts and
Entertainment Property Tax Credit, a property must:
      (1)   Be located within the Frederick Arts and Entertainment District;
      (2)   Have been used, before renovation, as a manufacturing, commercial
or industrial building; and
      (3)   Be wholly or partially renovated for use by a qualifying residing
artist or an arts and entertainment enterprise.
   (D)   Amount. The amount of the county property tax credit shall be equal to
the amount of any countyproperty tax increase that is attributable to the
renovation, subject to the phasing schedule in subsection (F).
   (E)   Duration. This county property tax credit shall run for a period not
to exceed 7 consecutive tax years. The first tax year the tax credit shall
become available for an eligible building shall be the first tax year in which
a building's property taxes would otherwise have increased due to the
qualifying renovation (the "first tax year"). The last tax year the county
property tax credit shall be available for a building shall be the earlier to
occur of:
      (1)   The sixth tax year that follows the first tax year; or
      (2)   The tax year in which a building is no longer used by a qualifying
residing artist or an arts and entertainment enterprise.
   (F)   Phasing schedule. County property tax credits shall be phased out in
accordance with the following schedule:
Tax Year Percent of County Property Tax Credit Granted in a Tax Year
Tax Year         Percent of County Property Tax Credit Granted in a Tax Year
1                100%
2                100%
3                100%
4                100%
5                75%
6                50%
7                25%
8 and thereafter 0%
   (G)   Expiration. The Arts and Entertainment District County Property Tax
Credit Program shall expire on June 30, 2033, and applicants may not apply for
a county property tax credit for any qualifying renovation that commences after
June 30, 2033. Any qualifying renovation project already accepted into the
program by this date shall continue to receive the county property tax credit
as provided in this section.
   (H)   Fire tax. This property tax credit shall be a credit only from the
county real property tax imposed pursuant to Md. Code Ann. Tax-Property Article
§ 6-202 and shall not be a credit from any special taxing district tax for fire
and rescue services imposed pursuant to Frederick County Public Local Law §
2-8-6 or similar legislation.
   (I)   Applications. A property owner may apply for a county property tax
credit under this article by submitting an application to the County Director
of Treasury.
   (J)   Definitions. The terms used herein shall have the same meanings as
provided in the applicable sections of the Annotated Code of Maryland, unless
expressly provided otherwise.
      ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT ENTERPRISE. A for profit or nonprofit entity
dedicated to visual or performing arts.
      QUALIFYING RESIDENT ARTIST. An individual who:
         (a)   Owns or rents residential real property in an Arts and
Entertainment District and conducts a business in the Arts and Entertainment
District; and
         (b)   Derives income from the sale or performance within the Arts and
Entertainment District of an artistic work that the individual wrote, composed,
or executed, either solely or with one or more other individuals.
(Ord. 04-14-358, 10-19-2004; Ord. 13-12-640, 6-20-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 23-13, 6-6-2023)
ARTICLE XI: ELDERLY OR DISABLED HOMEOWNERS' TAX DEFERRAL (§ 1-8-421)
Section
   
1-8-421   Elderly or disabled homeowners' tax deferral
§ 1-8-421. ELDERLY OR DISABLED HOMEOWNERS' TAX DEFERRAL.
   (A)   This real property tax deferral shall be known as the "elderly or
disabled homeowners' tax deferral" and is authorized by, and subject to, the
provisions set forth in the Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article, § 10-204.
   (B)   A homeowner is eligible for a deferral of county real property taxes
on residential real property occupied as a principal residence if the homeowner
or at least 1 of the residing homeowners:
      (1)   Has resided in the dwelling for a period of at least 5 consecutive
years immediately preceding the date upon which application for this elderly or
disabled homeowners' tax deferral is made; and
      (2)   (a)   Is at least 65 years of age; or
         (b)   Has been found permanently and totally disabled and has
qualified for benefits under:
            1.   The Social Security Act;
            2.   The Railroad Retirement Act;
            3.   Any federal act for members of the United States Armed Forces;
or
            4.   Any federal retirement system; or
         (c)   Has been found permanently and totally disabled by the Frederick
County Health Officer; and
      (3)   Meets the income eligibility requirements specified in subsection
(D) of this section.
   (C)   While a qualifying homeowner is in a long term care facility, the
individual shall continue to be considered as having his or her principal
residence in the qualifying dwelling for purposes of this elderly or disabled
homeowners' tax deferral program so long as the individual continues to own the
dwelling and for so long as the dwelling remains vacant or is the principal
residence of the qualifying homeowner's spouse who does not otherwise qualify
for this tax deferral program:
   (D)   The combined gross income, as defined in Md. Code Ann., Tax Property
Article, § 9-104, of the homeowners of the residence in question may not exceed
$55,000 per year.
   (E)   The amount of real property eligible for a payment deferral shall be
the dwelling, garage and curtilage, as determined by the supervisor of
assessments for Frederick County.
   (F)   The amount of tax that may be deferred shall be the amount of increase
in the Frederick County property tax from the date the homeowner elects to
defer the payment of this tax. This tax deferral shall only apply to the county
real property tax imposed pursuant to Md. Code Ann., Tax Property Article, § 6-
202 and shall not defer any special taxing district tax including tax for fire
and rescue services.
   (G)   The total amount of county property tax deferred plus interest
calculated at the rate of 3% per annum shall be due and payable upon the latter
to occur of:
      (1)   The date the homeowner ceases to be eligible for this tax deferral
under subsection (B) of this section;
      (2)   In the case of the death of a qualifying homeowner whose surviving
spouse does not otherwise qualify for this tax deferral program but thereafter
remains unmarried and continues to own and occupy the dwelling as his or her
principal residence, 10 years after the death of the qualifying homeowner; or
      (3)   When a surviving spouse of a qualifying homeowner, who becomes
qualified and thereafter applies for this tax deferral program during the 10-
year interim period set forth in subsection (G)(2) above, ceases to be eligible
for this tax deferral program under subsection (B) above.
   (H)   Notice regarding a tax deferral authorized under this section,
including the amount of tax to be deferred, shall:
      (1)   Be given to any mortgagee or beneficiary under a deed of trust on
the property; and
      (2)   Included in the annual property tax bill for the property, which
notice shall include the cumulative amount of the deferral and all related
interest.
   (I)   The election to defer taxes must be made before September 15 of a tax
year in order to receive deferral of the taxes. Qualifying homeowners may apply
for this tax deferral with the Frederick County Treasurer's Office.
   (J)   All county real property and other taxes not deferred are due and
payable and subject to the same interest rates as otherwise apply to these
county taxes.
   (K)   A lien shall attach to the property in the amount of all deferred
taxes and interest and shall remain attached until the deferred taxes and
interest are paid. Deferred taxes that are delinquent may be collected in any
manner as provided under the TaxProperty Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland (including through tax sale), by civil action, or as otherwise
provided by law or equity.
   (L)   A tax deferral for an eligible homeowner must further be specifically
authorized by and reflected in a written agreement containing the terms and
conditions of the deferral including notice of the lien. The county shall
record the agreement in the land records of Frederick County.
(Ord. 05-04-365, 3-29-2005; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE XII: NEW JOBS TAX CREDITS (§§ 1-8-431 — 1-8-436)
Section
   
1-8-431   New jobs and enhanced new jobs tax credits
   
1-8-432   Definitions
   
1-8-433   Eligibility for tax credit
   
1-8-434   Amount of tax credit; pass-through to lessees
   
1-8-435   Recapture of tax credit
   
1-8-436   Administration of tax credit
§ 1-8-431 NEW JOBS AND ENHANCED NEW JOBS TAX CREDITS.
   There is hereby enacted a new jobs tax credit and an enhanced new jobs tax
credit against the county property tax imposed on real property owned or leased
by a qualifying business entity or its affiliate.
(Ord. 11-14-580, 6-16-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-432 DEFINITIONS.
   In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.
   AFFILIATE, BUSINESS ENTITY, NEW OR EXPANDED PREMISES, NEW PERMANENT FULL-
TIME POSITION, and NOTIFICATION DATE have the meanings defined in Md. Code
Ann., Tax-Property Article, § 9-230, or any successor provision.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   DIRECTOR OF FINANCE. The Director of Finance for Frederick County or
designee.
   ENHANCED NEW JOBS TAX CREDIT. The credit granted under this article to a
qualified business entity against the county real property tax imposed on the
new or expanded premises that qualify under state law for an enhanced new jobs
credit.
   NEW JOBS TAX CREDIT. The credit granted under this article to a qualified
business entity against the county real property tax imposed on the new or
expanded premises.
(Ord. 11-14-580, 6-16-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-433 ELIGIBILITY FOR TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   To qualify for a new jobs tax credit under this article, a business
entity must, on or after July 31, 2011:
      (1)   Construct, or expand by at least 5,000 square feet, premises in
Frederick County on which it conducts business by buying, building, or leasing
new premises;
      (2)   Employ at least 25 persons in new permanent full-time positions
located in the new or expanded premises in Frederick County within the first
24-month period after it occupies the new or expanded premises;
      (3)   Be located in a priority funding area as designated in Title 5,
Subtitle 7B of the State Finance and Procurement Article; and
      (4)   Notify the Director of Finance, as required under state law;
      (5)   Meet all other requirements under state and county law to qualify
for the new jobs credit; and
      (6)   After meeting the requirements set forth above, and in order to
continue to receive a new jobs tax credit each year allowed under this
ordinance, the business entity must thereafter maintain at least 25 persons in
permanent full-time positions located in the new or expanded business premises
as indicated above for a period of 3 years after each year that a tax credit is
allowed.
   (B)   To qualify and be certified for an enhanced new jobs tax credit under
this article, a business entity, along with its affiliates, must, on or after
July 31, 2011:
      (1)   (a)   Obtain at least 250,000 square feet of new or expanded
premises within Frederick County by purchasing newly constructed premises,
constructing new premises, causing new premises to be constructed, or leasing
newly constructed premises;
         (b)   Continue to employ at least 2,500 individuals in existing
permanent full-time positions paying at least 150% of the federal minimum wage
and located at premises in the state where the business entity, along with its
affiliates, is primarily engaged in one or more of the industries listed in the
Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property Article, § 9-230; and
         (c)   Employ at least 500 individuals within Frederick County in new
permanent full-time positions paying at least 150% of the federal minimum wage
and located in the new or expanded premises, and, if applicable, in newly
renovated premises adjoining or otherwise neighboring the new or expanded
premises; or
      (2)   (a)   Obtain at least 250,000 square feet of new or expanded
premises within Frederick County by purchasing newly constructed premises,
constructing new premises, causing new premises to be constructed, or leasing
newly constructed premises; and
         (b)   Employ at least 1,250 individuals within Frederick County in new
permanent full-time positions paying at least 150% of the federal minimum wage
and located in the new or expanded premises and, if applicable, in newly
renovated premises adjoining or otherwise neighboring the new or expanded
premises; and
      (3)   Notify the Director of Finance, as required under state law; and
      (4)   Meet all other requirements under state and county law to qualify
for the enhanced new jobs tax credit.
   (C)   A business entity does not qualify for a new jobs tax credit or
enhanced new jobs tax credit if:
      (1)   The business entity has moved the operations which are located on
new or expanded premises from another county (including Baltimore City) in
Maryland;
      (2)   The business entity or another taxpayer has been given a tax credit
or exemption for the new or expanded premises during the same taxable year
under any other state or county law;
      (3)   The business entity, or its affiliates if applicable, are types of
business entities, or the new permanent full-time positions are types of
positions, or the new or expanded premises are located in a geographic area
that the county has made ineligible for a new jobs tax credit or enhanced new
jobs tax credit;
      (4)   The location of the new or expanded premises is inconsistent with
any applicable land use master plan; or
      (5)   The business entity fails to meet any of the qualifying
requirements set forth in state law including those found in the Md. Code Ann.,
Tax-Property Article, § 9-230.
(Ord. 11-14-580, 6-16-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-434 AMOUNT OF TAX CREDIT; PASS-THROUGH TO LESSEES.
   (A)   The new jobs tax credit that may be claimed against county real
property taxes under this article is the following percentage of the property
tax imposed on the assessment of the new or expanded premises:
      (1)   52% during the first and second taxable years in which a credit is
allowed;
      (2)   39% during the third and fourth taxable years in which a credit is
allowed; and
      (3)   26% during the fifth and sixth taxable years in which a credit is
allowed.
   After the sixth taxable year, the business entity or premises shall no
longer be eligible for a new jobs tax credit and the Director of Finance and
Frederick County Treasurer shall not allow further credit. In order to receive
a new credit after the sixth taxable year, a business entity must reapply for
the new jobs tax credit and must meet anew all requirements then existing by
creating additional jobs and additional square footage.
   (B)   The enhanced new jobs tax credit that may be claimed against county
real property taxes under this article is 58.5% of the property tax imposed on
the increase in assessment of:
      (1)   The new or expanded premises; and
      (2)   Any substantially renovated real property adjoining or neighboring
the new or expanded premises. A renovation is substantial for purposes of this
subsection if the renovation results in a complete rehabilitation of at least
50% of each building on the property.
   The enhanced new jobs tax credit may be claimed in each of the first 12
taxable years after the Director of Finance certifies eligibility for the
credit.
   (C)   If at any time during either the 6 years that a new jobs tax credit or
during the 12 years that an enhanced new jobs tax credit may be claimed under
this article, the business entity fails to satisfy any applicable requirement
under this article to qualify for the tax credit, the business entity's
eligibility for a tax credit hereunder shall cease, and no further credit shall
be allowed. In order to re-qualify and re-start the new tax credit period, the
business entity must reapply and must meet anew all requirements then existing
by creating additional jobs and additional square footage.
   (D)   A business entity may not apply for a new jobs tax credit or for an
enhanced new jobs tax credit if it owes delinquent taxes to Frederick County,
including but not limited to recaptured taxes under this article.
   (E)   A lessor of real property must reduce the amount of taxes for which an
eligible business entity is contractually liable under a lease or rental
agreement by the amount of any tax credit allowed under this article.
(Ord. 11-14-580, 6-16-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-435 RECAPTURE OF TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   A business entity which does not continue to satisfy all applicable
requirements under this article to qualify for a tax credit during the 3
taxable years after any year when a credit was allowed must repay the tax
credit to the county after receiving notice from the Director of Finance that
the credit must be repaid.
   (B)   Interest accrues on any repayable tax credit at the rate established
for overdue property taxes, beginning 30 days after the notice from the
Director of Finance.
   (C)   Any unrepaid tax credit is a lien on real and personal property owned
by the business entity in the same manner as unpaid property taxes under state
and county law and may be collected in the same manner as real property tax may
be collected under the Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property Article.
(Ord. 11-14-580, 6-16-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-8-436 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX CREDIT.
   (A)    A business entity must apply for either tax credit on a form
furnished by the Director of Finance, must identify which tax credit it intends
to request, and declare when and how it expects to qualify for the credit.
   (B)   When a business entity believes it has met all requirements for the
tax credit, it may apply for certification on a form furnished by the Director
of Finance, and must provide sufficient information to show that all
requirements under this article and applicable state law have been met.
   (C)   The Director of Finance shall:
      (1)   Determine the eligibility of the business entity for the tax
credit;
      (2)   Notify the State Department of Assessments and Taxation that a
business entity has been approved for the tax credit; and
      (3)   Require submission of information by the business entity each year
that a tax credit is sought and during the 3 taxable years after any year when
the tax credit was earned to verify, to the Director of Finance's satisfaction,
that the business entity continues to satisfy all applicable requirements under
this article.
   (D)   A business entity which submits a false or fraudulent application, or
withholds information, to obtain a tax credit under this article must repay the
county for all amounts previously credited for any and all years that the
credits were provided and all accrued interest and penalties that would apply
to those amounts as overdue taxes. A business entity which violates this
subsection is liable for all court costs and expenses of the county in any
civil action brought by the county against the violator. The county may collect
any repayable tax credit, and otherwise enforce this article, by any
appropriate legal action.
   (E)   The Director of Finance may promulgate regulations to administer the
new jobs tax credit and enhanced new jobs tax credit enacted by this article.
(Ord. 11-14-580, 6-16-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE XIII: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL TAX CREDIT (§§ 1-8-441 — 1-8-445)
Section
   
1-8-441   Establishment
   
1-8-442   Definitions
   
1-8-443   Qualifying conditions
   
1-8-444   Amount and duration of credit
   
1-8-445   General provisions
§ 1-8-441 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   As authorized by, and subject to, the provisions set forth in the
Annotated Code of Maryland, Tax Property Article, § 9-205, Frederick County,
Maryland hereby establishes a property tax credit against the county real
property tax on real property owned or occupied by a commercial or industrial
manufacturing, fabricating or assembling facility that qualifies under this
Article, which real property tax credit shall be known as the Frederick County
Commercial and Industrial Business Tax Credit.
   (B)   The Frederick County Director of Treasury ("County Treasurer") shall
administer this tax credit.
(Bill No. 15-09, 9-1-2015)
§ 1-8-442 DEFINITIONS.
   COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS. A person that conducts manufacturing,
fabricating or assembling operations within Frederick County.
   FACILITY. The property within Frederick County that is either developed or
expanded for manufacturing, fabricating or assembling purposes and for which
this tax credit is sought.
   SUBSTANTIAL INVESTMENT.
      (1)   The acquisition or expansion of a building, land or equipment for
manufacturing, fabricating or assembling purposes within Frederick County that
totals a new investment of at least $5,000,000 and
      (2)   The creation of at least 25 new permanent full time positions at
the facility paying at least 150% of the federal minimum wage and which
positions may not have been transferred to the facility from another location
in Frederick County.
   TAX CREDIT AGREEMENT. An agreement entered into with the county by the
commercial or industrial business responsible for the facility which sets forth
reporting and other administrative requirements and conditions with which, in
the County Executive's discretion, the commercial or industrial business and
facility must comply to receive this tax credit.
(Bill No. 15-09, 9-1-2015)
§ 1-8-443 QUALIFYING CONDITIONS.
   (A)   To qualify for this tax credit the commercial or industrial business
must make a substantial investment in developing and operating a facility
within Frederick County.
   (B)   The commercial or industrial business seeking this credit for a
facility must apply for this tax credit with the Frederick County Treasurer on
or before October 1 of the tax year for which the facility is first eligible
for this tax credit.
   (C)   The facility must be in continual operation throughout each tax year
for which this credit is granted.
   (D)   The facility must be located in an appropriately zoned area and may
not be located in an agricultural or resource conservation zone.
   (E)   The facility must be lawfully used for manufacturing, fabricating or
assembling purposes, as such terms are defined for purposes of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, Tax-Property Article.
   (F)   Both single and multiple use properties are eligible to qualify for
this tax credit, assuming all other eligibility requirements are met, although
multiple use properties will only be eligible to receive a tax credit on the
facility portion of the property devoted to active manufacturing, fabricating
or assembling purposes.
   (G)   The commercial or industrial business responsible for the qualifying
facility and the owner of the real property where the facility is located, if
other than the commercial or industrial business, must, if requested, enter
into a tax credit agreement with Frederick County.
(Bill No. 15-09, 9-1-2015)
§ 1-8-444 AMOUNT AND DURATION OF CREDIT.
   (A)   A facility shall be eligible for this commercial and industrial
business tax credit for a term not to exceed ten consecutive years after first
qualifying for this property tax credit. The first tax year the tax credit
shall become available for a qualifying facility shall be the first full tax
year in which its county property taxes would increase due to the substantial
investment in new construction or an improvement to an existing facility (the
"first tax year"). The last tax year this property tax credit shall be
available shall be the tenth tax year that follows the increase in county real
property tax due to the substantial investment in the facility.
   (B)   The County Executive shall establish the term and amount of each tax
credit granted under this Article, as the County Executive believes is in
Frederick County's best interest, in an amount expressed as a percent of the
additional Frederick County real property tax imposed as a result of an
increase in assessment due to the new construction or expansion of a qualifying
facility (the "incremental tax"). In the event the average amount of the credit
over the term of the credit would exceed 60% of total incremental tax, the tax
credit must be reviewed and approved by the County Council before the tax
credit is granted.
   (C)   The amount of a tax credit granted under this program may not exceed
the property tax increase attributable to the increase in the assessment of the
facility over the assessment before the substantial investment was made to the
qualifying facility (the "incremental tax").
(Bill No. 15-09, 9-1-2015)
§ 1-8-445 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   This property tax credit shall be a credit only against the county
real property tax imposed pursuant to Maryland Annotated Code Tax-Property
Article § 6-202 and shall not be a credit against any special taxing district
tax including, but not limited to tax for fire and rescue services, imposed
pursuant to Maryland or Frederick County law.
   (B)   Property owners shall file annually on or before April 30 of each
calendar year an affidavit, signed under oath or affirmation subject to
penalties for perjury, with the County Treasurer certifying that the facility
continues to operate in Frederick County and qualifies for this tax credit;
failure to do so shall mean that the otherwise qualifying property shall not be
entitled to receive this tax credit for the following tax year (July 1 through
June 30).
   (C)   In addition to terminating as may be provided in the tax credit
agreement or elsewhere in this Article, any tax credit granted under this
provision shall terminate:
      (1)   At the moment ownership of the qualifying facility or real property
on which it sits is transferred or conveyed in any manner whatsoever, except
that this provision shall not apply simply because the facility or real
property is subject to a mortgage or deed of trust granted as part of a
financing of the property or if the transfer or conveyance is between a parent
business entity and its wholly owned subsidiary business entity or between two
or more subsidiary business entities wholly owned by the same parent business
entity;
      (2)   At the moment in which the qualifying facility is substantially
destroyed;
      (3)   At the moment the qualifying facility ceases to be used in whole or
part for manufacturing, fabricating or assembling purposes, including but not
limited to failing to maintain the minimum employment level required for the
initial substantial investment; or
      (4)   At the end of the tenth tax year after the qualifying facility was
first eligible for this tax credit.
   (D)   To the extent this tax credit terminates other than at the end of a
tax year, the property owner shall repay, without demand, Frederick County the
amount of the tax credit received for that tax year. Interest shall accrue from
the moment the tax credit terminates at the rate established for overdue
property taxes. To the extent permitted by law, any unrepaid tax credit is a
lien on the real property that had received the tax credit and may be collected
in the same manner as unpaid property taxes may be collected under the
Annotated Code of Maryland, Tax-Property Article.
   (E)   In the event the commercial or industrial business making the
substantial investment that qualifies for this tax credit is a lessee of real
property subject to this credit, the amount of this tax credit shall pass
through to the commercial or industrial business that makes the substantial
investment qualifying the facility for this credit, except that the term of the
tax credit may not exceed the remaining term of the lease and may not, in any
event, exceed ten years.
   (F)   In the event a commercial or industrial business qualifies for this
commercial and industrial business tax credit as well as for a second real
property tax credit available from the county and applications are timely filed
for both credits, the qualifying business may elect which credit to receive,
but may not receive both credits. Upon expiration or termination of the
selected credit, if the qualifying business is not then in default of the
qualifications for either tax credit and the tax credits were for different
length terms the business shall then receive the remaining credit available
during any remaining time on the second credit.
(Bill No. 15-09, 9-1-2015)
ARTICLE XIV: COMMERCIAL CLEAN ENERGY LOAN PROGRAM (§§ 1-8-451 —1-8-456)
Section
   
1-8-451   Definitions
   
1-8-452   Program established; administration
   
1-8-453   Scope and eligibility
   
1-8-454   Qualifying improvements and costs
   
1-8-455   Real property tax surcharge
   
1-8-456   Financing
§ 1-8-451 DEFINITIONS.
   ACT. Section 1-1101 et seq. of the Local Government Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.
   CLEAN ENERGY LENDER. A capital provider that provides loans to property
owners in order to finance qualifying projects, approved by the Maryland Clean
Energy Center, and such capital provider's successors, transferees, and
assignees.
   CLEAN ENERGY LOAN. Any loan made by a private lender to a property owner
under the Clean Energy Loan Program.
   CLEAN ENERGY LOAN FINANCING AGREEMENT. An agreement between a property owner
and a clean energy lender providing for the terms and conditions of a clean
energy loan.
   CLEAN ENERGY LOAN OBLIGATION. All indebtedness and obligations of a property
owner to a clean energy lender under a clean energy financing agreement.
   CLEAN ENERGY LOAN PROGRAM OR PACE PROGRAM. The clean energy loan program
authorized by the Act, and established herein, the purpose of which is to
provide loans to property owners to finance qualifying projects.
   CLEAN ENERGY LOAN PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR. Any person or entity selected by
the County to manage the Clean Energy Loan Program.
   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY. Any real property as defined in the Act, including
residential dwellings containing more than four single dwelling units.
   MDPACE PROGRAM GUIDELINES. The guidelines as defined by the Clean Energy
Loan Program Administrator, the purpose of which is to describe the
requirements, rules, and procedures applicable to the PACE Program.
    PROPERTY OWNER. An owner of qualified commercial property.
   QUALIFYING PROJECTS. Projects as defined in §
1-8-454.
   SURCHARGE. The assessment levied by the County on a property owner's
property tax bill to collect PACE Program loan payments owed to a clean energy
lender by the property owner and costs of administering the PACE Program in
accordance with the Act and as authorized by the County legislation.
   SURCHARGE LIEN. The lien automatically established upon the County's levy of
the surcharge on the property tax bill.
(Bill No. 16-17, 11-15-2016; Bill No. 23-09, 6-6-2023)
§ 1-8-452 PROGRAM ESTABLISHED; ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Established.  There is hereby established a Clean Energy Loan Program
to finance and refinancequalifying projects in accordance with § 1-1101, et
seq., of the Local Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
   (B)   Rules and regulations. The County may adopt rules and regulations to
administer the Clean Energy Loan Program consistent with this subtitle.
   (C)   Program Administrator. The County Executive may enter into an
agreement with a private entity or State instrumentality to administer the
Clean Energy Loan Program.
(Bill No. 16-17, 11-15-2016; Bill No. 23-09, 6-6-2023)
§ 1-8-453 SCOPE AND ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   Scope. Property owners are eligible to participate in the Clean Energy
Loan Program for non-accelerating loans. The minimum loan amount shall be equal
to the minimum loan amount outlined in the MDPACE Program Guidelines as of the
date the loan is issued.
   (B)   Eligibility. In order to be eligible for a clean energy loan, the
property owner shall:
      (1)   Have a 100% ownership interest in the commercial property located
in Frederick County for which projects are proposed;
      (2)   Demonstrate that the most recent property taxes, assessments, and
charges on the property have been paid;
      (3)   Provide a copy of written notice to all current holders of a
mortgage or deed of trust who have a priority recorded lien on the property and
written proof of express consent to the clean energy loan as a priority lien by
all current holders of a mortgage or deed of trust on the property that is to
be financed under the Clean Energy Loan Program; and
       (4)   Establish that the owner of the commercial property is able to
repay the loan provided under the Clean Energy Loan Program, in a matter
substantially similar to that required for a mortgage loan under§§ 12-127, 12-
311, 12-409.1, 12-925 and 12-1029 of the Commercial Law Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
(Bill No. 16-17, 11-15-2016; Bill No. 23-09, 6-6-2023)
§ 1-8-454 QUALIFYING IMPROVEMENTS AND COSTS.
   (A)   Qualifying projects. The cost of the following types of qualifying
projects to existing buildings and structures, or new construction, on
commercial property may be financed through the Clean Energy Loan Program:
      (1)   Energy and water efficiency projects;
      (2)   Renewable energy projects, including but not limited to solar
energy equipment, geothermal energy devices, and wind energy systems;
      (3)   Environmental remediation projects, which means a project intended
to remove environmental or health hazards, and including projects that promote
indoor air and water quality, asbestos remediation, lead paint removal, and
mold remediation;
      (4)   Resiliency projects, which means a project intended to increase the
capacity of a property to withstand natural disasters and the effects of
climate change including flood mitigation, stormwater management, a project to
increase fire or wind resistance, a project to increase the capacity of a
natural system, an inundation adaptation project, alternative vehicle charging
infrastructure, and energy storage; and
      (5)   Any other project approved by the County or the Clean Energy Loan
Program Administrator as qualifying consistent with the Act.
   (B)   Qualifying costs. A clean energy loan may be used to pay for all costs
incurred by a property owner in connection with the qualifying projects,
including but not limited to:
      (1)   The cost of the energy audit;
      (2)   Feasibility studies and reports;
      (3)   Project management, design, installation, and construction of the
qualifying projects;
      (4)   Commissioning;
      (5)   Energy savings or performance guaranty or insurance;
      (6)   Closing costs of the clean energy loan;
      (7)   Permitting fees;
      (8)   Administrative fees;
      (9)   Post-install evaluation, management and verification; and
      (10)   Building accreditation.
(Bill No. 16-17, 11-15-2016; Bill No. 23-09, 6-6-2023)
§ 1-8-455 REAL PROPERTY TAX SURCHARGE.
    (A)   Repayment of loans. A property owner participating in the Clean
Energy Loan Program shall repay the clean energy loan through a surcharge on
their real property tax bill. Upon receipt of written notice from the Clean
Energy Loan Program Administrator of the execution of a clean energy loan
financing agreement, the County shall add the surcharge to the tax property
bill on July 1 of the year indicated by the payment schedule of the Clean
Energy Loan Financing Agreement. The surcharge shall constitute a first lien on
the property from the date it becomes payable until the unpaid surcharge and
interest and penalties on the surcharge are paid in full, regardless of a
change in ownership, whether voluntary or involuntary. A person or entity that
acquires property subject to a surcharge assumes the obligation to pay the
surcharge.
   (B)   Calculation. The surcharge for a clean energy loan shall include the
clean energy loan obligation and any administrative costs incurred by the
County. The included administrative costs shall be the actual expenses incurred
to administer the Clean Energy Loan Program.
   (C)   Statement of levy and lien of surcharge agreement. Upon receiving
written notice from the Clean Energy Loan Program Administrator of the
execution of a Clean Energy Loan Financing Agreement, the property owner shall
execute an agreement with the County and the clean energy lender that will be
recorded in the land records of Frederick County, at the expense of the
property owner, and which shall include:
      (1)   The date the clean energy loan was made to the property owner and
the property became subject to the surcharge;
      (2)   The term of the clean energy loan and the surcharge, including how
long it will apply to the property;
      (3)   The amount of the clean energy loan obligation and estimated county
administrative costs for the first year;
      (4)   The annual principal and interest amount for each year of the term
of the clean energy loan, including any partial year prorated amounts;
      (5)    The prepayment requirements and any prepayment premium that may
apply, if the loan is a pre-payable clean energy loan;
      (6)   Agreement by the property owner to repay all clean energy loan
obligations and the county's administrative costs through the surcharge
included on the owner's real property tax bill due and payable on the same date
as the real property tax bill;
      (7)   Acknowledgment by the property owner that an unpaid surcharge
constitutes a first lien on the property that has priority over prior or
subsequent liens in favor of private parties, and that the surcharge will
continue as a lien on the property from the date it becomes payable until the
unpaid surcharge and interest and penalties on the surcharge are paid in full,
regardless of a change in ownership of the property, whether voluntary or
involuntary;
      (8)   Acknowledgment by the property owner and the clean energy lender
that the County has no liability for the clean energy loan obligation or any
costs associated with the collection of amounts due under the clean energy loan
financing agreement; and
      (9)   Acknowledgment by the property owner that an overdue surcharge
shall be collected as a tax lien pursuant to Title 14, Subtitle 8 of the Tax-
Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland and
Chapter 2-7: Finance and Taxation, Article V: Tax Sales of this Code, and that
an overdue surcharge will also be collected, irrespective of whether real
property taxes or any other taxes, charges, or assessments are due and owing.
   (D)   Default. If a property owner defaults on the surcharge, the lien will
be collected pursuant to Title 14, Subtitle 8 of the Tax-Property Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland and
Chapter 2-7 of this Code, irrespective of whether property taxes or any other
taxes, charges or assessments are due and owing. The County shall not incur any
liability to the clean energy lender or others in the event of default.
   (E)   Credit of payments. Payments received from a property owner and from
the sale of a property where a clean energy loan is in default shall be
credited first to all County and other political subdivision taxes,
assessments, and charges before being credited towards outstanding clean energy
loan surcharges and balances.
   (F)   County to forward surcharges collected.  The County shall have no
ownership of the surcharges collected, except for administrative costs provided
under this subtitle. The County shall forward collected surcharge payments in
any calendar month to the clean energy lenders or the Clean Energy Loan Program
Administrator within 30 days after the end of the month in which such amounts
are collected. The County shall have no obligation to make payments to any
clean energy lender with respect to any clean energy loan obligation other than
that portion of surcharge actually collected from a property owner for the
repayment of a clean energy loan.
   (G)   County liability. Except for the obligation to forward surcharges
under Subsection (F) of this Section, the County does not incur any liability
by participating in the Clean Energy Loan Program and the County is not liable
to the clean energy lender, the Clean Energy Loan Program Administrator, the
property owner or to others in the event of the property owner's default.
(Bill No. 16-17, 11-15-2016; Bill No. 23-09, 6-6-2023)
§ 1-8-456 FINANCING.
   (A)   Private lenders; terms. Any private lender may provide a clean energy
loan, and the clean energy loan financing agreement that evidences the loan may
include any terms and conditions permitted by law. The clean energy loan must
be repaid over a term not to exceed the useful life of the project as
determined by the Clean Energy Loan Program.
   (B)   County role. The County's role in the Clean Energy Loan Program is
limited to sponsoring the Clean Energy Loan Program and collecting and
forwarding the surcharges imposed under the Clean Energy Loan Program. The
County may not provide clean energy loans or other financing in connection with
the Clean Energy Loan Program.
(Bill No. 16-17, 11-15-2016; Bill No. 23-09, 6-6-2023)
ARTICLE XV: SMALL BUSINESS REAL PROPERTY TAX CREDIT (§§ 1-8-461 — 1-8-466)
Section
   
1-8-461   Establishment
   
1-8-462   Definitions
   
1-8-463   Eligibility for tax credit
   
1-8-464   Tax credit percentages and timing
   
1-8-465   Lessors
   
1-8-466   General provisions
§ 1-8-461. ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   As authorized by, and subject to, the provisions set forth in the
Annotated Code of Maryland, Tax Property Article, Section 9-312(i), Frederick
County, Maryland hereby establishes a property tax credit against the County
property tax on real property owned or leased by a business entity that meets
the requirements specified in this article, which real property tax credit
shall be known as the Frederick County Small Business Real Property Tax Credit.
   (B)   The Frederick County Director of Finance ("Director") shall administer
this tax credit.
(Bill No. 16-18, 2-21-2017)
§ 1-8-462. DEFINITIONS.
   AFFILIATE. A person:
      (1)   That directly or indirectly owns at least 80% of a business entity;
or
      (2)   At least 80% of which is owned, directly or indirectly, by a
business entity.
   BUSINESS ENTITY.  A person conducting a trade or business in the state that
is subject to the state individual or corporate income tax or insurance
premiums tax.
   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Finance for Frederick County or Designee.
   FULL-TIME POSITION. A position that requires at least 1800 hours of an
employee's time in a calendar year, during which time the employee is paid at a
rate at least equal to 150% of the federal minimum wage.
   NEW OR EXPANDED PREMISES. Commercial or industrial real property, including
a building or part of a building that has not been previously occupied, where a
business entity or its affiliates locate to conduct business.
   NEW PERMANENT FULL-TIME POSITION. A position that is:
      (1)   A full-time position of indefinite duration;
      (2)   Located in Frederick County;
      (3)   Newly created, as a result of the establishment or expansion of a
business facility in the county; and
      (4)   Filled.
   NEW PERMANENT FULL-TIME POSITION.  Does not include a position that is:
      (1)   Created when an employment function is shifted from an existing
business facility of the business entity or its affiliates located in Frederick
County to another business facility of the same business entity or its
affiliates, if the position does not represent a net new job in Frederick
County;
      (2)   Created through a change in ownership of a trade or business;
      (3)   Created through a consolidation, merger, or restructuring of a
business entity or its affiliates, if the position does not represent a net new
job in Frederick County;
      (4)   Created when an employment function is contractually shifted from
an existing business entity or its affiliates located in the county to another
business entity or its affiliates, if the position does not represent a net new
job in Frederick County; or
      (5)   Filled for a period of less than 12 months.
(Bill No. 16-18, 2-21-2017)
§ 1-8-463. ELIGIBILITY FOR TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   To qualify for the Frederick County small business real property tax
credit under this article, before a business entity obtains new or expanded
premises or hires employees to fill the new permanent full-time positions at
the new or expanded premises, the business entity must provide written
notification to the Director stating:
      (1)   That the business entity intends to claim the property tax credit;
and
      (2)   When the business entity expects to obtain the new or expanded
premises and hire the required number of employees in the new permanent full-
time positions.
   (B)   To further qualify for this property tax credit a business entity
shall:
      (1)   Obtain at least 2,500 square feet of new or expanded premises
within Frederick County by purchasing newly constructed premises, constructing
new premises, causing new premises to be constructed, or leasing previously
unoccupied premises; and
      (2)   Employ at least five individuals in new permanent full-time
positions within Frederick County during a 24-month period, during which period
the business entity also must obtain and occupy the new or expanded premises.
      (3)   Continue to occupy the new or expanded premises and continue to
employ the increased total work force throughout each year for which this tax
credit is sought.
   (C)   To qualify for this property tax credit, the total number of full time
permanent employees collectively employed by the business entity and its
affiliates may not exceed 50 at the time the application for this tax credit is
initially filed.
(Bill No. 16-18, 2-21-2017)
§ 1-8-464. TAX CREDIT PERCENTAGES AND TIMING.
   (A)   Subject to subsection (B) of this section, if a business entity
qualifies for this property tax credit, the credit shall equal a percentage of
the amount of property tax imposed on the assessment of the new or expanded
premises, as follows:
      (1)   40% in the 1st and 2nd taxable years;
      (2)   30% in the 3rd and 4th taxable years;
      (3)   20% in the 5th and 6th taxable years; and
      (4)   0% for each taxable year thereafter.
   (B)   This small business property tax credit may not be granted until the
first full taxable year in which the Frederick County property tax imposed on
real property owned or leased by the business entity increases due to the
business entity's qualifying investment in the new or expanded premises.
   (C)   Provided eligibility is maintained each subsequent year, the last tax
year this property tax credit shall be available shall be the sixth tax year
that follows the increase in Frederick County real property tax due to the
qualifying investment in new or expanded property.
(Bill No. 16-18, 2-21-2017)
§ 1-8-465. LESSORS.
   The lessor of real property granted a small business property tax credit
shall reduce the amount of taxes for which a business entity is contractually
liable under the lease agreement by the amount of any tax credit granted under
this article for improvements made by the business entity. The term of the
property tax credit may not exceed the remaining term of the lease and may not,
in any event, exceed six years.
(Bill No. 16-18, 2-21-2017)
§ 1-8-466. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   This property tax credit shall be a credit only against the Frederick
County real property tax imposed pursuant to Maryland Annotated Code Tax-
Property Article Section 6-202 and shall not be a credit against any special
taxing district tax including, but not limited to, tax for fire and rescue
services imposed pursuant to Maryland or Frederick County law.
   (B)   Business Entities and Affiliates shall file annually on or before
April 30 of each calendar year an affidavit, signed under oath or affirmation
subject to penalties for perjury, with the Director certifying that the
business entity continues to operate in the new or expanded premises in
Frederick County, that the additional new jobs remain filled with full time
employees and that the real property otherwise continues to qualify for this
tax credit; failure to do so shall mean that the otherwise qualifying real
property shall not be entitled to receive this tax credit for the following tax
year (July 1 through June 30).
   (C)   In addition to terminating as may be provided elsewhere in this
article, any tax credit granted under this provision shall terminate:
      (1)   If ownership of the new or expanded premises is transferred or
conveyed in any manner whatsoever, except that this provision shall not apply
simply because the new or expanded premises is subject to a mortgage or deed of
trust granted as part of a financing of the premises or if the transfer or
conveyance is between a parent business entity and its wholly owned subsidiary
business entity or between two or more subsidiary business entities wholly
owned by the same parent business entity or between a business entity and an
affiliate;
      (2)   When the new or expanded premises is substantially destroyed;
      (3)   At the end of the sixth tax year after the new or expanded premises
was first eligible for this tax credit;
      (4)   When the qualifying business entity's increased total workforce or
new and expanded premises are reduced below their number or size when
qualifying for this tax credit; or
      (5)   Whenever the qualifying business entity is no longer in compliance
with the terms of this tax credit.
   (D)   To the extent this tax credit terminates other than at the end of a
tax year, the property owner shall repay, without demand, Frederick County the
amount of the tax credit received for that tax year. Interest shall accrue from
the date the tax credit terminates at the rate established for overdue property
taxes. To the extent permitted by law, any unrepaid tax credit is a lien on the
real property that had received the tax credit and may be collected in the same
manner as unpaid property taxes may be collected under the Annotated Code of
Maryland, Tax-Property Article.
   (E)   In the event a business entity qualifies for this small business tax
credit as well as for a second real property tax credit available from
Frederick County and applications are timely filed for both credits, the
qualifying business may elect which credit to receive, but may not receive both
credits. Properties participating in a tax financing or payment in lieu of
taxes program are not eligible for a small business real property tax credit.
   (F)   The business entity seeking this credit must apply for this tax credit
with the Director on or before October 1 of the tax year for which the real
property is first eligible for this tax credit and must thereafter reapply
annually at the same time as filing the required annual certification of
continued compliance.
   (G)   This small business tax credit program shall terminate on December 31,
2026.
(Bill No. 16-18, 2-21-2017)
ARTICLE XVI: HISTORIC PRESERVATION TAX CREDIT
Section
   
1-8-467   Establishment
   
1-8-468   Definitions
   
1-8-469   Eligibility, duration and amount
   
1-8-470   Application for tax credit
§ 1-8-467. ESTABLISHMENT.
   As authorized by, and subject to, the provisions set forth in the Md. Code
Ann., Tax Property Article § 9-204, Frederick County, Maryland hereby
establishes a Frederick County Historic Preservation Tax Credit.
(Bill No. 24-11, 9-17-2024)
§ 1-8-468. DEFINITIONS.
   Words and phrases used in this article shall have their usual meaning,
unless otherwise defined in this section.
   CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY. A certificate issued by the Commission, or
appropriate municipal commission, to the property owner of an eligible
property, which authorizes the Treasury Department to apply a historic tax
credit to the eligible property.
   COMMISSION. A Historic Preservation Commission within Frederick County,
Maryland created under the Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article § 8-201.
   ELIGIBLE PROPERTY. A historic property or landscape feature that is:
      (1)   Designated on the County Register of Historic Places; or
      (2)   Individually designated or located within a local historic district
in Frederick County that has been determined by a Commission to be of historic
or architectural significance.
   ELIGIBLE WORK. The repair or replacement of exterior features of the
building or structure; work that is necessary to maintain the physical
integrity of the building or structure regarding safety, durability, or
weatherproofing; maintenance of the exterior of the building or structure,
including routine maintenance; and repair or replacement of historic landmark
features such as masonry walls, fences, or other site features, if determined
to be of historic or architectural significance. ELIGIBLE WORK must have prior
county or municipal Historic Preservation Commission approval and all relevant
building and construction permits, if applicable, unless the project is
eligible for administrative approval or considered routine maintenance.
   QUALIFIED EXPENSES. The amount of money paid by the property owner of an
eligible property to a licensed contractor, architect, engineer, or historic
preservation consultant for eligible work, or for materials used to complete
eligible work. QUALIFIED EXPENSES must total at least $500 and must not be
funded by any local or state grants or loans.
(Bill No. 24-11, 9-17-2024)
§ 1-8-469. ELIGIBILITY, DURATION AND AMOUNT.
   (A)   The property owner of an eligible property is eligible for the
historic preservation tax credit and may apply for the credit for a period of
up to five years per eligible project. If the tax credit for any one year
exceeds the amount of the county real property bill for that year, the balance
may be carried forward until depleted for up to five years. However, if the
property becomes no longer an eligible property, any unused credit shall lapse.
   (B)   Qualified expenses shall be incurred on or after July 1, 2023 and
within two tax years prior to the date of application for the credit.
   (C)   The tax credit shall be 25% of the property owner's qualified
expenses.
   (D)   The total tax credit may not exceed $7,500 per year.
(Bill No. 24-11, 9-17-2024)
§ 1-8-470. APPLICATION FOR TAX CREDIT.
   (A)   On or before the first day of April immediately preceding the taxable
year for which the tax credit is sought, the property owner shall submit an
application to the Commission, or the appropriate municipal commission. The
application shall include:
      (1)   Copies of any permits;
      (2)   Expense receipts;
      (3)   Photographs of the property prior to the eligible work;
      (4)   Photographs of the property after the eligible work;
      (5)   Any other records documenting the completion of the eligible work;
and
      (6)   Failure to include all items listed in subsection (A) will result
in denial.
   (B)   The Commission, or appropriate municipal commission, shall review the
application. Upon review of the application, if the claimed expenses qualify as
eligible work on an eligible property, the Commission, or appropriate municipal
commission, shall issue a certificate of eligibility to the property owner. A
determination regarding a qualification of a properly or of renovation or
construction expenses by the Commission is not subject to appeal.
   (C)   The Commission or appropriate municipal historic preservation
commission must transmit all approved applications to the County Treasurer,
including the certificate of eligibility, by May 15 immediately preceding the
taxable year for which the tax credit is sought.
   (D)   Upon receipt of the approved applications, the County Treasurer shall
apply the tax credit to the appropriate tax bill.
   (E)   The County Treasurer may adopt guidelines, regulations, or procedures
to administer this section.
   (F)   The tax credit is non-transferable to a new property owner.
(Bill No. 24-11, 9-17-2024)
CHAPTER 1-9: FOOD AND DRINK
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-9-1 — 1-9-20)
Section
   1-9-1 – 1-9-20      Reserved
§§ 1-9-1 –1-9-20. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: FROZEN DAIRY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS (§§ 1-9-21 — 1-9-26)
Section
   
1-9-21   Definition
   
1-9-22   Statutes adopted
   
1-9-23   Space requirements
   
1-9-24   Water supply
   
1-9-25   Waste disposal
   
1-9-26   Penalties
§ 1-9-21. DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this article, a FROZEN DAIRY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall be
any establishment which freezes and sells, only on the premises, dairy
products.
(1959 Code, § 34-1) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-9-22. STATUTES ADOPTED.
   The provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland, Health General Article,
Title 21, Subtitle 8 applicable to frozen dairy food establishments, are hereby
adopted as ordinances of the county.
(1959 Code, § 34-2) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-9-23. SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each frozen dairy food establishment shall provide a minimum of 800
cubic feet for storage space. In this storage space shall be stored single-
serve containers, parchment paper, wrappers, spoons, cones and ingredients used
in the preparation of freezing frozen dairy products. Storage of such items
shall be on racks at least 8 inches off the floor.
   (B)   The unit or machinery in which the product is frozen shall be
maintained in a separate room in which no other food shall be prepared or
served, nor shall any other trade or commercial activity take place in such
room. If the public is served outside of the building the minimum size of such
room shall be 150 square feet, including a minimum of 25 square feet of vacant
floor area. In the event there shall be more than 1 unit or machine for
freezing in such room, the minimum size shall be increased 10% for each
additional unit. If the public is served inside the building, the minimum size
above described shall be increased by 75 square feet and the unit shall be
separated from the serving area by a minimum distance of 4 feet. (If there are
arrangements for the public to be seated within the building, the minimum shall
be increased to 200 square feet.)
(1959 Code, § 34-3) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-9-24. WATER SUPPLY.
   Each frozen dairy food establishment shall be equipped with hot and cold
water, under pressure. An elevated tank on the premises as a source of storage
or supply shall not be considered to be furnishing water under pressure.
(1959 Code, § 34-4) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-9-25. WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Waste products from any frozen dairy food establishment shall be
disposed of. Such establishment shall be connected to a municipal sanitary
sewerage system or some other disposal system approved by the County Health
Department.
   (B)   Subsection (A) shall not apply to mobile units. Mobile units shall be
equipped with a tank having a minimum capacity of 50 gallons, which tank shall
be attached to the underside of the mobile unit and which tank shall
periodically be emptied into a municipal sanitary sewerage system or some other
system approved by the County Health Department.
(1959 Code, § 34-15) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-9-26. PENALTIES.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding $100 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 10 days. Each day
such violation continues shall be considered a separate violation, upon
conviction by the district court.
(1959 Code, § 34-6) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
CHAPTER 1-10: GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 85-17-349, adopted April 9, 1985 repealed Chapter 1-10 and reenacted a
new Chapter 1 through 1-10. Formerly the chapter, consisting of Arts. I through
IV, pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1959, §§ 34A-
1 through 34A34, as amended by Ord. 76-1-61, adopted Jan. 12, 1976. The chapter
was amended in its entirety by Ord. 91-08-008, adopted and effective April 16,
1991.
   Ord. 12-27-622, adopted November 8, 2012 repealed Chapter 1-10 and reenacted
a new Chapter 1-10 as herein set forth.
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-10-1 — 1-10-15)
Section
   
1-10-1   Purpose and authority
   
1-10-2   Definitions
   
1-10-3   Scope
   
1-10-4   Exemptions
   
1-10-5   Variances
   
1-10-6   Severability
Cross references:
   Buildings, see
Chapter 1-6;
   Storm water management, see
Chapter 1-15.2;
   Subdivisions, see
Chapter 1-16;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 1-19
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 85-17-349, adopted April 9, 1985, repealed Chapter 1-10 and reenacted a
new Chapter 1-10. Formerly the chapter, consisting of Arts. I - IV, pertained
to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1959, §§ 34A-1 through 34A-
34, as amended by Ord. 76-1-61, adopted Jan. 12, 1976. The chapter was amended
in its entirety by Ord. 91-08-008, adopted and effective April 16, 1991.
   Ord. 12-27-622, adopted November 8, 2012 repealed Chapter 1-10 and reenacted
a new Chapter 1-10 as herein set forth.
Statutory reference:
   Sediment control, see Md. Code Ann., Environment Article, §§ 4-101 et seq.,
COMAR 26.09.01
§ 1-10-1. PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain, and enhance the
public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements
and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated with land
disturbances. The goal is to minimize soil erosion and prevent off-site
sedimentation by using soil erosion and sediment control practices designed in
accordance with the Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) 26.17.01, the 2011
Maryland Standards and Specifications (Standards and Specifications) and the
Stormwater Management Act of 2007 (Act). Implementing this chapter will help
reduce the negative impacts of land development on water resources, maintain
the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of streams, and minimize
damage to public and private property.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter pursuant to Md. Code Ann., Title 4,
Environment Article, Subtitle 1, are adopted under the authority of the
Frederick County Code and shall apply to all land grading occurring within the
incorporated Towns of Brunswick, Burkittsville, Emmitsburg, Middletown,
Myersville, New Market, Rosemont, Thurmont, Walkersville, and Woodsboro, and
the unincorporated area of Frederick County. The application of this chapter
and the provisions expressed herein shall be the minimum erosion and sediment
control requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by state statute.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-2. DEFINITIONS.
   ADMINISTRATION. The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) Water
Management Administration (WMA).
   ADVERSE IMPACT. Any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands, including
their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics, or
usefulness for human or natural uses, which are or may potentially be harmful
or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, biological
productivity, diversity, or stability or that unreasonably interfere with the
enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Those methods and procedures used in
the cultivation of land in order to further crop and livestock production and
conservation of related soil and water resources. Logging and timber removal
operations are not to be considered a part of this definition.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, or government agency that executes the
necessary forms to apply for a permit or approval to carry out construction of
a project.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The entity responsible for the review and approval of
erosion and sediment control plans. For the purpose of this chapter, the
APPROVAL AUTHORITY is the Frederick County Soil Conservation District.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). A structural device or nonstructural
practice designed to temporarily store or treat stormwater runoff in order to
mitigate flooding, reduce pollution, and provide other amenities.
   CLEAR. To remove the vegetative ground cover while leaving the root mat
intact.
   CONCEPT PLAN. The first of three plans submitted under the comprehensive
review and approval process required by the Act and described in COMAR 26.17.02
and shall include the information necessary to allow an initial evaluation of a
proposed project.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   DEPARTMENT. The Maryland Department of the Environment.
   DRAINAGE AREA. That area contributing runoff to a single point measured in a
horizontal plane that is enclosed by a ridge line.
   ENVIRONMENTAL SITE DESIGN (ESD). Using small-scale stormwater management
practices, nonstructural techniques, and better site planning to mimic natural
hydrologic runoff characteristics and minimize the impact of land development
on water resources.
   EROSION. The process by which the land surface is worn away by the action of
wind, water, ice, or gravity.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL. A system of structural and vegetative measures
that minimizes soil erosion and off-site sedimentation.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. An erosion and sediment control strategy
or plan designed to minimize erosion and prevent off-site sedimentation.
   EXEMPTION. Those land development activities that are not subject to the
erosion and sediment control requirements contained in this chapter.
   FINAL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. Along with the final stormwater
management plan, the last of three plans submitted under the comprehensive
review and approval process required by the Act and described in COMAR
26.17.02. Final erosion and sediment control plans shall be prepared and
approved in accordance with the specific requirements of the Frederick County
Soil Conservation District (SCD) and this chapter and designed in accordance
with the Standards and Specifications.
   GRADE. To disturb earth by, including but not limited to, excavating,
filling, stockpiling, grubbing, removing root mat or topsoil, or any
combination thereof.
   GRADING UNIT. The maximum contiguous area allowed to be graded at a given
time. For the purposes of this chapter, a grading unit is 20 acres or less.
   HIGHLY ERODIBLE SOILS. Those soils with a slope greater than 15 percent or
those soils with a soil erodability factor, K, greater than 0.35 and with
slopes greater than 5 percent.
   INSPECTION/ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The Frederick County Department of Permits
and Inspections.
   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP). Designing stormwater management systems so
that all reasonable opportunities for using ESD planning techniques and
treatment practices are exhausted and only where absolutely necessary is a
structural BMP implemented.
   OWNER/DEVELOPER. A person undertaking, or for whose benefit, activities
covered by this chapter are carried on. General contractors or subcontractors,
or both, without a proprietary interest in a project are not included within
this definition.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a building or grading permit has been issued.
   PERSON. Includes the federal government, the state, any county, municipal
corporation, or other political subdivision of the state, or any of their
units, or an individual, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator,
fiduciary, or representative of any kind, or any partnership, firm,
association, public or private corporation, or any of their affiliates, or any
other entity.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSONNEL. Any foreman, superintendent, or project engineer who
is in charge of on-site clearing and grading operations or the implementation
and maintenance of an erosion and sediment control plan.
   SEDIMENT. Soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited by the
action of wind, water, ice, gravity, or artificial means.
   SITE. Any tract, lot, or parcel of land, or combination of tracts, lots or
parcels of land that are in 1 ownership, or are contiguous and in diverse
ownership, where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision,
or project.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The second of three plans submitted under the
comprehensive review and approval process required by the Act and described in
COMAR 26.17.02. A site development plan shall include the information necessary
to allow a detailed evaluation of a proposed project.
   STABILIZATION. The protection of exposed soils from erosion by the
application of seed and mulch, seed and matting, sod, other vegetative
measures, and/or structural means.
   STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS. The "2011 Maryland Standards and
Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" or any subsequent
revisions.
   STORMWATER. Water that originates from a precipitation event.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. Natural areas, ESD practices, stormwater
management measures, and any other structure through which stormwater flows,
infiltrates, or discharges from a site.
   VARIANCE. The modification of the minimum erosion and sediment control
requirements for exceptional circumstances such that strict adherence to the
requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of
this chapter.
   WATERSHED. The total drainage area contributing runoff to a single point.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-15, 10-15-
2024)
§ 1-10-3. SCOPE.
   No person shall disturb land without implementing soil erosion and sediment
controls in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the Standards
and Specifications except as provided within this section.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-4. EXEMPTIONS.
   The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Agricultural land management practices, construction of agricultural
structures and agricultural BMPs; in certain instances, the use of this
exemption may require written confirmation from the Approval Authority.
   (B)   Clearing or grading activities that disturb less than 5,000 square
feet of land area and disturb less than 100 cubic yards of earth; and
   (C)   Clearing or grading activities that are subject exclusively to state
approval and enforcement under state law and regulations.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-5. VARIANCES.
   The Frederick or Catoctin SCD may only grant a variance from the
requirements of the Standards and Specifications when strict adherence will
result in exceptional hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter. The
owner/developer shall submit a written request for a variance to the Frederick
or Catoctin SCD. The request must state the specific variance sought and the
reasons for the request. The Frederick or Catoctin SCD shall not grant a
variance unless and until sufficient information is provided describing the
unique circumstances of the site to justify the variance.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-6. SEVERABILITY.
   If any portion, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion of this chapter, it being the intent of the county that this
chapter shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any portion, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase, hereof.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-10-7 – 1-10-15. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS (§§ 1-10-16 — 1-10-25)
Section
   
1-10-16   Review and approval of erosion and sediment control plans
   
1-10-17   Contents of erosion and sediment control plans
   
1-10-18   Modifications to erosion and sediment control plans
   
1-10-19   Standard erosion and sediment control plan
§ 1-10-16. REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   A person may not grade land without an erosion and sediment control
plan approved by the Frederick or Catoctin SCD.
   (B)   The Frederick or Catoctin SCD shall review erosion and sediment
control plans to determine compliance with this chapter and the Standards and
Specifications prior to approval. In approving the plan, the Frederick or
Catoctin SCD may impose such conditions that may be deemed necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, COMAR 26.17.01, the Standards
and Specifications, and the preservation of public health and safety.
   (C)   The review and approval process shall be in accordance with the
comprehensive and integrated plan approval process described in the Standards
and Specifications, Frederick County's Stormwater chapter, and the Act.
   (D)   At a minimum, a concept plan must include the mapping of natural
resources and sensitive areas including highly erodible soils and slopes
greater than 15 percent as well as information required under Frederick
County's Stormwater chapter. These areas are to remain undisturbed or an
explanation must be included with either the concept or site development plan
describing enhanced protection strategies for these areas during construction.
   (E)   A site development plan submittal must include all concept plan
information and indicate how proposed erosion and sediment control practices
will be integrated with proposed stormwater management practices. The latter is
to be done through a narrative and an overlay plan showing both ESD and erosion
and sediment control practices. An initial sequence of construction and
proposed project phasing to achieve the grading unit restriction should be
submitted at this time.
   (F)   An applicant shall submit a final erosion and sediment control plan to
the Frederick or Catoctin SCD for review and approval. The plan must include
all of the information required by the concept and site development plans as
well as any information in §
1-10-17 not already submitted.
   (G)   A final erosion and sediment control plan shall not be considered
approved without the inclusion of the signature and date of signature of the
Frederick or Catoctin SCD on the plan.
   (H)   Approved plans remain valid for 2 years from the date of approval
unless extended or renewed by the Frederick or Catoctin SCD.
   (I)   Grandfathering of Approved Plans:
      (1)   Any plans that receive final approval after January 9, 2013 must be
in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the Standards and
Specifications.
      (2)   A plan that receives final approval by January 9, 2013 may be
reapproved under its existing conditions if grading activities have begun on
the site by January 9, 2015, with the exception of stabilization requirements.
      (3)   Stabilization practices on all sites must be in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and the Standards and Specifications by January 9,
2013, regardless of when an approved erosion and sediment control plan was
approved.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-17. CONTENTS OF EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   An applicant is responsible for submitting erosion and sediment
control plans that meet the requirements of the Frederick or Catoctin SCD, this
chapter, Frederick County's Stormwater chapter, the Standards and
Specifications, and the Act. The plans shall include sufficient information to
evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potential
impacts of the proposed grading on water resources, and the effectiveness and
acceptability of measures proposed to minimize soil erosion and off-site
sedimentation.
   (B)   At a minimum, applicants shall submit the following information:
      (1)   A letter of transmittal and/or application;
      (2)   Name, address, and telephone number of:
         (a)   The owner of the property where the grading is proposed;
         (b)   The developer; and
         (c)   The applicant;
      (3)   A vicinity map indicating north arrow, scale, site location, and
other information necessary to easily locate the property;
      (4)   Drainage area map(s) at a 1" = 200' minimum scale showing existing,
interim, and proposed topography, proposed improvements, standard symbols for
proposed sediment control features, and pertinent drainage information
including provisions to protect downstream areas from erosion for a minimum of
200 feet downstream or to the next conveyance system;
      (5)   The location of natural resources, wetlands, floodplains, highly
erodible soils, slopes 15 percent and steeper, and any other sensitive areas;
      (6)   A general description of the predominant soil types on the site, as
described by the appropriate soil survey information available through the
local soil conservation district or the USDA Natural Resources Soil
Conservation Service;
      (7)   Proposed stormwater management practices;
      (8)   Erosion and sediment control plans including:
         (a)   The existing topography and improvements as well as proposed
topography and improvements at a scale between 1" = 10' and 1"= 50' with 2 foot
contours or other approved contour interval. For projects with more than minor
grading, interim contours may also be required;
         (b)   Scale, project and sheet title, and north arrow on each plan
sheet;
         (c)   The limit of disturbance (LOD) including:
            (i)   Limit of grading (grading units, if applicable); and
            (ii)   Initial, interim, and final phases;
         (d)   The proposed grading and earth disturbance including:
            (i)   Total disturbed area;
            (ii)   Volume of cut and fill quantities; and
            (iii)   Volume of borrow and spoil quantities;
         (e)   Storm drainage features, including:
            (i)   Existing and proposed bridges, storm drains, culverts,
outfalls, etc.;
            (ii)   Velocities and peak flow rates at outfalls for the 2-year
and 10-year frequency storm events; and
            (iii)   Site conditions around points of all surface water
discharge from the site;
         (f)   Erosion and sediment control practices to minimize on-site
erosion and prevent off-site sedimentation including:
            (i)   The salvage and reuse of topsoil;
            (ii)   Phased construction and implementation of grading unit(s) to
minimize disturbances, both in extent and duration;
            (iii)   Location and type of all proposed sediment control
practices;
            (iv)   Design details and data for all erosion and sediment control
practices; and
            (v)   Specifications for temporary and permanent stabilization
measures including, at a minimum:
               1.   The "Standard Stabilization Note" on the plan stating:
"Following initial soil disturbance or re-disturbance, permanent or temporary
stabilization must be completed within:
                  a.   Three (3) calendar days as to the surface of all
perimeter dikes, swales, ditches, perimeter slopes, and all slopes steeper than
3 horizontal to 1 vertical (3:1); and
                  b.   Seven (7) calendar days as to all other disturbed or
graded areas on the project site not under active grading."
               2.   Details for areas requiring accelerated stabilization; and
               3.   Maintenance requirements as defined in the Standards and
Specifications;
         (g)   A sequence of construction describing the relationship between
the implementation and maintenance of controls, including permanent and
temporary stabilization, and the various stages or phases of earth disturbance
and construction. Any changes or revisions to the sequence of construction must
be approved by the Frederick or Catoctin SCD prior to proceeding with
construction. The sequence of construction, at a minimum, must include the
following:
            (i)   Request for a pre-construction meeting with the appropriate
inspection/enforcement authority;
            (ii)   Clearing and grubbing as necessary for the installation of
perimeter controls;
            (iii)   Construction and stabilization of perimeter controls;
            (iv)   Remaining clearing and grubbing within installed perimeter
controls;
            (v)   Road grading;
            (vi)   Grading for the remainder of the site;
            (vii)   Utility installation and connections to existing
structures;
            (viii)   Construction of buildings, roads, and other construction;
            (ix)   Final grading, landscaping, and stabilization;
            (x)   Installation of stormwater management measures;
            (xi)   Approval of the appropriate inspection/enforcement authority
prior to removal of sediment controls; and
            (xii)   Removal of controls and stabilization of areas that are
disturbed by removal of sediment controls.
         (h)   A statement requiring the owner/developer or representative to
contact the Frederick County Department of Permits and Inspections or its agent
at the following stages of the project or in accordance with the approved
erosion and sediment control plan, grading permit, or building permit:
            (i)   Prior to the start of earth disturbance;
            (ii)   Upon completion of the installation of perimeter erosion and
sediment controls, but before proceeding with any other earth disturbance or
grading;
            (iii)   Prior to the start of another phase of construction or
opening of another grading unit; and
            (iv)   Prior to the removal of sediment control practices;
         (i)   Certification by the owner/developer that any clearing, grading,
construction, or development will be done pursuant to the approved erosion and
sediment control plan. The certification must also require that the responsible
personnel involved in the construction project have a Certificate of Training
at an MDE approved training program for the control of erosion and sediment
prior to beginning the project. The Certificate of Training for Responsible
Personnel may be waived by the Frederick or Catoctin SCD on any project
involving four or fewer residential lots. Additionally, the owner/developer
shall allow right of entry for periodic on-site evaluation by the Frederick or
Catoctin SCD, Frederick County Department of Permits and Inspections, and/or
MDE; and
         (j)   Certification by a professional engineer, land surveyor,
landscape architect, architect, or forester (for forest harvest operations
only) registered in the State that the plans have been designed in accordance
with erosion and sediment control laws, regulations, and standards, if required
by the Frederick or Catoctin SCD or the Administration.
      (9)   Any additional information or data deemed appropriate by the
Frederick or Catoctin SCD.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-18. MODIFICATIONS TO EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   The Frederick or Catoctin SCD may revise approved plans as necessary.
Modifications may be requested by the owner/developer, the inspection/
enforcement authority, or the Frederick County Department of Permits and
Inspections in accordance with COMAR 26.17.01.09(H) Plan Modifications.
   (B)   The Frederick or Catoctin SCD may develop a list of minor
modifications that may be approved as field revisions by the inspection/
enforcement authority. The Administration must approve any list of minor
modifications prior to its implementation.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-19. STANDARD EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN.
   (A)   The Frederick or Catoctin SCD may adopt a standard erosion and
sediment control plan for activities with minor earth disturbances, such as
single-family residences, small commercial and other similar building sites,
minor maintenance grading, and minor utility construction.
   (B)   A standard erosion and sediment control plan must meet the
requirements of this chapter and the Standards and Specifications.
   (C)   MDE shall review and approve a standard plan prior to its adoption.
   (D)   The standard erosion and sediment control plan for minor earth
disturbances may be applied for at the Frederick County Department of Permits
and Inspections.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-10-20 – 1-10-25. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: PERMITS (§§ 1-10-26 — 1-10-35)
Section
   
1-10-26   Permit requirements
   
1-10-27   Permit fees
   
1-10-28   Permit expiration and renewal
   
1-10-29   Permit suspension and revocation
   
1-10-30   Permit conditions
   
1-10-31   Right of entry
   
1-10-32   Performance Agreements and secured funds
§ 1-10-26. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Before a grading or building permit for any site is issued Frederick County
Department of Permits and Inspections, the Frederick or Catoctin SCD must
review and approve an erosion and sediment control plan for the site.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-27. PERMIT FEES.
   The fees to be collected for grading permit processing, inspection, and
enforcement, shall be adopted by ordinance or resolution of the county
governing body.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-28. PERMIT EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   Permit renewal requirements. The grading permit shall expire 1 year
from the date of issuance. All permits with an outstanding surety balance at
that time must be renewed in accordance with the following provisions.
   (B)   Permit renewal process.
      (1)   The permittee must submit a written request to renew their grading
permit at least 60 days prior to permit expiration for any grading permit
requiring renewal. All current permit processing, inspection and enforcement
fees must accompany this request.
      (2)   For projects that are not actively involved in grading or that will
be inactive for a 12 month renewal period, the permittee may submit a written
request to have their permit placed in an "inactive" status. If approved, only
the permit processing fee needs to be paid.
         (a)   The permittee must submit a written request to return their
permit to "active" status prior to conducting any grading activity. All current
inspection and enforcement fees are due prior to approval of the return to
active status.
         (b)   A revised Sediment and Erosion Control Plan may be required
during the permit renewal process if deemed necessary by the County.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-29. PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   Frederick County may suspend or revoke any grading or building permit after
providing written notification to the permittee based on any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any violation(s) of the terms or conditions of the approved erosion
and sediment control plan or permit;
   (B)   Noncompliance with violation notice(s) or stop-work order(s) issued;
   (C)   Changes in site characteristics upon which plan approval and permit
issuance was based;
   (D)   Failure to renew a grading permit and pay all applicable fees as
required under §
1-10-28;
   (E)   Any violation(s) of this chapter or any rules and regulations adopted
under it.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-30. PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   In issuing a grading or building permit, the Frederick County Department of
Permits and Inspections may impose such conditions that may be deemed necessary
to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter or the preservation of
the public health and safety.
   No clearing or grading permit shall be issued without a certificate from the
Zoning Administrator that the use for which clearing or grading is to be done
is consistent with the zoning of the property.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-31. RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   It shall be a condition of every grading or building permit that the
inspection agency has the right to enter property periodically to inspect for
compliance with the approved plan and this chapter.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-32. PERFORMANCE AGREEMENTS AND SECURED FUNDS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Performance Agreements and secured funds shall be required to
ensure the proper installation, maintenance, and removal of sediment control
devices. Approved unit prices shall reflect current standard industry pricing
and are available from the Frederick County Department of Permits and
Inspections.
      (2)   Secured funds so required in this article shall be in a form
acceptable to the County Attorney and shall be subject to forfeiture for
failure of the owner or developer to:
         (a)   Complete work specified in the performance agreement(s) with the
county; or
         (b)   Comply with all provisions of this chapter and other applicable
laws and regulations. The secured funds shall remain in effect until work is
completed according to specifications.
      (3)   A partial release of the secured funds may be approved based on the
amount of acceptable work completed as specifically delineated, described and
scheduled on the required plans and specifications.
      (4)   Any required Performance Agreements and secured funds are to be
posted prior to final grading permit approval.
   (B)   Liability insurance. In the event that the proposed work may create a
hazard to human life or property, the County may require a certificate of
insurance for not less than $25,000 to cover claims against personal injury
and/or property damage. If required, this insurance must be obtained prior to
issuance of the grading permit. Failure to maintain the insurance will result
in temporary revocation of all permits issued to that person or entity by
Frederick County. Under no circumstances shall any liability be imposed upon
the county for damages to persons or property.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-10-33 – 1-10-35. RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: INSPECTIONS (§§ 1-10-36 — 1-10-45)
Section
   
1-10-36   Inspection frequency and reports
   
1-10-37   Complaints
   As a condition of a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NDPES)
municipal separate storm sewer system permit, Frederick County is the delegated
inspection and enforcement authority.
   Frederick County Department of Permits and Inspections is responsible for
the inspection and enforcement of all land disturbing activities, including
those sites requiring an erosion and sediment control plan as specified by this
chapter.
(Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-36. INSPECTION FREQUENCY AND REPORTS.
   (A)   The owner/developer shall maintain a copy of the approved erosion and
sediment control plan on site.
   (B)   Every active site having a designed erosion and sediment control plan
should be inspected for compliance with the plan on average once every 2 weeks.
   (C)   A written report shall be prepared by the inspection/enforcement
authority after every inspection. The report shall describe:
      (1)   The date and location of the site inspection;
      (2)   Whether the approved plan has been properly implemented and
maintained;
      (3)   Practice deficiencies or erosion and sediment control plan
deficiencies;
      (4)   If a violation exists, the type of enforcement action taken; and
      (5)   If applicable, a description of any modifications to the plan.
   (D)    The inspection/enforcement authority shall notify the on-site
personnel or the owner/developer in writing when violations are observed,
describing:
      (1)   The nature of the violation;
      (2)   The required corrective action; and
      (3)   The time period in which to have the violation corrected.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-37. COMPLAINTS.
   The inspection/enforcement authority shall accept and investigate complaints
regarding erosion and sediment control concerns from any interested parties and
routinely:
   (A)   Conduct an initial investigation within 3 working days from receipt of
the complaint;
   (B)   Notify the complainant of the initial investigation and findings
within 7 days from receipt of the complaint; and
   (C)   Take appropriate action when violations are discovered during the
course of the complaint investigation.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-10-38 – 1-10-45. RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: ENFORCEMENT (§§ 1-10-46 — 1-10-48)
Section
   
1-10-46   Enforcement procedures
   
1-10-47   Penalties
   
1-10-48   Civil infractions
§ 1-10-46. ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   When the inspection/enforcement authority determines that a violation
of the approved erosion and sediment control plan has occurred, the inspector
shall notify the on-site personnel or the permittee in writing of the
violation, describe the required corrective action and the time period in which
to have the violation corrected.
   (B)   If the violation persists after the date specified for corrective
action in the notice of violation, the inspection/enforcement authority shall:
      (1)   Stop work on that site. The inspection/enforcement authority shall
determine the extent to which work is stopped, which may include all work on
the site except that work necessary to correct the violation, and/or,
      (2)   Issue a penalty and/or civil infraction as described in §
1-10-47 and §
1-10-48.
   (C)   If reasonable efforts to correct the violation are not undertaken by
the permittee, the inspection/enforcement authority shall refer the violation
for legal action.
   (D)   The inspection/enforcement authority may deny the issuance of any
permits to an application when it determines that the applicant is not in
compliance with the provisions of a building or grading permit or approved
erosion and sediment control plan.
   (E)   Any step in the enforcement process may be taken at any time,
depending upon the severity of the violation.
   (F)   If a person is working without a permit, the inspection/enforcement
authority shall stop work on the site except activity necessary to provide
erosion and sediment control.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-47. PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, is
subject to a fine not exceeding $10,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 1 year or
both for each violation, with costs imposed in the discretion of the court.
Each day upon which the violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.
   (B)   Any agency whose approval is required under this chapter or any
interested person may seek an injunction against any person who violates or
threatens to violate any provision of this chapter.
   (C)   In addition to any other sanction under this chapter, the appropriate
state, county or municipal agency may bring a civil action against a person for
violation of this chapter.
      (1)   The action may seek imposition of a civil penalty up to $10,000.00
for each violation.
      (2)   In imposing a penalty, the court may consider the cost of restoring
the area unlawfully disturbed.
   (D)   Any governing authority that recovers damages in accordance with this
subsection shall deposit them in a special fund, to be used solely for:
      (1)   Correcting to the extent possible, the failure to implement or
maintain erosion and sediment controls; and
      (2)   Administration of the sediment control program.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-10-48. CIVIL INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority provided in §
2-2-29, any violation of any of the provisions of this entire chapter, which is
Chapter 1-10, entitled "Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control," is a civil
offense, and shall be called a civil infraction. If, after investigation, a
civil infraction is believed to exist, the inspection agency shall deliver a
citation or a warning to the property owner and other person or persons
responsible for the infraction. If the person is unable to be located
personally, the inspection agency may post the citation or warning in a
conspicuous place on the property and mail a copy of same by registered mail to
the person, which shall be sufficient for delivery under this section.
   (B)   The citation or warning, as provided for in this section, shall be in
writing and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the person charged (or warned);
      (2)   The nature of the violation;
      (3)   The location of the violation;
      (4)   The date(s) of the violation;
      (5)   The amount of the fine assessed (or possibility of assessment);
      (6)   The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid (or
violation corrected, if applicable);
      (7)   The person's right to stand trial for the violation (if
applicable); and
      (8)   A certification by the inspection agency attesting to the truth of
the matters set forth.
   (C)   Whenever an alleged or possible civil infraction comes to the
attention of the inspection agency, the procedure to be followed is:
      (1)   The inspection/enforcement authority will investigate whether an
infraction has occurred;
      (2)   If the inspection/enforcement authority reasonably finds that an
infraction has occurred, they will issue a warning to the person or persons
responsible in the form and manner as outlined in this section, with a time
stated of no more than 10 days to correct the infraction and to prevent future
infractions;
      (3)   That, if the infraction continues or is allowed to occur after the
time stated, the inspection/enforcement authority will issue a citation to the
person or persons responsible in the form and manner as outlined in this
section. Notwithstanding the provision of step (2) above, the inspection agency
may issue a citation at step (2) without the prior issuance of a warning.
   (D)   A present fine of $1,000 is hereby imposed upon any person responsible
for a civil infraction for each violation. Each day such violation is permitted
to exist shall be considered a separate infraction. All fines shall be payable
within 20 days to the county, in the Frederick County Department of Permits and
Inspections, which shall remit same on a daily basis to the County Treasurer.
   (E)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
offense by filing with the Director of Frederick County Department of Permits
and Inspections a notice of intention to stand trial. The notice shall be given
at least 5 days before the date of payment as set forth in the citation. Upon
receipt of the notice of intention to stand trial, the Director of Frederick
County Department of Permits and Inspections shall forward to the District
Court for Frederick County, Maryland, a copy of the citation and the notice of
intention to stand trial. On receipt of the citation, the District Court will
schedule the case for trial and notify the defendant of the trial date. All
fines, penalties, or forfeitures collected by the District Court for civil
infractions shall be remitted to the county, through the County Treasurer.
   (F)   If a person who receives a citation for an infraction fails to pay the
fine by the date of payment set forth on the citation and fails to file a
notice of intention to stand trial, a formal notice of the infraction shall be
sent to the person's last known address. If the citation is not satisfied
within 15 days from the date of the notice, the person is liable for a fine of
$2,000 for each infraction. If after 35 days, the citation is not satisfied,
the Director of Frederick County Department of Permits and Inspections may
request adjudication of the case through the District Court. The District Court
shall schedule the case for trial and summon the defendant to appear.
   (G)   Adjudication of an infraction under this subsection is not a criminal
conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities ordinarily imposed
by a criminal conviction.
   (H)   In a proceeding before the District Court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Ann. Code, Local Government Article, Title 6. However, the
County Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute all civil infractions under
this section.
   (I)   If a person is found by the District Court to have committed a civil
infraction, he shall be liable for the costs of the proceedings in the District
Court; and the court may permit the county to abate any such condition at the
person's expense, the same as provided in Md. Ann. Code, Local Government
Article, Title 6.
   (J)   Depending on the circumstances of each case and after consultation
with the County Attorney, the Director of Frederick County Department of
Permits and Inspections has the discretionary authority to reduce or suspend
all or a portion of the fine payable through his office.
   (K)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit or prevent the
Director of Frederick County Department of Permits and Inspections or anyone
else from seeking other legal remedies, such as injunctions or criminal
prosecution.
(Ord. 12-27-622, 11-8-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
CHAPTER 1-11: HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-11-1 — 1-11-20)
Section
   
1-11-1   Physician’s examination and certificate required for admission to
County Chronic Hospital
   
1-11-2   Income requirements for admission to Montevue County Home
   
1-11-3   Smoking in public buildings
   
1-11-4   Civil smoking infractions
   
1-11-5   Nuisances
   
1-11-6   Nuisance - noise levels
   
1-11-7   Enforcement and penalties
   
1-11-8   Release of balloons
Cross references:
   Air quality control, see
Chapter 1-3;
   Animals and fowl, see
Chapter 1-5;
   Authority of county to sell Montevue Hospital, see §
2-2-22;
   Food and drink, see
Chapter 1-9;
   Minimum Livability Code, see §§
1-6-31 et seq.;
   Sanitary requirements for amusements, see §§
1-4-2 et seq.
§ 1-11-1. PHYSICIAN’S EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATE REQUIRED FOR ADMISSION TO
COUNTY CHRONIC HOSPITAL.
   No person shall be admitted to the County Chronic Hospital unless a
physician’s examination has been made and certified on the application. The
purpose of this section is to protect the county against liability for an
undiagnosed illness or physical disability.
(1959 Code, § 35-1) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-2. INCOME REQUIREMENTS FOR ADMISSION TO MONTEVUE COUNTY HOME.
   No person shall be admitted to Montevue County Home whose income or
financial status exceeds the amount established by resolution of the county
governing body. Each guest of the home shall be permitted to retain such amount
of his monthly income for his personal use as may be established by the county
and the balance shall be paid to the county.
(1959 Code, § 35-2) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-3. SMOKING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to smoke tobacco products in public buildings
owned or controlled by the county. This prohibition against smoking in public
buildings shall not apply to the Citizen’s Truck Company, Inc., building and
Independent Hose Company, Inc., building.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed $50 for each offense. Any county employee who violates this
section shall, in addition, be subject to disciplinary action as established by
resolution or ordinance of the county governing body.
   (C)   The administrators of Citizens Nursing Home and Montevue Home may
adopt transition policies to allow those who are patients on April 1, 1992, to
smoke in the home.
(1959 Code, § 35-5) (Ord. 79-2-128, 2-6-1979; Ord. 92-02-037, 1-21-1992; Ord.
14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-4. CIVIL SMOKING INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to §
2-2-29, any violation of any of the provisions of §
1-11-3 of the Code is a civil infraction and shall be called a civil smoking
infraction.
   (B)   Whenever an alleged or possible civil smoking infraction comes to the
attention of the Director of Parks and Recreation Division, the procedure to be
followed is:
      (1)   That the Director of Parks and Recreation Division or his
authorized agent shall investigate whether an infraction has occurred;
      (2)   That, if the investigation indicates that an infraction has
occurred, he will call the alleged violator in to discuss the matter with the
person;
      (3)   That, if after investigation and after discussion, the Director
reasonably finds that an infraction has occurred, he will issue a written
warning to the alleged violator stating that the next violation will cause a
citation to be issued;
      (4)   That, if the alleged violator is again accused of an infraction,
the Director or his authorized agent will investigate the matter and discuss it
with the alleged violator; if the Director reasonably finds that a second
infraction has occurred, he will issue a citation to the person on a State of
Maryland citation form;
      (5)   That, notwithstanding the provisions of step (3) above, the
Director may issue a citation at step (3) without the prior issuance of a
warning if the alleged violator indicates that he or she will not follow the
provisions of §
1-11-3.
   (C)   A fine of $25 is hereby imposed upon any person responsible for a
civil smoking infraction. All fines shall be payable to the county in the Parks
and Recreation Division, which shall remit the same on a daily basis to the
County Treasurer.
   (D)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
offense by filing with the Director of Parks and Recreation Division a notice
of intention to stand trial. The notice shall be given at least 5 days before
the date of payment of the fine as set forth in the citation. On receipt of a
notice of intention to stand trial, the Director shall forward to the District
Court for Frederick County, Maryland, a copy of the citation and the notice of
intention to stand trial. On receipt of the citation, the district court shall
schedule the case for trial and notify the defendant of the trial date. All
fines, penalties, or forfeitures collected by the district court for smoking
infractions shall be remitted to the county through the County Treasurer.
   (E)   If a person who receives a citation for an infraction fails to pay the
fine by the date of payment set forth on the citation and fails to file a
notice of intention to stand trial, a formal notice of the infraction shall be
sent to the person at his or her employment address. If the citation is not
satisfied within 15 days from the date of the notice, the person is liable for
a fine of $50 for each infraction. If, after 35 days, the citation is not
satisfied, the Director may request adjudication of the case through the
district court. The district court shall schedule the case for trial and summon
the defendant to appear.
   (F)   Adjudication of an infraction under this section is not a criminal
conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities ordinarily imposed
by a criminal conviction.
   (G)   In a proceeding before the district court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Code, Local Government Article, Title 6. However, the County
Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute all civil smoking infractions under
this section.
   (H)   If a person is found by the district court to have committed a civil
smoking infraction, he shall be liable for the costs of the proceedings in the
district court.
   (I)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit or prevent the
Director of the Parks and Recreation Division or the County Attorney’s office
from seeking other legal remedies, such as injunctions or criminal prosecution.
(Ord. 86-27-404, 5-27-1986; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-5. NUISANCES.
   (A)   Declared. On any parcel of property in Frederick County, Maryland, it
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a danger to the public health, safety
and welfare for any contaminated water, filth, garbage, and rubbish, including,
but not limited to more than 2 dismantled, inoperative or unlicensed motor
vehicles, unless within a completely enclosed building or within a permitted
commercial or industrial zoning district, and any abandoned or discarded
appliances, including, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, freezers and
the like, or any offensive or deleterious matter to be and remain on any
premises which is subject to this section in the county.
   (B)   Violation; penalty. If the owner of said premises shall fail to remove
said filth, rubbish, and the like within 10 days of the date of the notice to
do so from the County Health Officer, Director of the Department of Permits and
Inspections, or any other duly authorized county official, he shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of a violation of this section, shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days or both fined and imprisoned. Each day a violation exists shall
be a separate offense.
   (C)   Civil nuisance infractions.
      (1)   Pursuant to the provisions of §
2-2-29 of the Frederick County Code, the failure of the owner to comply with
the terms of the notice given under subsection (B) above shall also constitute
a civil infraction.
      (2)   The citation, as provided for in this section, shall be in writing
and shall contain the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the person charged (or warned);
         (b)   The nature of the violation;
         (c)   The location of the violation;
         (d)   The date(s) of the violation;
         (e)   The amount of the fine assessed (or possible of assessment);
         (f)   The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid (or
violation corrected, if applicable);
         (g)   The person’s right to stand trial for the violation (if
applicable); and
         (h)   A certification by the County Health Officer or Director of the
Department of Permits and Inspections or authorized agent attesting to the
truth of the matters set forth.
      (3)   Whenever an alleged or possible nuisance comes to the attention of
the county, the procedure to be followed is:
         (a)   That the County Health Officer or Director of the Department of
Permits and Inspections will investigate whether a nuisance exists;
         (b)   That, if he reasonably finds that a nuisance exists, he will
issue a notice to the person or persons responsible, giving the person 10 days
to remove the nuisance;
         (c)   That if the nuisance continues or is allowed to occur after the
10 day notice, the Director will issue a citation to the person or persons
responsible in the form and manner as outlined in this section.
      (4)   A fine of $100 is hereby imposed upon any person responsible for a
civil infraction for each violation. Each day such violation is permitted to
exist shall be considered a separate infraction. All fines shall be payable to
the county, in the Department of Permits and Inspections, which shall remit
same on a daily basis to the County Treasurer.
      (5)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
offense by filing with the County Health Officer or the Director of the
Department of Permits and Inspections a notice of intention to stand trial. The
notice shall be given at least 5 days before the date of payment of the fine as
set forth in the citation. On receipt of the notice of intention to stand
trial, the Director shall forward to the District Court for Frederick County,
Maryland, a copy of the citation and the notice of intention to stand trial. On
receipt of the citation, the district court shall schedule the case for trial
and notify the defendant of the trial date. All fines, penalties, or
forfeitures collected by the district court for civil infractions shall be
remitted to the county, through the County Treasurer.
      (6)   If a person who receives a citation for an infraction fails to pay
the fine by the date of payment set forth on the citation and fails to file a
notice of intention to stand trial, a formal notice of the infraction shall be
sent to the person’s last known address. If the citation is not satisfied
within 15 days from the date of the notice, the person is liable for a fine of
$200 for each infraction. If, after 35 days, the citation is not satisfied, the
Director may request adjudication of the case through the district court. The
district court shall schedule the case for trial and summon the defendant to
appear.
      (7)   Adjudication of an infraction under this subsection is not a
criminal conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities
ordinarily imposed by a criminal conviction.
      (8)   In a proceeding before the district court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Code Ann., Local Government Article, Title 6. However, the
County Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute all civil infractions under
this section.
      (9)   If a person is found by the district court to have committed a
civil infraction, he shall be liable for the costs of the proceedings in the
district court.
      (10)   Depending on the circumstances of each case and after consultation
with the County Attorney, the County Health Officer or Director of the
Department of Permits and Inspections has the discretionary authority to reduce
or suspend all or a portion of the fine payable through his office.
      (11)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit or prevent the
county, or anyone else, from seeking other legal remedies, such as injunctions
or criminal prosecution.
   (D)   Abatement by county. In the event the owner shall fail or refuse to
comply with such notice, in addition it shall be lawful for the county to have
the material removed and charge the cost to the owner of the property, which
amount may be collected by a suit in a court of appropriate jurisdiction. This
section shall prevail over any other ordinance, rule or regulation governing
the same subject matter to the extent that this section is more restrictive.
(Ord. 79-20-146, 8-14-1979; Ord. 86-27-404, 5-27-1986; Ord. 90-22-620, 6-9-
1990; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-6. NUISANCE - NOISE LEVELS.
   (A)   The County Council finds that excessive noise harms public health and
welfare and impairs enjoyment of property. The intent of this Chapter is to
limit noise sources to protect public health and welfare and to allow the
peaceful enjoyment of property.
   (B)   Definitions.
      DAYTIME HOURS. 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., local time.
      dBA. Abbreviation for the sound level in decibels determined by the A-
weighting network of a sound level meter or by calculation from octave band or
one-third octave band data. (COMAR 26.02.03.01.)
      NIGHTTIME HOURS. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., local time.
   (C)   Noise standards for residential areas as receiving property.
      (1)   Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection and in
subsection (F) of this section, a person may not cause or permit noise levels
emanating from any property, such that the levels received on residential
property exceed the levels contained in Table 1 below. (COMAR 26.02.03.02B.(1))
Table 1
Maximum Allowable Noise Levels (dBA) for Receiving Land Use Categories
 
Day/Night Industrial Commercial Residential
Day       75         67         65
Night     75         62         55
 
      (2)   A person may not cause or permit noise levels emanating from
construction or demolition-site activities that exceed:
         (i)   During daytime hours, 90 dBA; or
         (ii)   During nighttime hours, the levels specified in Table 1 above
(COMAR 26.02.03.03B.(1))
   (D)   Measurement of noise levels.
      (1)   The measurement of noise levels under this subsection shall be
conducted at points on or within the property line of the receiving property
(or the boundary of a land use area) and may be conducted at any point for the
determination of identity in multiple source situations.
      (2)   Sound level meters used to determine compliance with this section
shall meet or exceed the specifications for Type II sound level meters.
   (E)   Off-road internal combustion vehicles.
      (1)   A person may not operate or permit to be operated an off-road
internal combustion engine powered recreational vehicle, including, but not
limited to, a dirt bike, an all terrain vehicle, a go cart, a snowmobile, or a
similar vehicle, on private property without the express written permission of
a person owning an interest in the property.
      (2)   A person may not operate or permit to be operated an off-road
internal combustion engine powered recreational vehicle, including, but not
limited to, a dirt bike, an all terrain vehicle, a go cart, a snowmobile, or a
similar vehicle, on private property closer than 300 feet to a neighboring
residence, without the written permission of the affected resident, unless the
operator of the vehicle can demonstrate that the operation of the vehicle, at
all of its operating speeds, within 300 feet of the neighboring residence, will
not cause the noise levels set forth in (C)(1) above to be exceeded at the
receiving property line. (COMAR 26.02.03.02 B.(5))
   (F)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
      (1)   Devices used solely for the purpose of warning, protecting, or
alerting the public, or some segment thereof, of the existence of an emergency
situation;
      (2)   Household tools and portable appliances in normal usage;
      (3)   Lawn care and snow removal equipment during daytime hours, when
used and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications;
      (4)   Agricultural field machinery when used and maintained in accordance
with manufacturer's specifications;
      (5)   Blasting operations for demolition, construction, and mining or
quarrying, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.;
      (6)   Motor vehicles on public roads;
      (7)   Aircraft and related airport operations at airports licensed by the
State Aviation Administration;
      (8)   Boats on State waters or motor vehicles on State lands under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Natural Resources;
      (9)   Emergency operations;
      (10)   Pile driving equipment, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m.;
      (11)   Sound not electronically amplified created by sporting, amusement,
and entertainment events and other public gatherings operating according to
terms and conditions imposed by the County, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
12:00 midnight;
      (12)   Railroads;
      (13)   Construction and repair work on public property;
      (14)   Air conditioning or heat pump equipment used to cool or heat
housing on residential property. For this equipment, a person may not cause or
permit noise levels which exceed 70 dBA for air-conditioning equipment at
receiving residential
property, and 75 dBA for heat pump equipment at receiving residential property;
      (15)   Trash and recycling collection between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.;
      (16)   Carnivals, fairs and amusements conducted by civic and service
organizations;
      (17)   Sporting events conducted by primary or secondary schools,
colleges, or recreational leagues on Board of Education, County or municipally
owned properties, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.; and
      (18)   Trapshooting, skeet shooting, or other target shooting on any
range or property approved by the Division of Planning and Permitting for such
activities. (Envir. Art. § 3-401.)
(Bill No. 16-15, 11-1-2016)
§ 1-11-7. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   A violation of §
1-11-6 shall be subject to enforcement by the Director of the Division of
Planning and Permitting or the Director's designees, the Zoning Administrator,
or the Sheriff of Frederick County and the Sheriff's designees ("Enforcement
Official"), pursuant to §
1-1-9 of the Code.
   (B)   The Enforcement Official is not required to issue a warning notice.
   (C)   A first offense shall be deemed a Class E civil offense. Each
subsequent offense by the same individual or property owner(s) shall be cited
at the next highest Class of offense.
   (D)   The Enforcement Official may, in consultation with the County
Attorney, seek additional legal remedies as appropriate under the
circumstances.
(Bill No. 16-15, 11-1-2016)
§ 1-11-8. RELEASE OF BALLOONS.
   (A)   Definitions.
      BALLOON. A nonporous bag of tough, light material, generally latex or
mylar, whether filled or unfilled.
      PERSON. Any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other
organization or group, however organized.
   (B)   Release of balloons.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to knowingly and
intentionally release, organize the release of or intentionally cause to be
released into the atmosphere of Frederick County helium-filled balloons.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
         (a)   Any balloon(s) released by or on behalf of any agency of the
State of Maryland, or the United States or pursuant to a contract with the
State of Maryland, the United States, or any other state, territory or
government for scientific or meteorological purposes;
         (b)   Hot air balloon(s) that are recovered after launch;
         (c)   The negligent and unintentional release of any balloon(s); or
         (d)   Pilot balloons (pibal) released by hot air balloon pilots to
determine meteorological conditions such as wind speed and direction.
   (C)   Violations and penalties. Any person who violates this section shall
be guilty of a civil infraction and subject to a fine of not more than $250.
(Bill No. 19-18, 12-17-2019)
§§ 1-11-9 – 1-11-20. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: NURSING HOMES; ASSISTED LIVING (§§ 1-11-21 — 1-11-26)
Section
   
1-11-21   Nursing home operation
§ 1-11-21. NURSING HOME OPERATION.
   The County shall operate CitizensCare and Rehabilitation Center of Frederick
County, Maryland and Montevue Assisted Living and shall exercise all of the
powers and duties authorized in state law.
(Ord. 13-13-641, 6-25-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-
2022)
§§ 1-11-22 – 1-11-26. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: REFUSE DISPOSAL FACILITIES (§§ 1-11-27 — 1-11-44)
Section
   
1-11-27   Registration of vehicle and permit required to use
   
1-11-28   Evidence of permit
   
1-11-29   Exception to article
   
1-11-30   Permit application; administration of article
   
1-11-31   County to establish fees, terms of permits, other rules and
regulations
   
1-11-32   Prohibited wastes
   
1-11-33   Permitted sources of refuse
   
1-11-34   Prohibited activities
   
1-11-35   Weight limitations for vehicles
   
1-11-36   Right to refuse use
   
1-11-37   Violation declared misdemeanor; penalty
   
1-11-38   Additional penalty for depositing hazardous material
   
1-11-39   Civil refuse covering infractions
   
1-11-40   User fees
   
1-11-41   Tire, mattress and box spring disposal
   
1-11-42   Scavenging unlawful
   
1-11-43   Yard waste
   
1-11-44   System benefit charge
§ 1-11-27. REGISTRATION OF VEHICLE AND PERMIT REQUIRED TO USE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle subject to
this article to place, dump or otherwise deposit any refuse, garbage or other
material in any dump, landfill or other place for the disposal of garbage or
refuse owned or controlled by the county (also referred to as refuse disposal
facilities) without first registering the vehicle and receiving a permit for
the same.
(Ord. 80-26-178, 9-9-1980; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-28. EVIDENCE OF PERMIT.
   The county shall cause to be prepared a plate, stamp, sticker or other
evidence of the issuance of a permit to use county refuse disposal facilities
to be placed on any vehicle for which a permit is issued to authorize the
vehicle admittance to county refuse disposal facilities to deposit garbage or
other refuse, and no vehicle subject to this article shall be allowed to use
any dump or landfill described herein without the indicia of a permit attached
to the vehicle as may be required by the rules and regulations of the county.
(Ord. 80-26-178, 9-9-1980; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-29. EXCEPTION TO ARTICLE.
   This article shall not apply to passenger cars or station wagons described
as Class A (passenger) vehicles under Md. Code Ann., Transportation Article, §
13-912 which are registered to residents of Frederick County, Maryland, and
which are depositing refuse from their own residence or farm, provided that no
hazardous materials as described herein are deposited in the facilities.
(Ord. 80-26-178, 9-9-1980; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-30. PERMIT APPLICATION; ADMINISTRATION OF ARTICLE.
   An application for the registration of a vehicle for a permit to use any
refuse disposal facilities shall provide the information required on a form
approved by the county. This article shall be administered by the Division of
Utilities and Solid Waste Management of Frederick County.
(Ord. 80-26-178, 9-9-1980; Ord. 11-13-579, 6-7-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-11-31. COUNTY TO ESTABLISH FEES, TERMS OF PERMITS, OTHER RULES AND
REGULATIONS.
   The county governing body, by resolution, may establish fees for the
registration and the terms for the issuance of permits to use the refuse
disposal facilities referred to herein and is also authorized to adopt, by
resolution, further rules and regulations concerning the use of the refuse
disposal facilities.
(Ord. 80-26-178, 9-9-1980; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-32. PROHIBITED WASTES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, corporation or other
entity to place in the refuse disposal facilities any wastes that are listed as
hazardous in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, § 3001 printed in
Volume 45, No. 98 of the Federal Register of May 19, 1980, or any amendments to
that list, or those hazardous substances designated in the regulations of the
Maryland State Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
(Ord. 80-26-178, 9-9-1980; Ord. 81-9-199, 3-10-1981; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
Editor’s note:
   The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act is currently located in 42 USC
6901 et seq.
§ 1-11-33. PERMITTED SOURCES OF REFUSE.
   For those persons, firms or corporations or other entities in the business
of collecting and transporting garbage and refuse, only refuse which is
collected within the confines of Frederick County shall be eligible for
disposal in county-owned or controlled refuse disposal facilities, with the
exception that any refuse collected within the limits of the Town of Mount
Airy, Maryland may be deposited in a Frederick County refuse facility in view
of the inter-county boundaries of the town.
(Ord. 80-26-178, 9-9-1980; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-34. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   In addition to those matters which may be prohibited by a resolution of the
county governing body, it is unlawful to do the following in any refuse
disposal facilities:
   (A)   Salvaging, scavenging or animal feeding;
   (B)   Speeding or reckless driving;
   (C)   Dumping before or after scheduled operating hours;
   (D)   The operation of unsafe vehicles;
   (E)   Dumping of motor vehicles or parts thereof;
   (F)   Dumping of hot ashes, firearms or explosive materials;
   (G)   Dumping of septic tank sludge;
   (H)   Dumping of nonstabilized sewage sludge; (Stabilization of sludge is
the process of converting active, organic matter in sewage sludge into inert,
harmless material.)
   (I)   Dumping of sludge containing less than 13% solids.
(Ord. 80-26-178, 9-9-1980; Ord. 81-19-209, 6-23-1981; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-11-35. WEIGHT LIMITATIONS FOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Vehicles using any refuse disposal facilities shall meet the weight
limitations prescribed by the laws of the State of Maryland for vehicles. Any
vehicle found by the county to be overweight shall be denied access to the
landfill.
   (B)   Vehicles transporting refuse to any refuse disposal facility shall
have the refuse covered in such a manner as to prevent the spillage of contents
onto county streets and highways.
(Ord. 80-26-178, 9-8-1980; Ord. 81-19-209, 6-23-1981; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-11-36. RIGHT TO REFUSE USE.
   The county, through the administration of the Division of Utilities and
Solid Waste Management, reserves the right to refuse the use of the landfill
facility privileges to any person, firm or corporation found not conforming to
the rules and procedures governing the landfill operation.
(Ord. 80-26-178, 9-9-1980; Ord. 11-13-579, 6-7-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-11-37. VIOLATION DECLARED MISDEMEANOR; PENALTY.
   It shall be a misdemeanor to violate any of the terms of this article and
anyone convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or sentenced to jail not to exceed 6
months, or both fined and imprisoned in the discretion of the court. Each day
on which a violation continues shall be a separate offense.
(Ord. 80-26-178, 9-9-1980; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-38. ADDITIONAL PENALTY FOR DEPOSITING HAZARDOUS MATERIAL.
   Any person depositing hazardous material in a refuse disposal facility area
referred to in this article shall also be subject to a civil penalty not to
exceed $10,000 and a mandatory injunction may be obtained by the county to
cause the violator to remove the hazardous material at his expense, which
expense shall include any site grading, pollution control, decontamination of
equipment and personnel, and the violator shall be liable for any injuries or
sickness to any personnel as a result of depositing hazardous material on the
refuse disposal facility site.
(Ord. 80-26-178, 9-9-1980; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-39. CIVIL REFUSE COVERING INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to §
2-2-29 of the Frederick County Code, any violation of any of the provisions of
§
1-11-35(B) of the Code is a civil infraction and shall be called a civil refuse
covering infraction.
   (B)   Whenever an alleged civil refuse covering infraction comes to the
attention of the Sheriff’s office, or the person designated by the Director of
the Division of Utilities and Solid Waste Management (hereinafter referred to
as the “designee”), the procedure to be followed is:
      (1)   That the Sheriff or his Deputy shall investigate whether an
infraction has occurred;
      (2)   That, if the investigation indicates that an infraction has
occurred, the Sheriff or Deputy shall issue a citation to the driver of the
vehicle on a State of Maryland citation form;
      (3)   That, if the vehicle is no longer in the area, the Sheriff or his
deputy will issue a citation to the owner of the vehicle on a State of Maryland
citation form;
      (4)   That, whenever an alleged civil refuse covering infraction comes to
the attention of the designee, the designee may issue a citation to the driver
of the vehicle.
   (C)   A fine of $100 is hereby imposed upon any person responsible for a
civil refuse covering infraction. All fines shall be payable to the county in
the office of the Sheriff, or in the office designated by the Director of the
Division of Utilities and Solid Waste Management in the case of a citation
issued by the designee, which shall remit the same on a weekly basis to the
County Treasurer.
   (D)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
offense by filing with the Sheriff, or the Division of Utilities and Solid
Waste Management of Frederick County if the citation was issued by the
designee, a notice of intention to stand trial. The notice shall be given at
least 5 days before the date of payment of the fine as set forth in the
citation. On receipt of a notice of intention to stand trial, the Sheriff, or
the Director of the Division of Utilities and Solid Waste Management if the
citation was issued by the designee, shall forward to the District Court for
Frederick County, Maryland, a copy of the citation and the notice of the
intention to stand trial. On receipt of the citation, the district court shall
schedule the case for trial and notify the defendant of the trial date. All
fines, penalties, or forfeitures collected by the district court for refuse
covering infractions shall be remitted to the county, through the County
Treasurer.
   (E)   If a person who receives a citation for an infraction fails to pay the
fine by the date of payment set forth on the citation and fails to file a
notice of intention to stand trial, a formal notice of the infraction shall be
sent to the person at his or her employment address. If the citation is not
satisfied within 15 days from the date of the notice, the person is liable for
a fine of $200 for each infraction. If, after 35 days, the citation is not
satisfied, the Sheriff, or the Director of the Division of Utilities and Solid
Waste Management if the citation was issued by the designee, may request
adjudication of the case through the district court. The district court shall
schedule the case for trial and summon the defendant to appear.
   (F)   Adjudication of an infraction under this section is not a criminal
conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities ordinarily imposed
by a criminal conviction.
   (G)   In a proceeding before the district court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Code Ann., Local Government Article, Title 6. However, the
County Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute all civil refuse covering
infractions under this section.
   (H)   If a person is found by the district court to have committed a civil
refuse covering infraction, he shall be liable for the costs of the proceedings
in the district court.
   (I)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit or prevent the
seeking of other legal remedies, such as injunctions or criminal prosecution.
(Ord. 86-28-405, 5-27-1986; Ord. 88-1-478, 1-5-1988; Ord. 11-13-579, 6-7-2011;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-40. USER FEES.
   Any person using the Frederick County landfill or transfer station and
disposing of any material (excluding tires or mattresses or box springs, which
are provided for in §
1-11-41) shall pay a fee to the county at the rates set by resolution of the
county governing body. Material may be weighed according to the rules of the
Division of Utilities and Solid Waste Management, and the fee imposed on the
actual weight of each load, rounded to the nearest 1/100 of a ton (20 pounds).
Alternatively, a disposal fee may be charged on such other basis as may be
established by the county. For example, alternatives to weighing tonnage might
include, but not be limited to, the county governing body establishing flat
rates for the disposal of specific materials and establishing flat rates per
disposal trip such as for use of the landfill's Citizens' Convenience Center.
(Ord. 88-35-512, 10-18-1988; Ord. 89-17-548, 3-21-1989; Ord. 90-34-632, 8-31-
1990; Ord. 92-05-040, 2-18-1992; Ord. 11-13-579, 6-7-2011; Ord. 12-30-625, 12-
4-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-41. TIRE, MATTRESS AND BOX SPRING DISPOSAL.
   Any person disposing of tires or mattresses or box springs through the
Frederick County landfill shall pay a fee to the county at the rates set by
resolution of the county governing body. The Division of Utilities and Solid
Waste Management may establish rules and procedures concerning the collection
of fees.
(Ord. 89-4-535, 1-17-1989; Ord. 92-05-040, 2-18-1992; Ord. 11-13-579, 6-7-2011;
Ord. 12-30-625, 12-4-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-42. SCAVENGING UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the Director of
the Division of Utilities and Solid Waste Management to salvage, scavenge or
otherwise remove, or cause to be salvaged, scavenged or removed, any material
from a bin or other container (including but not limited to residential
curbside bins) placed in the county by the Division of Utilities and Solid
Waste Management for the collection of any material for recycling.
   (B)   Violation of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty not
to exceed the following:
      (1)   First offense:      $100;
      (2)   Second offense:   $250;
      (3)   Third offense:      $500;
      (4)   Subsequent offenses:   $1,000.
   (C)   In addition to, and not in lieu of any other penalties prescribed in
this section, the County Attorney, on behalf of the county, may seek further
appropriate relief in the courts of Maryland, including, but not limited to,
actions for injunctive relief.
(Ord. 95-16-140, 9-26-1995; Ord. 11-13-579, 6-7-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-11-43. YARD WASTE.
   (A)   For purposes of this article, yard waste shall consist of any
materials normally generated in the maintenance of gardens, yards, lawns, or
landscaped areas, whether residential, commercial or public, including leaves,
grass clippings, plants, shrubs, prunings and trimmings no greater than 8 feet
in length and no greater than 6 inches in diameter. Yard waste does not include
other tree waste, land clearing debris, waste pavement, soil or any edible
product from any garden, yard, lawn or landscaped area.
   (B)   No person shall dispose of yard waste, or cause yard waste to be
disposed, either by itself or by commingling it with solid waste intended for
disposal in the refuse disposal area of the Frederick County Landfill. It is
the county’s intent that yard waste shall not be disposed of in the refuse
disposal area of the landfill. Yard waste may only be disposed of at the
recycling area of the landfill at such composting, mulching or other processing
area as established by the county.
   (C)   Pursuant to §
2-2-29, any violation of subsection (B) of this section shall subject the
violator to removing the yard waste from the refuse disposal area of the
landfill and possible loss of landfill use privileges as provided for under §
1-11-36. In addition, a violation of subsection (B) of this section shall be a
civil infraction identified as a “yard waste disposal infraction,” subject to
all procedures, penalties and costs set forth in §
1-11-39. Yard waste disposal infractions are not subject to §
1-11-37.
(Ord. 06-03-399, 1-17-2006; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-11-44. SYSTEM BENEFIT CHARGE.
   (A)   System benefit charge established. There is a system benefit charge to
pay for a portion of the reasonably anticipated capital costs and operating
costs for the disposal of solid waste.
   (B)   Countywide application. This system benefit charge shall apply
countywide including within the municipalities.
   (C)   Residential system benefit charge. The owner of each dwelling unit
shall be charged a residential system benefit charge. The owner shall pay this
system benefit charge.
   (D)   Amount of residential charge. The amount of the annual residential
system benefit charge for each single family residential dwelling unit shall be
$80 for fiscal year ’09 (July 1, 2008 through June 30, 2009) and $84 for fiscal
year ’10 (July 1, 2009 through June 30, 2010) and $88 for each fiscal year
thereafter. The amount of the annual residential system benefit charge for each
dwelling unit in a multi-family residential building shall be $44 for fiscal
year ’09 (July 1, 2008 through June 30, 2009) and $47 for fiscal year ’10 (July
1, 2009 through June 30, 2010) and $49 for each fiscal year thereafter.
   (E)   Imposition of nonresidential system benefit charge.  The owner of each
nonresidential real property in the county upon which improvements having an
assessed value of greater than $5,000 have been placed shall be charged a
nonresidential system benefit charge. The owner shall pay this nonresidential
system benefit charge.
   (F)   Calculation of nonresidential system benefit charge.
      (1)   Each year the Division must make a determination of which of the
following 5 waste disposal generator categories a particular type of improved
property use falls within:
         (a)   Low generator: 0 to 2 lbs./sq. ft.;
         (b)   Medium low generator: >2 to 4 lbs./sq. ft.;
         (c)   Medium generator: >4 to 6 lbs./sq. ft.;
         (d)   Medium high generator: >6 to 8 lbs./sq. ft.; or
         (e)   High generator: >8 lbs./sq. ft.
      (2)   The Division may make its determination of which of the foregoing 5
generator categories a particular land use falls within by referring to the
most current solid waste generation study conducted by the county. If no
current study is available, the Division may base this classification on solid
waste generation studies from other jurisdictions.
      (3)   The amount of the nonresidential system benefit charge for each
generator category shall be:
 
                                      System Benefit Charge Per Fiscal Year/
Category                Units         Per Unit
                                      FY 09 FY 10 FY 11 and beyond
Nonresidential - low    2,000 sq. ft. $38   $40   $42
Nonresidential - medium 2,000 sq. ft. $113  $119  $125
low
Nonresidential - medium 2,000 sq. ft. $188  $198  $208
Nonresidential - medium 2,000 sq. ft. $272  $286  $301
high
Nonresidential - high   2,000 sq. ft. $336  $354  $372
 
      (4)   For the purpose of calculating the nonresidential system benefit
charge, the gross floor area of improvements on nonresidential real property is
to be expressed in terms of GFA units. For example, if a property has
improvements with a gross floor area of 1 - 2,999 square feet, the total GFA
units for that property is 1. If a property has improvements with a gross floor
area of 3,000 - 4,999 square feet, the total GFA units for that property is 2.
If a property has improvements with a gross floor area of 5,000 - 6,999 square
feet, the total GFA units for that property is 3.
      (5)   The total nonresidential system benefit charge to be paid by a
property owner is determined by multiplying the nonresidential system benefit
charge rate for the generator category by the number of GFA units attributable
to the gross floor area of improvements located on the nonresidential real
property. For example, if a retail store of 10,000 square feet is in the medium
generator category, and the nonresidential system benefit charge rate for that
category is $55 per GFA unit, the nonresidential system benefit charge would be
$55 x 5 GFA units = $275.
   (G)   Appeals process.
      (1)   Right to appeal. A property owner may, on or before September 30 of
the billing year, appeal, in writing, to the Director, with a copy to the
County Treasurer, for reconsideration of: (a) the generator category
determination; (b) the gross floor area used as the basis for determining the
number of GFA units; or (c) the determination of the residential system benefit
charge. Partial year billings may be appealed within 60 calendar days of the
billing date. Only the property owner or an agent duly authorized in writing by
the property owner for the purpose of the appeal, may file an appeal for any
given property. The appeal must be submitted using the form provided by the
Division for the subject levy year. The Division will mail a current year form
to any owner or agent requesting one.
      (2)   Information to include with appeal. The property owner must include
with the appeal a detailed statement of the basis for the appeal and documents
supporting the property owner’s assertion that: (a) the property should be
included in a different solid waste generator category; (b) the gross floor
area used to calculate GFA units is incorrect; or (c) the residential system
benefit charge has been incorrectly determined. If the property owner has
challenged the solid waste generator category in which the property has been
placed, the documents provided by the owner must include evidence reflecting
all of the waste generation at the property, including, but not limited to,
invoices for the most recent 12 months of service from the solid waste
collector(s) for the property. If such invoices do not state the net weights of
waste from the property according to weight tickets issued from state certified
calibrated scales, then the application must also include copies of the
contracts relating the dumpster volumes and frequency of service to the
invoiced amounts. State certification of scale calibration must have occurred
in the year in which the appeal was filed. Affidavits stating an estimate of
tonnage are not acceptable unless accompanied by weight readouts from
calibrated scales. If invoices for waste collection do not exist, the applicant
must certify this, and the Division may inspect the property or require
additional information under subsection (G)(3) of this section to estimate its
waste generation rate. If the property owner has challenged the gross floor
area used to calculate GFA units, the documents provided must include evidence
of the actual gross floor area on the property from assessor’s worksheets at
MSDAT or from architectural plans filed with the county or a municipality.
      (3)   Director’s right to additional information. The Director may
request that the property owner provide additional information which the
Director reasonably believes will assist the Director in deciding the appeal.
The Division may also inspect the property for reasons consistent with this
regulation. If the property owner fails to provide the information within 25
calendar days of the date of the Director’s request, or denies the division
access to the property for an inspection pursuant to this regulation, the
Director may dismiss the appeal.
      (4)   Written determination of appeal. The Director must make a written
determination of the appeal. The written determination of the appeal must be
mailed to the property owner by first class mail with a copy provided to the
County Treasurer. Other than dismissal of an appeal for the reason stated in
subsection (G)(3), the determination must either affirm the system benefit
charge or adjust it based upon evidence presented. The adjustment may decrease
or increase the system benefit charge imposed on the property owner. In the
case of an adjustment of the generator category, and provided there are no
changes in the use of the property, the decision of the Director is valid for 3
years including that in which the appeal takes place.
      (5)   Payment of system benefit charge following appeal. The property
owner must pay the system benefit charge at the same time as real property
taxes are due. Payment of the full system benefit charge should be paid by the
due date stated on the bill in order to avoid interest and penalty. If the
appeal results in a change, a revised bill will be issued. If the bill is
decreased, a refund will be mailed for any overpayment. If an additional
payment is due, the property owner will have 30 days to pay the additional
amount without interest or penalty.
   (H)   Collection of the system benefit charge. The system benefit charge
shall be billed with the tax bill and collected along with taxes on real
property. For improvements that are completed after the beginning of a fiscal
year, the system benefit charge may be billed based upon a partial year. If
system benefit charges are not billed with the tax bill for any reason, the
bill must indicate the portion of the year covered by the invoice. System
benefit charges that are not billed with the taxes are payable within 30 days
of the bill date.
   (I)   Collection. The County Treasurer shall collect and secure the system
benefit charge in the same manner in which taxes on real property are
collected. If the system benefit charge or any portion of it is not paid when
due, the property for which the charge has been made is subject to the same
penalties, procedure, sale, and lien priority in case of delinquency that are
provided for general real property taxes. The property for which the charge has
been made may be sold at tax sale in the same manner as real property is sold
for nonpayment of taxes. The county may also bring suit against the property
owner for any unpaid system benefit charge.
   (J)   Definitions.
      COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
      COUNTY TREASURER.  The Treasurer of Frederick County (sometimes referred
to as the Director of Treasury) or the designee of the County Treasurer.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Division of Utilities and Solid Waste
Management for Frederick County or designee of the Director.
      DIVISION. The Division of Utilities and Solid Waste Management for
Frederick County.
      DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single residential unit
containing living, sleeping and cooking accommodations and designed to be used
for living purposes. Each apartment unit or mobile home shall be considered a
dwelling unit. Dwelling units shall not include those units designed primarily
for transient occupant purposes, nor shall they include rooms in hospitals or
nursing homes. In the event the number of dwelling units in a building or
structure cannot otherwise be determined, each 1,000 square foot area, or
portion thereof, in the building or structure shall be deemed to constitute 1
dwelling unit.
      GFA UNIT. The gross floor area of an improvement on real property divided
by 2,000. To determine the number of GFA units, the quotient is rounded to the
nearest increment of 2,000 whole number. Fractions of lower than .5 are to be
rounded downward and fractions of .5 and higher are to be rounded upward. Each
real property will have a minimum of 1 GFA unit (i.e., 500 square foot = 1 GFA
unit).
      MSDAT. The Maryland State Department of Assessments and Taxation.
      MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. A building or other structure
containing 2 or more dwelling units that share a common entrance into the
structure, such as, but not limited to, apartment buildings.
      NONRESIDENTIAL. Any use of land other than residential.
      NONRESIDENTIAL SYSTEM BENEFIT CHARGE. The system benefit charge imposed
upon nonresidential generators of solid waste in the county.
      RESIDENTIAL. Any use of a building for a dwelling unit.
      RESIDENTIAL SYSTEM BENEFIT CHARGE. The system benefit charge imposed upon
residential generators of solid waste in the county.
      SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT. A house, building or other
structure containing 1 dwelling unit, such as, but not limited to, single
family homes, rooming houses, townhouses, each dwelling unit in a duplex or
triplex, each condominium unit that has an individual dedicated entrance with
curbside trash collection service, and other similar structures.
(Ord. 06-05-401, 1-26-2006; Ord. 08-13-489, 5-20-2008; Ord. 09-10-514, 4-28-
2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
CHAPTER 1-12: PARKS AND RECREATION
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-12-1 — 1-12-19)
Section
   
1-12-1   Short title
   
1-12-2   Purpose
   
1-12-3   Application
   
1-12-4   Definitions and word usage
   
1-12-5   Use of fees
   
1-12-6   Severability
   
1-12-7   Naming policy
Statutory references:
   Power of county to establish a recreation program, see Md. Ann. Code, Local
Government Article § 1-604;
   Recreation facilities authorized, see Md. Ann. Code, Local Government
Article § 1-607
§ 1-12-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Frederick County Parks and
Recreation Ordinance.”
(Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-12-2. PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations providing for the
public’s safe and peaceful use of county park land; for the maintenance,
protection and preservation of the property, facilities and natural resources
of the county and for the recreation programs conducted on park land. Park land
is open for use by all members of the public regardless of race, religion,
creed, color, sex, national origin or disability.
(Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-12-3. APPLICATION.
   (A)   This chapter applies to all Frederick County public park land and
recreation programs as defined herein.
   (B)   This chapter applies to all invitees who visit any park land or
participate in any recreation program under the control of the Division. It
does not apply to Division personnel in the performance of their duties.
(Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-12-4. DEFINITIONS AND WORD USAGE.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, words, phrases, and
their derivatives shall have the meanings given. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, and words in the
plural number include the singular number and vice versa. The word “shall” is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. A liquid beverage containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by
volume.
   ANIMAL. Includes any animal either domesticated or non-domesticated,
reptiles, fish, amphibians or members of the avian species.
   CAMP or CAMPING. Staying in a county park land overnight, after normal
closing hours, with permit.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   DESIGNEE. An employee or volunteer acting under the authority of the
Division Director.
   DIVISION. The Frederick County Parks and Recreation Division.
   DIVISION DIRECTOR. The person designated by the County Executive as a chief
administrator for the Frederick County Parks and Recreation Division.
   EXHIBITION. An exhibiting, showing or presenting to view a public display.
   FREDERICK COUNTY PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION. Shall be referred to
herein as FCPRC.
   GIFT. A voluntary transfer of property, real or personal, without
consideration.
   GROUNDS. Real property within Frederick County Park Land.
   LITTER. Refuse or other discarded material.
   LP & RP. The current Frederick County Land Preservation and Recreation Plan.
   NUISANCE. Any substantial and unreasonable interference with, or disturbance
of, the use or enjoyment of park property or park facilities by another park
visitor.
   PARK FACILITY. Any natural or man-made amenity located on park land, used by
the public, including but not limited to shelters, playgrounds, athletic
fields, structures and designated areas (e.g. tractor pull tracks, batting
cages).
   PARK LAND. Land and water which Frederick County owns or in which it holds a
leasehold, easement or other legal interest, and is managed by the Parks and
Recreation Division for the use and benefit of the public for recreational
purposes and/or the protection of wildlife habitats and/or natural, scenic or
historical resources. PARK LAND includes but is not limited to all parks,
trails, and open space property or portions thereof, either purchased or
accepted by the county. Also included are all vegetation, soils, natural
substances, buildings, signs, improvements, fixtures, equipment, monuments,
historic artifacts, statues, structures and their contents and property/
boundary survey markers/monuments located on the aforesaid land and water.
   PERFORMANCE. An entertainment presented before an audience.
   PERMIT. A written permission and/or other official permit form issued by the
Division Director or designee.
   PERSON. Shall extend to and be applied to firms, partnerships, corporations,
associations, organizations, trustees, agents, and bodies politic, or any
combination thereof, as well as to natural persons.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property except real property, as
defined herein.
   PUBLIC PEACE. The peace or tranquility of persons in the park land.
   REAL PROPERTY. Land, tenements and hereditaments.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITY. Any place under the control of the Division where
recreational activities occur.
   RIDING ANIMALS. Any domesticated animal that is meant to be ridden for
recreation.
   SUNSET. The time of day at which the sun descends below the horizon.
   TOURNAMENT. Teams competing in a series of contests.
   VEHICLES.
      (1)   Wheeled conveyances, whether motor powered, animal-drawn, or self
propelled; or
      (2)   Any motorized or non-motorized conveyance capable of flight; or
      (3)   Any motorized or non-motorized conveyance that travels on or under
the water.
   The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind, or description.
The term includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, ATVs, motorcycles,
scooters (both motorized and not), bicycles, tricycles, airplanes, balloons,
gliders, boats, canoes and pontoon boats.
(Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-12-5. USE OF FEES.
   All funds derived from rentals, fees, permits or from other sources for the
use of any county recreational facilities shall be deposited with the County
Treasurer in the General Fund Account, unless designated as a separate
enterprise fund account as approved by the county governing body.
(1959 Code, § 30-15) (Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-6. SEVERABILITY.
   If any portion, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion of this chapter, it being the intent of the county that this
chapter shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any portion, section,
subtitle, sentence, clause, hereof.
(Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-12-7. NAMING POLICY.
   Naming of a park, an area within a park land or a park facility must be
approved by the county governing body in accordance with the naming policy
adopted by the county governing body .
(Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§§ 1-12-8 – 1-12-19. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION (§§ 1-12-20 — 1-12-29)
Section
   
1-12-20   Created
   
1-12-21   Members
   
1-12-22   Officers
   
1-12-23   Meetings
   
1-12-24   Purposes
   
1-12-25   Committees
   
1-12-26   Acceptance of gifts
   
1-12-27   Cooperation with governmental agencies
§ 1-12-20. CREATED.
   There is hereby created the Frederick County Parks and Recreation
Commission.
(1959 Code, § 30-9) (Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to create Commission, see Md. Ann. Code, Local Government Article
§ 1-606
§ 1-12-21. MEMBERS.
   (A)   Subject to confirmation by the County Council, the FCPRC shall consist
of 8 persons appointed by the County Executive, plus 1 member of the Board of
Education and 1 member of the County Council, for a total of 10 members. All
planning regions are to be represented, however, if there are no applications
from interested and qualified persons in an unrepresented planning region, the
County Executive may appoint an interested and qualified person from another
planning region of the county. All appointees must be registered voters in
Frederick County. All members are voting members. All appointments shall be for
4 years. Terms of office shall be staggered and shall begin the first day of
July of the year of the appointment.
   (B)   Any member who is absent from 50% or more of the scheduled meeting or
hearings during any 6-month period unless excused by the FCPRC Chair shall be
deemed to have resigned from his or her position on the FCPRC. It shall be the
presiding officer’s responsibility to notify the Commission of such vacancy.
All members shall receive a copy of such notice.
   (C)   FCPRC shall review all applications for membership and make
recommendations to the County Executive regarding appointments and
reappointments to the FCPRC.
   (D)   FCPRC members shall receive no compensation for their services as
such, but may be reimbursed for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by
them in the performance of their duties within the amount made available by the
appropriation for such purposes.
(1959 Code, § 30-11) (Ord. 80-11-163, 4-22-1980; Ord. 01-06-280, 4-17-2001;
Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
Statutory reference:
   Members, see Md. Ann. Code, Local Government Article § 1-606
§ 1-12-22. OFFICERS.
   (A)   At the regular meeting in the month of July, the members of the FCPRC
shall select a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from its County Executive-
appointed membership. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall serve for a 1-
year term and can only succeed themselves 1 term.
   (B)   The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and appoint all
committees. The Vice-Chairperson shall perform the duties of the Chairperson in
his or her absence, or when unable to serve.
   (C)   There shall be a Recording Secretary, appointed by the FCPRC. The
Recording Secretary shall record the minutes of the meetings of the FCPRC, send
out notices and reports to members of regular or special meetings and perform
other secretarial services as required by the FCPRC.
(1959 Code, § 30-12) (Ord. 80-11-163, 4-22-1980; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005;
Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-23. MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the FCPRC shall be held monthly on a regularly
scheduled date agreed upon by the members of the FCPRC. Special meetings shall
be called by the Chairperson or the Division Director as deemed necessary.
Notice of regular meetings shall be sent to the members of the FCPRC by the
Secretary at least 5 days prior to the date of the meeting.
   (B)   A quorum must be present before any business is transacted, and 5
members of the FCPRC shall be considered a quorum.
(1959 Code, § 30-13) (Ord. 80-11-163, 4-22-1980; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005;
Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-24. PURPOSES.
   (A)   The purposes and objectives of the FCPRC shall be to make
recommendations to the county and Division as appropriate regarding:
      (1)   General policy relating to parks and recreation for the county;
      (2)   The park land for the county;
      (3)   Properties over which the Division has jurisdiction;
      (4)   Recreation programming for the county;
      (5)   Park master plans;
      (6)   Community Grant Program applications and awarding funding on a
yearly basis; and
   (B)   Obtain input and represent the parks and recreation needs and
interests of Frederick County citizens.
(1959 Code, § 30-10) (Ord. 80-11-163, 4-22-1980; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005;
Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Annual budget, see §§
1-8-21 et seq.
§ 1-12-25. COMMITTEES.
   The Chairperson shall appoint from the membership of the FCPRC standing
committees and special committees of the FCPRC as deemed necessary. The
committees shall consist of at least 3 persons.
(1959 Code, § 30-14) (Ord. 80-11-163, 4-22-1980; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005;
Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-26. ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS.
   The FCPRC may recommend to the County Executive acceptance of gifts of real
or personal property or money for use in and/or as public parks or to create or
improve park facilities. Any accepted gift will become the property of the
county.
(1959 Code, § 30-15) (Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Annual budget, see §§
1-8-21 et seq.
§ 1-12-27. COOPERATION WITH GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES.
   The FCPRC shall cooperate with other governmental agencies where
appropriate, in planning, acquiring, leasing, providing, establishing,
maintaining and conducting other recreation and park areas and facilities and
activities.
(Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§§ 1-12-28 – 1-12-29. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: PARKS AND RECREATION DIVISION (§§ 1-12-30 — 1-12-49)
Section
   
1-12-30   Purpose of the Parks and Recreation Division
   
1-12-31   Rules and regulations
   
1-12-32   Hours of operation
   
1-12-33   Fees and charges
   
1-12-34   Permits
   
1-12-35   Protection of property, structures and natural resources
   
1-12-36   Use of park land and park land facilities
   
1-12-37   Animals generally
   
1-12-38   Fires
   
1-12-39   Noise; amplification of sound
   
1-12-40   Recreational activities
   
1-12-41   Operation and parking of motor vehicles
   
1-12-42   Peddling and soliciting
   
1-12-43   Weapons and fireworks
   
1-12-44   Littering
   
1-12-45   Alcoholic beverages
   
1-12-46   Impersonating or interfering with employees
   
1-12-47   Disorderly conduct; public nuisance
   
1-12-48   Criminal penalties
   
1-12-49   Civil park infractions
§ 1-12-30. PURPOSE OF THE PARKS AND RECREATION DIVISION.
   The purpose of the Frederick County Parks and Recreation Division is to
acquire, plan, develop, and maintain park land, park facilities and other
county-owned land assigned by the county and to create, develop and execute
recreation programs for county residents.
(Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-12-31. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Division may adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of business and
the protection of park land, park facilities and other properties under its
control, subject to the approval of the county governing body.
(1959 Code, § 30-15) (Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-32. HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Park land shall be open to the public every day within designated
hours as set by the Division Director:
      (1)   The Division Director or designee may close park land to public
entry for the protection of park property, public health, safety or public
welfare, by posting signs, or placing barricades in the vicinity of typical
points of entry to the park land.
      (2)   The Division Director or designee may open or keep any park land
open beyond normal hours of operation, for the protection of park property,
public health, safety or public welfare, and by permit.
   (B)   Trespass. No person shall remain upon park land at any time between
closing time of said park land and opening time of the following morning except
by permit issued by the Division Director or designee.
   (C)   No person shall remain upon park land after a lawful command by any
law enforcement officer or by the Division Director or designee to vacate the
park land.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(j)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-33. FEES AND CHARGES.
   No person shall use any park facility, park land or area for which a fee or
charge has been established by the Division without payment of such fee or
charge in advance.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(s)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-34. PERMITS.
   (A)   Application for a permit.
      (1)   Any person requesting use of park land or park facilities for which
a permit is required must apply for and obtain a valid permit before such use.
      (2)   Permits will be issued in accordance with the rules and regulations
of the Division.
   (B)   Permit requirements.
      (1)   Permits for exclusive use of any park facility or part thereof may
be issued by the Division Director or designee.
      (2)   Applications for permits shall be made on a form provided by the
Division.
      (3)   The Division Director will determine whether the proposed use or
activity is consistent with public health, safety and welfare.
      (4)   The Division Director will determine whether the proposed use or
activity is consistent with the size, location and available amenities of the
relevant facility.
      (5)   No permit shall be issued to anyone under the age of 18.
      (6)   The permit holder shall keep the permit in his or her possession
and shall present the permit to a law officer, park official or Division
Director upon request.
      (7)   The permitted activities shall be conducted in strict accordance
with the terms and conditions of the permit. It shall be unlawful for a person
to violate any provision of a permit.
      (8)   The permit holder shall be responsible for the conduct and good
order of the group participating in the permitted activity. It shall be the
responsibility of the permit holder to reimburse the Division for any and all
costs incurred as a result of loss, breakage, destruction, and/or removal of
park land property and/or recreational facilities as well as any excessive
clean-up of the premises.
      (9)   Proof of insurance may be required for certain permits.
      (10)   The Division Director or designee may revoke a permit at any time
for violation of any provision of the permit, law or regulations, including,
but not limited to, failure to produce proof of insurance or the use of
misleading or fraudulent information in order to obtain a permit. Revocation of
a permit will result in the loss of all privileges granted as well as the
forfeiture of all fees paid for the permit.
      (11)   Permits may be revoked by the Division Director or designee for
any infraction of park rules and regulations at any time.
      (12)   The Division Director may assess charges against a permit holder
to recover costs related to misuse of park land or park facilities.
   (C)   Certain activities by permit only.
      (1)   Any performance shall have a permit allowing such performance.
      (2)   No person shall place, construct or erect any building or structure
of whatever kind, whether temporary or permanent in character, or run or string
any public service utility into, upon, or across park land, except by permit.
      (3)   Activities of “moon bounce” and animal rides or other similar
activities shall have a permit allowing such activity.
      (4)   Use of park facilities for tournament play is by permit only.
      (5)   No person shall indulge in any exhibition, demonstration, parade,
assembly, public meeting or any other public expression of view or carry out
any performance without a permit issued by the Division.
      (6)   Advertising of sale of goods or services is prohibited except by
permit.
      (7)   No person, in or on park land, shall dig or remove any soil,
objects (submerged or not), rocks, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, downed-
timber, or other wood or material, nor make any excavation by tools, equipment,
blasting or other means or agency, except by permit.
      (8)   Other activities shall have a permit as deemed to require a permit
by the Division.
   (D)   Certain activities prohibited on park land.
      (1)   Use of park land by any person for recreational activities which
precludes use of the park by the general public.
      (2)   Any activity which is illegal under any federal or the State of
Maryland law.
      (3)   Hindering or obstructing the use of any structure or facility on
park land by other park visitors.
      (4)   Defacing, altering, injuring or disturbing any monument, park
facility, boundary line, physical structure, land, sign, historic feature or
ruin.
      (5)   Entering or exiting by vehicle, except at officially designated
entrances and exits.
      (6)   Swimming in non-designated swimming areas.
      (7)   Boating in non-designated areas except by permit.
      (8)   Gaming or profit-making activities except by permit.
      (9)   Commercial use of utilities.
      (10)   Advertising of alcohol and tobacco products.
      (11)   Being nude, exposing him or herself or engaging in sexual
intercourse or sodomy.
      (12)   Urinating or defecating in non-designated facilities or areas.
      (13)   Other prohibitions as deemed appropriate by the Division.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(c)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-35. PROTECTION OF PROPERTY, STRUCTURES AND NATURAL RESOURCES.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Intentionally remove, alter, injure, destroy any tree, other plant,
rock, soil or mineral without a permit.
   (B)   Dig trenches, holes or other excavations in park land without a
permit.
   (C)   Introduce any plant, animal or other agent within park land without a
permit.
   (D)   Harvest, grow, or cultivate a controlled substance.
(Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-12-36. USE OF PARK LAND AND PARK LAND FACILITIES.
   (A)   The Division Director or designee may issue permits to reserve
athletic fields, recreation buildings, group picnic areas, pavilions, camp
sites, and certain other park land facilities and activities for the sole use
of individual(s) or groups as designated on the permit. A person who does not
hold a permit for a specific place and where a permit has been issued for that
same place at the same time, must surrender that place to the permit holder.
   (B)   Permits for reservation of facilities and activities are subject to
the following conditions, in addition to the conditions listed in division (A):
      (1)   The facilities or activity areas applied for are available and
appropriate for the purpose specified in the permit.
      (2)   A permit reserving a site or facility entitles the permit holder to
its exclusive use on the date and times specified on the permit.
      (3)   No person shall camp on park land, except by permit and in such
areas as may be designated for such purpose by the Division.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(g)) (Ord. 77-12-89, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005;
Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-37. ANIMALS GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall hunt, stalk, molest, harm, frighten, kill, injure,
trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw objects at any animal.
   (B)   No person shall remove or have in his or her possession any non-
domesticated animal except by permit or in accordance with posted regulations
of the Division.
   (C)   All animals must be leashed on a tether no longer than 9 feet.
   (D)   No person shall allow any domesticated animal to create a nuisance.
   (E)   No person shall allow any domesticated animal to run at large except
in designated areas.
   (F)   Riding animals may only be ridden in designated areas.
   (G)   In order to protect the resources, the Division Director may issue a
permit for the control, removal or management of any non-domesticated animal.
   (H)   A person bringing any animal on park land is responsible for immediate
removal and clean up of the animal’s defecation.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(b)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-38. FIRES.
   (A)   No person shall build or cause to be built any fire or use any type of
heating device with combustible materials from which a fire could be ignited,
except within designated areas.
   (B)   No person shall leave any fire or any type of heating device, unless
attended by an adult.
   (C)   All fires or any type of heating device, shall be cold to the touch
before leaving the area.
   (D)   Any lighted match, cigar, cigarette or other burning materials must be
extinguished before disposal.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(e)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § I, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-39. NOISE; AMPLIFICATION OF SOUND.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Install, use, operate or permit the use or operation within the park
land of any of the following devices: Sound amplifying equipment such as
loudspeakers, radios, tape players, phonographs, television sets, musical
instruments or other devices for the production or reproduction of sound
without authorization by permit. It is unlawful to use this equipment in such a
manner as to be disturbing or a nuisance to persons of reasonable sensitivity
to noise within the area of audibility.
   (B)   It is unlawful to yell, shout, whistle, sing or make any unpleasant
and unnecessary noises to disturb the peace and quiet within any park land or
cause discomfort or annoyance to persons of reasonable sensitivity to noise
within the area of audibility, except for special programs at dates and times
as authorized by permit.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(m)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-40. RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
   Certain recreational activities are restricted to designated areas of park
land and/or otherwise regulated, pursuant to the provisions of this section.
   (A)   Bicycling: Bicycle riding is subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Riding is permitted on roads in park lands.
      (2)   Riding is permitted on paths or other trails designated for that
purpose.
      (3)   Bicycles must be operated in a safe and controlled manner.
      (4)   Bicycles are subject to speed limits and other posted traffic
regulations.
      (5)   Bicycles are subject to regulations under the state vehicle laws.
   (B)   Fishing: Fishing is permitted only in designated areas and in
compliance with state and other applicable laws.
   (C)   Horseback riding: Horses are permitted only in designated areas and
trails.
   (D)   Roller skating; rollerblading; skateboarding; mountain boarding:
Roller skating, rollerblading, skateboarding and mountain boarding are
permitted in designated areas only.
   (E)   Swimming; water sports:  Swimming and other water sports are allowed
only in areas designated for such activities and only during the hours
specified.
   (F)   Winter sports:
      (1)   The use of downhill skis or snowmobiles is prohibited on all park
lands.
      (2)   No person shall skate, sled, coast or walk on any ice.
      (3)   No person shall coast with hand sleds, snow boards, bob sleds, snow
tubes, carts or other vehicles or devices with or without wheels or runners
except at such time and place as designated.
      (4)   Cross country skiing and snow shoeing are permitted only in
designated areas.
      (5)   No person shall skate, sled or ski in a negligent manner.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(p)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-41. OPERATION AND PARKING OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No vehicle shall block or partially block any road, boat ramp, or
trail. Vehicles must be parked in designated areas, unless specifically
authorized by permit.
   (B)   No person shall operate a vehicle except on roadways or areas
designated by the Division; provided however, no person shall operate any type
of mini bike, trail bike, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile or other vehicle that
cannot be registered for operation on the public highways, except in such areas
as may be designated.
   (C)   Traffic laws and parking regulations applied on public roads in the
county are applicable in park land, unless otherwise set forth in this section.
   (D)   Pedestrian right-of-way. Pedestrians have the right-of-way over any
vehicle.
   (E)   The speed limit for motorized vehicles in park land is the posted
speed limit within the park land.
   (F)   No person shall exceed the posted speed limit on park land.
   (G)   Except for emergency repairs, the repair or maintenance of any vehicle
on park land is prohibited.
   (H)   Any vehicle parked in violation of this section is subject to being
towed without notice at the owner’s expense.
   (I)   No vehicles will be left on park land after official closing time of
the park except by permit. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section is
subject to being towed without notice at the owner’s expense and risk.
   (J)   Parking on park land is restricted to park users and permit holders.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(h)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-42. PEDDLING AND SOLICITING.
   No person shall peddle or solicit business of any nature, collect any funds
for any service, charity or any purpose, distribute handbills or other
advertising matter, unless by permit.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(j)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-43. WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS.
   (A)   No person shall have in his or her possession any firearm or weapon,
including but not limited to bows, air guns, paint ball guns and slingshots,
while on park land unless by permit. This section shall not apply to any
persons authorized by law to carry firearms in the discharge of their official
duties or to persons participating in programs sponsored and conducted by the
Division that involve the use of such firearms and weapons.
   (B)   No person shall have in his or her possession any fire works or
explosives on, over, or onto park land unless by permit.
   (C)   No person shall discharge any weapon, fireworks or explosives over or
onto park land.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(o)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-44. LITTERING.
   (A)   No person shall litter on any park land. All litter shall be deposited
in the containers provided for such purpose.
   (B)   Only litter that is a result of use within park land shall be
discarded in the containers provided.
   (C)   Where no containers are available, litter shall be removed from the
park land by the person or persons creating said litter.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(o)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-45. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   No person shall possess or consume alcoholic beverages on park land except
in accordance with the alcohol use policy of the Division and with a valid
permit issued by the Division Director.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(5)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 90-01-599, 1-29-
1990; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 09-03-507,
12-2-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-46. IMPERSONATING OR INTERFERING WITH EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   No person shall impersonate any employee of the Division.
   (B)   No person shall interfere, harass, hinder or disobey the lawful
command of any employee or designee in the discharge of his or her duties.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(1)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-47. DISORDERLY CONDUCT; PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   No person shall engage in fighting or exhibit threatening, violent,
disorderly or indecent behavior.
   (B)   No person shall use obscene or profane language or make any obscene
gesture or display.
   (C)   No person shall address any person present using language tending to
incite a breach of the peace or to be inimical to the peace.
   (D)   No person shall create a condition that is hazardous or physically
offensive to any person.
   (E)   No person shall engage in any conduct which disturbs the public peace
while on park land.
(Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-12-48. CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   It shall be a misdemeanor to violate any of the provisions of this article.
Any person so convicted of a violation shall be fined not more than $500, or be
sentenced to no more than 5 days in jail, or both, at the discretion of the
court.
(1959 Code, § 30-18(t)) (Ord. 77-12-89, § II, 9-6-1977; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-
2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-12-49. CIVIL PARK INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to Chapter 634 of the Laws of Maryland 1984, being §
2-2-29 of the Frederick County Code (1979), any violation of the provisions of
Article III of this chapter is a civil infraction and shall be called a civil
park infraction. If after investigation, a civil park infraction is believed to
exist or is observed directly by park personnel, the Frederick County Division
Director of the Parks and Recreation Division or his or her division
representative shall deliver a citation or a warning to the person or persons
responsible for the infraction. If the infraction occurs inside of a vehicle,
the driver shall also be cited as having control of the vehicle.
   (B)   The citation or warning, as provided for in this section, shall be in
writing and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the person charged (or warned);
      (2)   The nature of the violation;
      (3)   The location of the violation;
      (4)   The date(s) of the violation;
      (5)   The amount of the fine to be assessed (or possible of assessment);
      (6)   The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid;
      (7)   The person’s right to stand trial for the violation (if
applicable); and
      (8)   A certification by the Division Director or authorized designee
attesting to the truth of the matters set forth.
   (C)   A fine of $50 is hereby imposed upon any person responsible for a
civil park infraction for each violation. All fines shall be payable to the
county, in the office of the Parks and Recreation Division, which shall remit
same on a daily basis to the County Treasurer. Each day such violation is
permitted to exist shall be considered a separate infraction.
   (D)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
offense by filing with the Division Director a notice of intention to stand
trial. The notice shall be given at least 5 days before the date of payment of
the fine as set forth in the citation. On receipt of the notice of intention to
stand trial, the Division Director shall forward to the District Court for
Frederick County, Maryland, a copy of the citation and the notice of intention
to stand trial. On receipt of the citation, the District Court shall schedule
the case for trial and notify the defendant of the trial date. All fines,
penalties or forfeitures collected by the District Court for park infractions
shall be remitted to the county, through the Frederick County Treasurer.
   (E)   If a person who receives a citation for an infraction fails to pay the
fine by the date of payment set forth on the citation and fails to file a
notice of intention to stand trial, a formal notice of the infraction shall be
sent to the person’s last known address. If the citation is not satisfied
within 15 days from the date of the notice, the person is liable for a fine of
$100 for each infraction. If after 35 days, the citation is not satisfied, the
Division Director may request adjudication of the case through the District
Court. The District Court shall schedule the case for trial and summon the
defendant to appear.
   (F)   Adjudication of an infraction under this section is not a criminal
conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities ordinarily imposed
by a criminal conviction.
   (G)   In a proceeding before the District Court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Ann. Code, Local Government Article, Title 6. However, the
County Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute park infractions under this
section.
   (H)   If a person is found by the District Court to have committed a civil
park infraction, he or she shall be liable for the costs of the proceedings in
the District Court.
(Ord. 90-06-604, 2-6-1990; Ord. 05-35-396, 10-25-2005; Ord. 07-23-463, 6-26-
2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
CHAPTER 1-13: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-13-1 — 1-13-15)
Section
   
1-13-1   Department of Planning and Development Review
Cross references:
   Storm water management, see
Chapter 1-15.2;
   Subdivisions, see
Chapter 1-16;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 1-19
§ 1-13-1. DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Department of Planning and Development
Review under the immediate supervision of a Director, who shall be
professionally qualified and experienced, and who shall be appointed and
removed by the Community Development Division Director and whose salary shall
be established by the county.
   (B)   The Department of Planning and Development Review shall provide
administrative services, recommendations, advice and technical information in
the field of planning and zoning to the county and, under the authority of the
County Executive, shall administer various planning and zoning programs and
regulations adopted by the county concerning the protection of the environment
and for the health, safety and welfare of the county relating to the planning
and zoning field, and the Department shall provide staff services for the
County Planning Commission, the incorporated municipalities of the county when
so requested by a municipality, the county council of governments, and shall
carry out other assigned duties and responsibilities as directed by the county.
(1959 Code, § 30-36) (Ord. 02-03-299, 3-5-2002; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-13-2 – 1-13-15. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION (§§ 1-13-16 — 1-13-30)
Section
   
1-13-16   Created
   
1-13-17   Territorial jurisdiction
   
1-13-18   Members
   
1-13-19   Organization; meetings; rules; records
   
1-13-20   Staff and financing
   
1-13-21   Powers and duties
   
1-13-22   Impartiality of Planning Commission and Board of Appeals members
§ 1-13-16. CREATED.
   There is hereby created a County Planning Commission.
(1959 Code, § 30-4) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-13-17. TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
   The County Planning Commission’s territorial jurisdiction shall extend over
the county, but shall not include incorporated municipalities lying within the
county, except to the extent that the governing bodies of such municipalities
request that the plans and regulations of the Commission be made applicable to
such municipalities.
(1959 Code, § 30-4) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Inclusion of municipalities in county programs, see Md. Ann. Code, Land Use
Article § 3-101
§ 1-13-18. MEMBERS.
   All members of the County Planning Commission shall serve with the
compensation that the county deems appropriate, as the county governing body
provides in the annual budget. Members may, after a public hearing, be removed
from office by the County Council for any reason specified in Maryland
Annotated Code, Land Use Article § 2-102(D). The County Council shall file a
written statement of reasons for such removal. All members shall be eligible
for reappointment. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of
term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the County Executive subject to
confirmation by the County Council. All members of the County Planning
Commission shall be residents of Frederick County.
(1959 Code, § 30-5.1) (Ord. 80-2-154, 1-29-1980; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014;
Bill No. 23-25, 1-23-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Members of Commission, see Md. Ann. Code, Land Use Article § 2-102
§ 1-13-19. ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS; RULES; RECORDS.
   The County Planning Commission shall elect a Chairperson from 1 of the
appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may
determine. The term of Chairperson shall be 1 year, with eligibility for
reelection. The Commission shall hold at least 1 regular meeting each month. It
shall adopt rules for transactions of business and shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations which record shall be a
public record.
(1959 Code, § 30-6) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Md. Ann. Code, Land Use Article, Title 2
§ 1-13-20. STAFF AND FINANCING.
   The County Planning Commission may, with the approval of the County
Executive, appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work and may
also contract with planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for
such services as it may require. The expenditures of the Commission shall be
under such conditions and within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by
the county governing body which shall provide the funds, equipment and
accommodations necessary for the Commission's work.
(1959 Code, § 30-6.1) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Md. Ann. Code, Land Use Article, Title 2
§ 1-13-21. POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The County Planning Commission shall have all the powers, functions and
duties provided for in Md. Ann. Code, Land Use Article § 2-105 and 3-101 and
following.
(1959 Code, § 30-7) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-13-22. IMPARTIALITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION AND BOARD OF APPEALS MEMBERS.
   (A)   Members of the Frederick County Planning Commission and members of the
Frederick County Board of Appeals (member), once the appointment of member has
become effective, shall comply with the following provisions.
   (B)   A member shall:
      (1)   Act at all times in a manner consistent with independence,
integrity and impartiality, and maintain the dignity appropriate to the body to
which appointed;
      (2)   With respect to a case, controversy, or issue that is pending
before the member, shall not make a commitment, pledge, or promise that is
inconsistent with the impartial performance of the adjudicative duties of the
office;
      (3)   Not make any statement that would reasonably be expected to impair
the fairness of deliberations or actions on a matter pending before the member;
      (4)   Not disclose or use nonpublic information acquired in their role as
a member for any purpose unrelated to their official duties.
(Bill No. 18-25, 10-30-2018)
§§ 1-13-23 – 1-13-30. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: AGRICULTURAL LAND PRESERVATION DISTRICT (§§ 1-13-31 — 1-13-35)
Section
   
1-13-31   Generally
   
1-13-32   Official maps
   
1-13-33   Manner of establishment of districts
   
1-13-34   Local program for the preservation of critical agricultural land
   
1-13-35   Installment purchase program
Statutory reference:
   Agricultural preservation district, see Md. Code Ann., Agriculture Article,
§§ 2-501 et seq.
§ 1-13-31. GENERALLY.
   (A)   Agricultural preservation districts may be established in the county.
Such districts shall provide for the protection of normal agricultural
activities in the districts through the following provisions:
      (1)   Any farm use of land is permitted;
      (2)   Operation at any time of machinery used in farm production or the
primary processing of agricultural products is permitted;
      (3)   Normal agricultural activities and operations in accordance with
good husbandry practices, which do not cause bodily injury or directly endanger
human health, are permitted and preferred activities, including activities
which may produce normal agriculturally-related noise and odors;
      (4)   The sale of farm products produced on the farm where the sales are
made is permitted.
   (B)   These provisions are applicable to all county agricultural
preservation districts established in accord with the Maryland Code Annotated,
Agricultural Article.
(Ord. 79-7-133, § I, 5-1-1979; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-13-32. OFFICIAL MAPS.
   Official maps of agricultural preservation districts shall be located at the
County Community Development Division and shall be revised from time to time to
reflect the establishment, alteration and abolition of agricultural
preservation district boundaries. The official maps shall be made current at
least once a year by June 30 of each year and shall be published at the same
scale as the Department of Assessment and Taxation tax maps.
(Ord. 79-7-133, § 2, 5-1-1979; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-13-33. MANNER OF ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   In accord with the Md. Code Ann., Agriculture Article, §§ 2-501 through 2-
519, and with Maryland Regulations 15.15.01, agricultural preservation district
establishment shall be accomplished only upon formal notification to the county
by the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation. Such notification
shall include a copy of the agricultural preservation district agreement signed
by all parties and as recorded among the land records of the county. All such
district agreements, together with property descriptions shall be maintained in
an official file and be available from the County Community Development
Division.
(Ord. 79-7-133, § 3, 5-1-1979; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-13-34. LOCAL PROGRAM FOR THE PRESERVATION OF CRITICAL AGRICULTURAL LAND.
   (A)   Purposes. There is hereby created in Frederick County a Critical Farms
Program, to conserve, protect and encourage use and improvement of agricultural
lands; to encourage, promote and protect farming as a valued occupation; and to
provide a means of facilitating the acquisition and permanent protection of
agricultural land. This protection shall occur primarily through the use of
options to purchase development rights easements on eligible property.
   (B)   Eligibility. To be eligible for this program, an application must meet
each of the following criteria:
      (1)   Property eligibility.
         (a)   The property must meet the minimum requirements of the Maryland
Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) for easement sales in effect
as of the date of submission at the time of application.
         (b)   The property must:
            1.   Be located within or adjacent to a Priority Preservation Area;
            2.   Be located within or adjacent to a Rural Legacy Area; or
            3.   Have a soil potential rating greater than 60 out of 100, as
calculated by County staff based on USDA data.
         (c)   The property must total at least 50 contiguous acres, except
that if the applicant is purchasing property adjacent to property they
currently own, then the property being purchased must be at least 20 contiguous
acres and the total area of the current holdings plus the property being
purchased must be at least 50 contiguous acres.
         (d)   The property must be designated No Planned Service in the
adopted County water and sewerage plan, unless the property is over 100 acres
in size and has a soil potential rating of 80 or above out of 100.
         (e)   Seventy-five percent of the acreage of the property must be
located within an area zoned either agricultural or resource conservation;
         (f)   The property must be eligible to have additional residential
lots subdivided in accordance with the county zoning and subdivision
regulations.
      (2)   Applicant eligibility.
         (a)   An applicant must be a contract purchaser of the property, or
has purchased the property within the 6 months prior to application.
         (b)   An applicant must not have had an ownership interest in the
property as an individual or as an owner of a controlling interest in an
entity, within the 5 years prior to application.
         (c)   An applicant must be actively engaged in the field of
agriculture and must submit documentation as to their history, involvement, and
experience in agriculture. The applicant must provide supporting documentation
as requested by county staff.
   (C)   Scoring. The evaluation of applications shall be governed by priority
criteria for the Frederick County Agricultural Land Preservation Program, as
approved by the County Executive, at the time of application. County staff
shall apply the priority criteria and determine the score and ranking of each
application.
   (D)   Board recommendation. Information regarding the scoring of each
application will be presented to the Frederick County Agricultural Preservation
Advisory Board (“Ag Board”). In accordance with Md. Code Ann., Agriculture
Article, § 2-504.1(d)(1), the Ag Board shall make a recommendation to the
County Executive as to which applications should be granted preliminary
approval.
   (E)   Preliminary approval. The County Executive may grant preliminary
approval to 1 or more applications, based on availability of funds and the
ranking determined by the County staff and approved by the County Executive.
The County Executive may also determine that none of the applications score
high enough to justify an option to purchase a development rights easement
through the program.
   (F)   Easement evaluation.
      (1)   After preliminary approval, the county will authorize and pay for 2
appraisals of development rights easement values for the properties, in
accordance with the guidelines of the MALPF. The 2 appraisals will be used by
county staff to make a recommendation to the county executive as to the amount
of the offer to made to the applicant.
      (2)   The maximum value of any development rights easement shall be 70%
of the fair market value of the land less the value of the improvements. The
fair market value of the land is the price as of the valuation date for the
highest and best use of the property which a vendor, willing but not obligated
to sell, would accept for the property and which a purchaser, willing but not
obligated to buy, would pay for the property if the property was not subject to
any restriction imposed under the state or county agricultural preservation
programs.
      (3)   When an agreement as to the easement value has been reached, the
county governing body may grant the final approval of the option to purchase
the development rights easement. Preliminary approval by the County Executive
does not obligate the county governing body in any way to grant final approval.
   (G)   Option to purchase easement.
      (1)   After final approval of the offer by the county governing body, the
county will extend a written option offer to the applicant to purchase a
development rights easement on the property in an amount equal to 75% of the
value of the easement, which option shall extend for a period of 5 years.
      (2)   This option shall provide for restrictions on the use of the
property that are substantially the same as the restrictions contained in the
easement agreement used by the MALPF. Once the documents creating this option
are prepared and executed, the appropriate documents shall be recorded in the
Land Records of Frederick County.
   (H)   Easement sale.
      (1)   The recorded option to purchase will require that the applicant and
its heirs or assigns actively pursue, for a period of 5 years, the sale of a
development rights easement to the MALPF at an asking price no less than the
amount of the option to purchase the development rights easement extended by
the county. The applicant must accept any offer fromMALPF that equals or
exceeds the amount of the county option. If the MALPF purchases a development
rights easement from the applicant during this 5 year period, the full amount
paid by the county for the option will be repaid to the county at the
settlement of the easement. Settlement of a MALPF easement and payment of the
proceeds to the county will release the applicant from any additional
obligations related to the option to purchase by the county.
      (2)   If a development rights easement on the property has not been
purchased by MALPF within 5 years, the applicant may rescind the option to
purchase by repaying to the county the full amount paid by the county for the
option, plus interest for the entire period of the option, at the legal rate in
effect at the time of rescission. If the applicant does not cancel the option
and make full repayment to the county, the county will exercise the option
contained in the agreement and purchase the development rights easement from
the applicant for the consideration already paid by the county to the applicant
for the option. Unless otherwise agreed by both the county and the applicant,
the easement agreement will be substantially the same as the standard easement
agreement of MALPF. The easement agreement may be assigned by the county to
MALPF.
(Ord. 94-02-097, 4-5-1994; Ord. 06-23-419, 6-20-2006; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 24-19, 12-3-2024)
§ 1-13-35. INSTALLMENT PURCHASE PROGRAM.
   (A)   Purpose. There is hereby created in Frederick County an installment
purchase program for the purpose of accelerating land preservation easement
purchases and providing an additional land preservation program for the
landowners and citizens of Frederick County. This section is created with the
further purpose to preserve productive agricultural land and woodland which
provides for the continued production of food and fiber for the citizens of the
county and to protect farmland/open space from the impacts from development.
   (B)   Definitions.
      ADVISORY BOARD. The Frederick County Agricultural Preservation Advisory
Board.
      COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
      DEPARTMENT. The Frederick County, Maryland Planning Department.
      EASEMENT. An agricultural land preservation easement, which limits the
land to agricultural or woodland land uses and prohibits residential,
commercial and industrial development except in accordance with the terms of
the easement.
      INSTALLMENT AGREEMENT. An installment purchase agreement between
Frederick County and the seller.
      INSTALLMENT PURCHASE PROGRAM. The Frederick County agricultural land
preservation installment purchase program.
      U.S.D.A. The United States Department of Agriculture.
   (C)   Qualifying criteria.
      (1)   Soil criteria. Properties for which a landowner has made
application for approval under the Frederick County agricultural land
preservation installment purchase program must meet 1 of the following criteria
as defined in the Frederick County soil survey:
         (a)   Minimum of 50% U.S.D.A. Class I, II and III soils;
         (b)   Minimum of 50% U.S.D.A. woodland groups I and II;
         (c)   A combination of farmland and woodland with a minimum of 60%
U.S.D.A. Class I, II and III soils and U.S.D.A. woodland groups I and II.
      (2)   Size criteria. The minimum size for properties entering the
installment purchase program shall be 50 acres provided however farms with less
than 50 acres may enroll in the program if contiguous to a property of 50 acres
or greater which is already under easement in the program or in conjunction
with other applications for properties which in combination meet or exceed 50
acres.
      (3)   Locational criteria. Properties considered for the Frederick County
agricultural land preservation installment purchase program easement shall be
located in a no planned service designation (N.P.S.) in the adopted water and
sewerage plan. The county governing body may approve a property for easement
purchase within a water and sewer service area upon a specific finding that the
land has extraordinary agricultural capability, is of significant size and has
the potential to be part of a larger area of contiguous preserved land. Prior
to any application being forwarded to the county governing body it shall be
referred to the Frederick County Planning Commission for review and comment.
      (4)   Other criteria. Landowners applying for sale of a development
rights easement under the installment purchase program must have further
subdivision rights under the provision of the Frederick County Zoning
Ordinance; provided, however, properties without further subdivision rights may
be permitted to be considered if the property:
         (a)   Is located within 2,000 feet of a growth area as designated on a
region plan; or
         (b)   Adjoins another parcel of land containing at least 50 acres
which is subject to an agricultural conservation easement or other conservation
easement; provided, that any such agricultural or other conservation easement
must preclude further subdivision of such property.
   (D)   Application for sale of development rights.
      (1)   An owner of agricultural land which meets the minimum
qualifications set forth may make application to sell to the county in
subsection (C) above an easement on the entire contiguous acreage of the land
less 1 acre per existing dwelling located on the subject property.
      (2)   The application shall be made on a form provided by the county and
be accompanied by a plat or map of the property at a scale of no smaller than 1
inch equals 600 feet. Each application shall also include a certificate that a
soil conservation plan approved by the Soil Conservation District for the
property has been made or revised within the last 10 years from the date of the
application. Applications for easement sale under the installment purchase
program shall be accepted by the Planning Department annually until September 1
of each year. The County Executive may authorize the Department to accept
applications biannually based upon a recommendation of the Advisory Board. All
applications shall be forwarded to the Advisory Board for review. The County
Executive upon a recommendation from the Advisory Board may limit the number of
applications to be considered based on available funding and the timing to
process the applications and make settlement.
      (3)   Each application shall be reviewed according to the Frederick
County agricultural land preservation installment purchase program ranking
system and ranked from highest score to lowest. The Frederick County
Agricultural Preservation Advisory Board’s recommendation and ranking shall be
forwarded to the County Executive for approval. Offers to purchase agricultural
preservation easements shall be made to the highest ranked farm first with
additional offers made in descending order according to the ranking system. The
county may modify this procedure if adequate funding is not available for the
next ranked property owner who would have received an offer if funds were
available.
   (E)   Ranking. The Advisory Board shall establish a ranking system for the
installment purchase program which shall at a minimum consider soil
productivity, development threats and pressures, contribution to a mass of
preserved land and good soil conservation practices and stewardship. The
ranking system shall be forwarded to the County Executive for approval. The
Frederick County agricultural land preservation installment purchase program
ranking system may be amended or revised from time to time.
   (F)   Valuation of the easement.
      (1)   The base value for acquisition of development rights under the
installment purchase program shall be established by the county governing body
in a separate resolution. Additional value above the base value will accrue for
qualifying properties in accordance with the approved ranking system. The total
value of an easement will be determined by the county governing body after a
recommendation by the Advisory Board.
      (2)   A property which has no further subdivision rights under the
provisions of the Frederick County Zoning Ordinance as of September 26, 2006
may be eligible for the purchase of an easement at the base value, with no
additional value accrued through the ranking system, but only where such
property:
         (a)   Is located within 2,000 feet of a growth area as designated on a
region plan; or
         (b)   Adjoins another parcel of land containing at least 50 acres
which is subject to an agricultural conservation easement or other conservation
easement; provided that any such agricultural or other conservation easement
must preclude further subdivision of such property.
   (G)   Method of payment.
      (1)   The landowner and county shall enter into an installment purchase
agreement (I.P.A.). The agreement shall state the total amount of money that
the county has agreed to pay the landowner and set the terms of the sale,
including the interest rate. The installment purchase agreement shall be for a
term of not less than 10 nor more than 20 years with interest being paid
annually. At the end of the term the landowner will receive a lump sum payment
constituting the principal. This agreement is exempt from the provisions of Md.
Ann. Code, Local Government Article §§ 19-205 and 19-206.
      (2)   Although preference is given to installment purchase easement
acquisitions, a landowner may request that development rights be purchased in
lump sum. Upon a recommendation of the Advisory Board and the Frederick County
Department of Finance, the County Executive may approve a lump sum payment.
   (H)   Recording of the easement. A deed of easement, restricting, in
perpetuity, future development on the property, shall be recorded in the
Frederick County land records. The form of the deed of easement shall be
approved by the County Executive upon a recommendation of the Frederick County
agricultural preservation Advisory Board and the office of the Frederick County
Attorney.
   (I)   Agricultural preservation easement.
      (1)   Upon establishment of an agricultural preservation easement, a
landowner agrees to the following conditions:
         (a)   To maintain the land in agricultural use or properly managed so
that it is available for continued agricultural use from the date that the
easement is recorded in the land records of Frederick County;
         (b)   To implement and maintain a soil and water conservation plan as
prepared by the Soil Conservation District. Such plan shall be kept on file in
the offices of the Department and the district office of the Soil Conservation
Service;
         (c)   That the easement agreement creates an encumbrance upon the land
and binds future owners, heirs, successors or assigns and precludes the
subdivision and utilization of the land principally for uses such as
residential, institutional, commercial or industrial except as contained within
this ordinance or the deed of easement approved by the county. Any agricultural
uses currently permitted would be allowed to continue under this agreement. The
easement agreement shall not provide for public access to any privately owned
land. Purchase of an easement by the county does not create a right of public
access to the land.
      (2)   In addition to any other requirements, the construction of new
buildings or structures on the land, other than farm buildings, is contingent
upon the written application to and approval by the Department, subject to
review by, and recommendation of, the Frederick County Agricultural Advisory
Board.
   (J)   Additions to existing easements.
      (1)   The process for adding land to existing easements shall be the same
as for the initial establishment of an easement. The Advisory Board may
establish a minimum size criterion for the addition of land contiguous to an
existing easement.
      (2)   The landowner of record at the time of easement sale may, at any
time after easement sale, request a tenant home in accordance with conditions
established within the Frederick County Zoning Ordinance for tenants actively
engaged in the farming operation. This request shall be submitted to the
Department for approval, subject to the review and recommendation of the
Frederick County Agricultural Advisory Board.
      (3)   Subject to the succeeding paragraph, a landowner who sells an
easement through the installment purchase program may request a 2 acre lot
exclusion for the exclusive residential use of the owner and each of the
children of the owner as long as the original owner continues to own the land.
This right shall not convey to subsequent landowners.
      (4)   The total number of lot exclusions for the owner and children may
not exceed 1 dwelling unit per 50 acres with a maximum lot size of 2 acres. A
landowner may elect to relinquish the ability to exclude all children’s/owner’s
lots for the right to exclude 1 lot which may be conveyed to persons not an
owner or child of the owner. The maximum 2 acre lot shall include all county
right-of-way requirements. In addition, any landowner of an easement requesting
a lot exclusion shall be required to repay the county for that lot. This
repayment shall be equal to the amount paid per acre by the county to the
landowner plus a pro rata portion of interest previously paid to the landowner
by the county under the installment agreement.
   (K)   Uses of land under agricultural preservation easement.
      (1)   Property under agricultural preservation easement shall be
maintained in agriculture use. A landowner may request accessory, and
compatible commercial uses to an agricultural use of the property, as permitted
under the Frederick County Zoning Ordinance, provided that such use does not
affect the agricultural integrity of the property, minimizes the use of
productive agricultural land and fulfills the purpose and intent of the
agricultural preservation easement.
      (2)   Such a request shall be submitted to the Department and reviewed by
the Advisory Board who shall make specific findings in each request as to the
appropriateness of such use and the impact on the agricultural use of the
property.
      (3)   Accessory and compatible commercial uses must conform to existing
regulations and ordinances.
   (L)   (1)   The county may enter into installment agreements with landowners
to acquire development rights under other state and local land preservation
programs upon compliance with the criteria and procedures of those programs.
      (2)   Installment agreements under other land preservation programs are
not required to comply with the criteria and procedures of the installment
purchase program.
(Ord. 02-01-297, 1-15-2002; Ord. 02-20-316, 10-15-2002; Ord. 06-32-428, 9-26-
2006; Ord. 07-35-475, 11-27-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
CHAPTER 1-14: PLUMBING
ARTICLE I: LICENSES (§§ 1-14-1 — 1-14-18)
Section
   
1-14-1   Licensing of plumbers
   
1-14-2   Licensing for on-site utility contractors
   
1-14-3   Licensing of appliance installers
   
1-14-4   Expiration of licenses
   
1-14-5   Refusal or revocation of licenses
Cross references:
   Buildings see
Chapter 1-6;
   Local laws relating to plumbing, see §
2-10-1;
    Water, sewers and drains, see
Chapter 2-13;
   Water, sewers and sewage disposal, see
Chapter 1-18
§ 1-14-1. LICENSING OF PLUMBERS.
   (A)   All master plumbers shall make application for a license on forms
approved by the administrative authority accompanied by a fee as set by a
resolution of the county governing body. The "administrative authority"
referred to in this chapter is the Director of the Department of Permits and
Inspections or an authorized agent of the Director.
   (B)   Journeymen plumbers shall make application for a license on forms
approved by the administrative authority accompanied by a fee as set by a
resolution of the county governing body.
   (C)   All septic system installers that are not licensed by the county as a
master plumber shall make application for a license on forms approved by the
administrative authority accompanied by a fee as set by a resolution of the
county governing body and a performance bond in the amount of $10,000
conditioned upon the applicant's proper installation of
all work. Such bonds when required shall be in a form prescribed by the
administrative authority.
(1959 Code, § 42-16) (Ord. 81-40-230, 11-17-1981; Ord. 91-21-021, 8-8-1991;
Ord. 94-20-115, 10-18-1994; Ord. 01-16-290, 7-12-2001; Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-
2010; Ord. 11-22-588, 9-29-2011; Ord. 12-12-607, 6-14-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-
13-2014)
Statutory reference:
   State regulation of plumbers, see Md. Ann. Code, Business Occupations and
Professions, Title 12
§ 1-14-2. LICENSING FOR ON-SITE UTILITY CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   Application: All on-site utility contractors shall make application
for a license on forms approved by the administrative authority, accompanied by
a fee, which shall be set by resolution of the county governing body.
   (B)   Requirements for license:
      (1)   Proof of a minimum of 6 years of supervisory experience in the
utility trade, which shall include at least 1 of the following:
         (a)   A notarized letter or certified wage records from a current or
former employer; or
         (b)   Substantially equivalent documentation or proof of the required
experience in a form acceptable to the administrative authority.
      (2)   Proof that the applicant has no outstanding Frederick County Code
violations;
      (3)   Certification in OSHA subpart “P” in trench safety or proof of a
current certificate (license) from another jurisdiction obtained in an
equivalent manner acceptable to the Frederick County Advisory Plumbing Board;
      (4)   Certification in OSHA requirements for confined spaces;
      (5)   A current certificate of general commercial liability insurance
with limits of at least $300,000 for property damage and $100,000 for liability
(total property damage and liability insurance of at least $400,000); and
      (6)   A government-issued photo ID.
   (C)   Scope of work:
      (1)   On-site utility contractors may perform on-site utility work as
defined in §
2-13-21(A) of the public local laws of Frederick County.
      (2)   All on-site utility contractor workers performing work on-site must
have OSHA training on confined space and trench safety, as defined in §
1-14-2(B)(3) and (4).
      (3)   Work must comply with the Frederick County water and sewer
specifications and standards for water mains, sanitary sewers and related
structures, as well as related code provisions adopted by the county.
(Ord. 05-34-395, 12-1-2005; Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-14-3 LICENSING OF APPLIANCE INSTALLERS.
   (A)   Scope. Appliances are limited to those that fall within the specific
license subcategory classifications of this section. All pressure vessels are
excluded and must be installed by a Frederick County- Licensed Master Plumber.
   (B)   Application, fee, certificate of insurance. All appliance installers
shall make application for a license on forms approved by the Frederick County
Advisory Plumbing Board accompanied by:
      (1)   A copy of their Maryland state license or a license from a
jurisdiction recognized by the State of Maryland;
      (2)   Proof that the applicant has no outstanding Frederick County code
violations;
      (3)   A fee as set by resolution of the county governing body; and
      (4)   A certificate of insurance in the amount of $300,000 for property
damage and liability insurance in the amount of $100,000, making a total of
400,000 required for property damage and liability insurance.
   (C)   Permit required, issuance. No plumbing appliance shall be installed
without a permit from the Frederick County Department of Permits and
Inspection. Such permit shall be issued in accordance with this §
1-14-3, provided that appliances may be installed by either a licensed plumber
or licensed appliance installer.
   (D)   Inspection and approval of installations. All appliance installations
shall be inspected and approved under the pertinent provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   All appliance installers shall have their service vehicles labeled
with their name as it appears on their state license and their state and county
license numbers.
   (F)   Subcategory of appliance installers license. Only those subcategory
licenses listed below are permitted.
      (1)   LP gas appliance installers license.
         (a)   Requirements for license.
            1.   A valid:
               A.   Propane gas fitters certificate issued by the State of
Maryland; or
               B.   LP gas license issued by any other jurisdiction and
recognized by the State of Maryland; and
            2.   Insurance as required by §
1-14-3(B).
         (b)   Scope of work.
            1.   All permits must be secured by a Frederick County-licensed LP
gas appliance installer.
            2.   All journeypersons will be licensed in accordance with §
1-14-1(B) of this chapter.
      (2)   Natural gas appliance installers license.
         (a)   Requirements for license.
            1.   A valid natural gas license issued by: any jurisdiction and
recognized by the State of Maryland; W.S.S.C.; Baltimore County; or Baltimore
City; and
            2.   Insurance as required by §
1-14-3(B).
         (b)   Scope of work.
            1.   All permits must be secured by a Frederick County-licensed
natural gas appliance installer.
            2.   All journey persons will be licensed in accordance with §
1-14-1(B) of the Plumbing Ordinance.
      (3)   Pool installers license.
         (a)   Requirements for license.
            1.   A Maryland Home Improvement Contractor's License; and
            2.   Insurance as required in §
1-14-3(B).
         (b)   Scope of work.
            1.   A pool installers license permits the installation of a
backflow device to an existing hose bib for a residential pool, hot tub, or
spa.
            2.   Commercial installations and installations of new water lines
under a pool installers license are prohibited.
      (4)   Water treatment installers.
         (a)   Requirements for license.
            1.   A water conditioner installer or well driller in the water
supply category, as licensed by the State of Maryland Board of Well Drillers.
No additional county license is required.
         (b)   Scope of work.
            1.   Water treatment appliances shall be installed only on existing
water and sewer systems.
            2.   All journey persons will be licensed in accordance with §
1-14-1(B) of the Plumbing Ordinance.
(Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-4 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   All licenses issued in accordance with this article shall expire on November
13th of the next odd-numbered year after the date of initial issuance. Any
license not renewed by the expiration date will require the payment of a late
fee as established by resolution of the county governing body, in addition to
the renewal fee.
(Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-5 REFUSAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   Any license may be refused or revoked by the administrative authority in the
event it is shown that such applicant is either unable or unwilling to properly
perform the work. This action can be appealed to the Frederick County Advisory
Plumbing Board, which action is stayed until after the Board's decision on
appeal.
(Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-14-6 – 1-14-18. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: PLUMBING INSPECTOR (§§ 1-14-19 — 1-14-35)
Section
   
1-14-19   Administration and enforcement
   
1-14-20   Qualifications; conduct
   
1-14-21   Duties
   
1-14-22   Right of entry; power to stop work
Cross reference:
   Departments of Permits and Inspections, see §§
1-2-49 et seq.
§ 1-14-19. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   This article shall be administered and enforced by the Department of Permits
and Inspections, hereinafter referred to as the "Department." The
qualifications of the Chief Plumbing Inspector and all other persons hired as
Plumbing Inspectors shall be as prescribed in the job descriptions on file in
the Human Resources Division of Frederick County, Maryland. Nothing herein
shall prohibit County Electrical or Building Inspectors from performing
residential plumbing inspections so long as the Inspectors are properly
qualified, trained and supervised.
(1959 Code, § 42-5) (Ord. 88-30-507, 6-21-1988; Ord. 08-28-504, 11-25-2008;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-20. QUALIFICATIONS; CONDUCT.
   No person shall be appointed Chief Plumbing Inspector unless he or she shall
hold a license as a Master Plumber in the state. No Plumbing Inspector,
including the Chief Plumbing Inspector, may be engaged in or financially
interested in the plumbing business or the sale of any plumbing supplies, nor
act as an agent, whether directly or indirectly, for any person so engaged.
(1959 Code, § 42-6) (Ord. 85-35-367, 9-3-1985; Ord. 08-28-504, 11-25-2008; Ord.
14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-21. DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of all qualified Inspectors to see that all work
covered by this chapter is executed by persons properly qualified under this
chapter and to report any violation to the proper officials for appropriate
action. Qualified Inspectors shall inspect all constructions controlled under
this chapter and see that it is done in accordance with the adopted code.
(1959 Code, § 42-7) (Ord. 08-28-504, 11-25-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-22. RIGHT OF ENTRY; POWER TO STOP WORK.
   Qualified Inspectors, in the discharge of their official duties, and upon
proper identification, shall have the authority to enter any buildings,
structures or premises at any reasonable hour and are empowered to order work
stopped that is not in conformity with this chapter and to require the person
doing the work to correct the same.
(1959 Code, § 42-8) (Ord. 08-28-504, 11-25-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-14-23 – 1-14-35. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: ADVISORY PLUMBING BOARD (§§ 1-14-36 — 1-14-55)
Section
   
1-14-36   Established
   
1-14-37   Members
   
1-14-38   Duties as to Plumbing Code
   
1-14-39   Meetings; review of plumbers’ credentials; list of plumbers
   
1-14-40   Duties as to Board of Arbitration
   
1-14-41   Authority to create by-laws
Statutory reference:
   Plumbing Board required, see Md. Ann. Code, Local Government Article § 13-
916
§ 1-14-36. ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established an Advisory Plumbing Board.
(1959 Code, § 42-2) (Ord. 01-16-290, 7-12-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-37. MEMBERS.
   The Advisory Plumbing Board shall consist of a person designated by the
Frederick County Health Officer, 2 state or county licensed plumbers, and 2
other persons; all members shall be appointed by the County Executive, subject
to confirmation by the County Council. The Board shall be appointed for
staggered 4 year terms of office. At the end of a term, a member continues to
serve until a successor qualifies and is appointed. A member who is appointed
after a term has begun will serve only for the remainder of the term and until
a successor qualifies and is appointed.
(1959 Code, § 42-2) (Ord. 01-16-290, 7-12-2001; Ord. 08-28-504, 11-25-2008;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-38. DUTIES AS TO PLUMBING CODE.
   The Advisory Plumbing Board shall assist the Plumbing Inspector in the
promulgation and enforcement of the Plumbing Code and shall recommend changes
in the Plumbing Code to the county governing body. Such changes shall not
become effective until approved by the county governing body.
(1959 Code, § 42-2) (Ord. 01-16-290, 7-12-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-39. MEETINGS; REVIEW OF PLUMBERS’ CREDENTIALS; LIST OF PLUMBERS.
   The Advisory Plumbing Board shall meet at such times as may be necessary but
at least once during any 6 month period. They may review the credentials and
licenses issued by the Department to any person.
(1959 Code, § 42-3) (Ord. 01-16-290, 7-12-2001; Ord. 08-28-504, 11-25-2008;
Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-40. DUTIES AS BOARD OF ARBITRATION.
   The Advisory Plumbing Board shall sit as a board of arbitration with respect
to any disputes that may arise involving an interpretation of the Plumbing Code
or of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. Any person who requests
a hearing before the board shall pay a fee as set by resolution of the county
governing body, prior to the scheduling of such hearing. A hearing request
shall be submitted 15 days prior to the hearing date.
(1959 Code, § 42-4) (Ord. 01-16-290, 7-12-2001; Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord.
14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-41. AUTHORITY TO CREATE BY-LAWS.
   The Advisory Plumbing Board shall have the authority to establish,
implement, and amend, as necessary, bylaws for its operation.
(Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-14-42 – 1-14-55. RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: PLUMBING CODE (§§ 1-14-56 — 1-14-89)
Section
   
1-14-56   Adoption
   
1-14-57   Amendments
   
1-14-58   Well system installation
   
1-14-59   Condemned equipment
§ 1-14-56. ADOPTION.
   The County hereby adopts:
   (A)   Those certain plumbing regulations known as the 2021 Edition of the
International Plumbing Code, and the whole thereof; and the same is hereby
adopted, ratified and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein
subject to the local amendments described below in §
1-14-57;
   (B)   Those certain fuel and gas regulations known as the 2021 International
Fuel Gas Code and generally relating to fuel gas piping systems; and
   (C)   Section 12-206 of the Public Safety Article of the Maryland Code,
prohibiting the use of certain materials in the construction of fuel gas piping
systems in certain buildings.
(1959 Code, § 42-1) (Ord. 81-40-230, 11-17-1981; Ord. 85-35-367, 9-3-1985; Ord.
91-30-030, 11-12-1991; Ord. 99-11-238, 7-29-1999; Ord. 02-08-304, 4-4-2002;
Ord. 05-33-394, 11-29-2005; Ord. 08-16-492, 6-17-2008; Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-
2010; Ord. 12-12-607, 6-14-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 15-05, 7-
7-2015; Bill No. 19-22, 1-21-2020; Bill No. 23-05, 3-21-2023; Bill No. 24-06,
5-21-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Power of county to adopt Plumbing Code, see Md. Ann. Code, Local Government
Article § 13-915 and 13-916
§ 1-14-57. AMENDMENTS.
   The International Plumbing Code is hereby amended and changed as described
and shown below.
   Section 101 is hereby amended as follows:
      101.2 Scope. The exception is hereby deleted.
   Section 103 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   Section 104 is hereby amended as follows:
      104.2 Applications and Permits. The administrative authority shall
receive applications and issue permits for the installation and alteration of
plumbing systems, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued,
and enforce compliance with the provisions of this code.
   Section 106 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   Section 108 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   Section 109 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   Section 202 is hereby amended as follows:
      Administrative Authority: Is the Director of the Department of Permits
and Inspections, or an authorized agent of the Director.
      Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system that
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside and
that extends five (5) feet (1524 mm) beyond the walls of the building and
conveys the drainage to the building sewer.
   Subsection 305.4 is hereby amended as follows:
      305.4 Freezing. A water, soil or waste pipe shall not be installed
outside of a building, in attics or crawl spaces; concealed in outside walls,
or in any other place subjected to freezing temperature unless adequate (R-24
minimum) provision is made to protect them from freezing by insulation or heat
or both. Water service pipe shall be installed not less than thirty-six (36)
inches (915 mm) deep or less than six (6) inches (152 mm) below the frost line.
   Subsection 305.4.1, Sewer depth is hereby amended by adding the following
text.
      (a)   Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems
shall be installed not less than 12 inches below finished grade at the point of
septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be installed not less than 12
inches below grade.
   Subsection 312.10.2 is hereby amended by adding the following text.
      (a)   Copies of test reports for the initial installation shall be sent
to the administrative authority and the water supplier. Copies of annual test
reports shall be sent to the water supplier.
      (b)   Testing, inspection and repair of devices shall be performed by
certified individuals approved by an agency acceptable to the administrative
authority. Certification for testing shall be in accordance with a nationally
recognized accredited training program. Certification shall include not less
than 32 hours of combined classroom and practice training and successful
completion of a written and practical examination.
      (c)   Double check valves and reduced pressure principal valves: Such
devices shall be installed at not less than 12 inches above the floor with the
maximum of 60 inches above floor. All test reports shall be made on Frederick
County forms and the device shall be tagged with a Frederick County pink card.
      (d)   Where a continuous water supply is critical and cannot be
interrupted for the periodic testing of a backflow prevention device, multiple
backflow prevention devices or other means of maintaining a continuous supply
shall be provided.
   Subsection 403.1.1 is hereby amended by adding the following text.
      (a)   In new construction for assembly and mercantile occupancies, an
accessible unisex water closet shall be provided where an aggregate of six or
more male or female water closets are required. In buildings of mixed
occupancy, those water closets required for the assembly or mercantile portion
of the occupancy would be used to determine the ability to make use of the
unisex bathing room option. The inclusion of the one accessible unisex bathing
room shall be allowed to replace both one male and one female toilet.
      (b)   Unisex bathing rooms shall comply with this section and the
requirements for accessible bathing rooms as per standards prescribed in the
International Building Code, except where a more stringent requirement is found
in COMAR 05.02.02 Maryland Accessibility Code.
      (c)   Unisex bathing rooms shall be located on an accessible route.
Unisex bathing rooms shall be located not more than one story above or below
separate-sex bathing rooms. The accessible route from any separate-sex bathing
rooms to a unisex bathing room shall not exceed 500 feet/152.4m.
      (d)   Unisex bathing rooms shall be designated by accessible signs.
Directional signage shall be provided at all separate-sex bathing rooms
indicating the location of the nearest unisex bathing room.
   Section 404 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   New section 404 to read as follows:
   Section 404 Accessible Plumbing Facilities: Plumbing fixtures and
installation shall conform to the requirements of the International Building
Code except where a more stringent requirement is found in the Code of Maryland
Regulations 05.02.02 Maryland Accessibility Code.
   Section 410.1 is hereby amended as follows:
   410.1 Approval. Drinking fountains shall conform to ASME A112.19.1, ASME
A112.19.2, or ASME A112.19.9M, and water coolers shall conform to ARI 1010.
Drinking fountains and water coolers shall conform to NSF 61, Section 9. Where
water is served in restaurants, drinking fountains shall not be required. In
other occupancies where drinking fountains are required, water coolers or
bottled water dispensers shall not be permitted to be substituted for the
required drinking fountains.
   Subsection 413.4 Public Laundries, Central Washing Facilities, Commercial
Kitchens, and Bathing Rooms is hereby amended to add the following text:
      Floor drains shall be located in bathing rooms containing two (2) or more
water closets or a combination of one water closet and one urinal, except in
dwelling units. Floor drains shall be required in commercial kitchens.
   Subsection 418 is hereby amended to add the following new subparagraphs:
      418.3 Prohibited locations. Laundry trays and mop sinks shall not be
located in, nor accessed through, public restrooms.
      418.4 Wall area. The wall area around mop sink basins shall be
constructed of smooth waterproof materials to a minimum height of 36", but no
less than the height of the faucet. Waterproofing materials of epoxy or paint
coatings are prohibited.
   Section 501.2 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   New subsection 501.2 to read as follows:
      501.2 Water heater as space heater.
      (a)   The installation of any system or equipment utilizing water heaters
to provide heat must be installed by a person who is licensed to perform the
work in Maryland and who has obtained the necessary local permits for such
installations.
      (b)   This section is applicable to:
         1.   A combination heating system, which is installed as a unit and
incorporates a water heater as an integral part of the system, to provide the
primary heat source to the dwelling;
         2.   Pieces of equipment sold as an add-on to an existing heating
system for the purpose of providing supplemental heat, and are attached to a
water heater containing water, which may later be expected to be used as
potable water.
      (c)   All installations shall comply with the following:
         1.   Combination water/space heating equipment, materials and
components shall be suitable for use with potable water and listed for such
use;
         2.   Water heaters, piping and components connected for a space
heating application shall be properly sized and installed according to
manufacturer’s instructions;
         3.   Water heaters used in combination water/space heating systems
shall be listed as complying with American National Standards (ANSI) Z21.101,
Z21.10.3 or UL732, as applicable;
      4.   A water temperature control value shall be installed with every
installation utilizing a combination water heating/space heating system
application to limit domestic hot water temperature safe for ordinary domestic
use by individuals;
      5.   The installer must disinfect and certify the water system whenever
required by the administrative authority under Section 610 of International
Plumbing Code;
      6.   The system shall be equipped with a means for periodic circulation
between the water heater and the exchanger during off seasons;
      7.   An acceptable means shall be provided to prevent thermal circulation
through the exchanger during off seasons, except circulation necessary to
comply with subparagraph (6);
      8.   A copy of the documentation to support the requirements of these
subparagraphs shall be available for an Inspector’s review during inspections
and shall remain with the unit;
      9.   For all such devices used in Maryland, an informational sheet shall
be provided that outlines all of the requirements of this subsection.
   Subsection 605.3 is hereby amended to add the following text:
   All copper tube used underground shall be Type K copper. When using insert
fittings on plastic water service the size of the pipe shall be no less than
one inch. The fittings used shall be made of brass or stainless steel and shall
be used with stainless steel bands. Delete from Table 605.3 water service pipe
type L, WL, M or WM copper tubing. A minimum diameter of a one inch pipe shall
be used for connection from submersible pump to a storage tank as part of a
well system installation.
   Table 605.4 is hereby amended to delete the following text:
   Type M or WM copper tube.
   Subsection 606.1, Location of full-open valves, is hereby amended to add a
new subparagraph:
      9.   After the tee for the connection to the sprinkler system on the
domestic side and within 5 feet of the water main entering the structure on
commercial buildings.
   Subsection 606.5.8 is hereby amended to add the following text:
   Any pressure tank installed in a basement and/or crawl space shall be a
minimum of seven and one-half (7½) inches above finished grade. All water
pressure tanks and apparatus for mobile homes shall be installed in the
confines of the living space. In every case, the only exception shall be those
tanks installed a minimum of eighteen (18) inches from the top of the tank to
finished grade in an approved manhole with water tight lid, a minimum of six
(6) inches above finished grade.
   Subsection 606.7 is hereby added as follows:
      Subsection 606.7 Dead ends. In the installation or removal of any part of
the water distribution system, dead ends shall be prohibited. Future water
distribution piping shall be allowed when valves are provided within 2 feet
(610 mm) of the branch tee and are tagged as to their purpose. Valves shall be
kept in the closed position following testing.
   Subsection 608.17.4, Connections to automatic fire sprinkler systems and
standpipe systems, is hereby amended to delete exceptions (1.) and (2.).
   Subsection 608.17.4 is hereby amended to add the following:
      In 1 and 2 family dwellings the type of backflow preventer required shall
be an ASSE 1024 dual check valve.
   Section 701.2 Sewer required is hereby deleted and replaced with the
following:
   Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and all premises
having drainage piping shall be connected to a public sewer, where available,
or an approved private sewage disposal system in accordance with Code of
Maryland (COMAR) regulations.
   Table 710.1(1) is hereby amended to read as follows:
      Footnote a. The minimum size of any building sewer shall be four (4)
inches in diameter to the inside of the building with the exception of
townhouses which can be 3 inches in diameter.
      b.   Maximum grade of sewer line, sanitary drains, vents not to exceed ½"
per foot.
   Subdivision 701.8 is hereby amended to add the following text:
   Food or drink shall not be stored, prepared or displayed beneath overhead
sewer or drain pipes unless such pipes are protected against leakage or
condensation reaching the food or drink as described below for new
construction. In newly constructed or remodeled establishments, soil or drain
pipes located over food preparation, storage, display or serving areas are
undesirable. Where building design requires that soil or drain pipes be located
over such areas, the installation shall be made with the least possible number
of joints and shall be installed so as to connect to a vertical stack at the
nearest wall or vertical building support and the construction shall be
performed as follows:
      a.   All openings through floors over such areas shall be provided with
sleeves securely bonded to the floor construction and projecting not less than
three-quarters inch above top of the finished floor with space between sleeve
and pipe or duct sealed.
      b.   Floor and shower drains installed above such areas shall be equipped
with integral seepage pans.
      c.   Plumbing fixtures in rooms located above such areas shall be of the
wall mounted type except bathtubs. Tubs shall have waste and overflow
connections made above floor and piped to the trap below the floor. Connections
through floors and to traps shall conform with all other provisions of this
regulation. No floor openings, other than sleeve for waste pipe, will be
permitted for tubs.
      d.   All other soil or drain pipes shall be of an approved material as
listed in Table 702.1 and Section 702. All materials shall conform to
established standards. Cleanouts shall be extended through the floor
construction above.
      e.   Soil and drain pipes located above such area shall be subjected to a
standing water test of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
      f.   Piping subject to operation at temperatures that will form
condensation on the exterior of the pipe shall be thermally insulated.
      g.   Where pipes are installed in ceilings above such areas, the ceiling
shall be of the removable type, or shall be provided with access panels in
order to form a ready access for inspection of piping.
      h.   In lieu of the above, any other method may be approved by the
administrative authority.
   Section 705.10.2 is hereby amended to delete the following text:
      exception #2. The solvent cement is used only for joining PVC drain,
waste and vent pipe and fittings in non-pressure applications in sizes up to
and including 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter.
   Subsection 904.3.1 is hereby added as follows:
      904.3.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through roof
shall be terminated at least 6 inches above the roof, except that where a roof
is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent
extensions shall run at least 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof. A minimum of two
(2) natural air vents are required for all single-family dwelling houses.
   Section 918.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   918.1 General. Air admittance valves shall only be installed with the
approval of the administrative authority. Where approved, vent systems
utilizing air admittance valves shall comply with this section. Stack-type air
admittance valves shall conform to ASSE 1050. Individual and branch-type air
admittance valves shall conform to ASSE 1051.
   Section 1003.3.4, Grease interceptors, is hereby replaced with the
following:
   Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be sized by a
registered design professional or master plumber in accordance with PDI G101,
ASME A112.14.3 Appendix A, or ASME A112.14.4. Grease interceptors and automatic
grease removal devices shall be designed and tested in accordance with PDI
G101, ASME A112.14.3 or ASME A112.14.4. Grease interceptors and automatic
grease removal devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions. Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be
located as close as possible to the grease source.
   Section 1003.4. Add the following text after subsection 1003.4.
   Interceptors.
   A.   In a structure where a public sanitary sewer is available, the waste
pipe from oil and sand interceptors shall discharge, if installed, into the
public sanitary sewer, or any more restrictive manner as otherwise mandated by
an applicable administrative authority.
   B.   New construction.
   1.   Any new construction of a structure, where public sanitary sewers are
not available, shall have the option to either:
      (i)   Construct the structures without any floor drains; structures
without floor drains must operate to minimize waste and prevent wastewater from
leaving the shop area and discharging to the environment; or
      (ii)   If drains are included, ensure that each drain shall flow into an
approved sand interceptor which shall drain into a 1,000 gallon or larger
approved holding tank.
   2.   An oil and water separator is not required when the waste discharges
into a holding tank.
   C.   Existing structures.
   1.   In areas where public sanitary sewers are not available, existing
structures that are being renovated or enlarged shall either:
      (i)   Permanently plug all existing floor drains; structures which plug
their floor drains must notify the Maryland Department of Environment, Ground
Water Permits Program, prior to drain closure, and must operate to minimize
waste and prevent wastewater from leaving the shop area and discharging to the
environment, or
      (ii)   Retrofit all existing floor drains so as to allow them to flow
into an approved sand interceptor which shall drain into a 1,000 gallon or
larger approved holding tank which is equipped with a high level alarm.
   2.   An oil and water separator is not required when the waste discharges
into a holding tank.
   D.   If an underground tank is installed, it shall be corrosion protected
and designed according to COMAR 26.10.03.
   E.   Any new construction of a structure or renovation of an existing
structure which discharges liquid wastes as described in Section 1003 of
International Plumbing Code or which discharges other industrial waste waters
shall have the option of discharging into an on-site subsurface disposal
system, providing the facility’s owner/operator applies for and obtains from
the Maryland Department of Environment a water discharge permit issued pursuant
to the provisions and conditions of COMAR 26.08.01–26.08.04.
   Where approved and approved point of discharge.
   A.   Sand and oil interceptors shall be provided wherever floors, pits, or
surface areas subject to the accumulation of grease or oil from service or
repair operations are drained or washed into a drainage system. Such locations
include, but are not limited to: car or truck washing facilities, engine
cleaning facilities, and similar operations. Drainage from such locations shall
be connected to the sanitary sewer.
   B.   Drains shall not be required in service or repair garages employing dry
absorbent cleaning methods; however, if any drains are located in such areas,
they shall discharge to the sanitary sewer through sand and oil interceptors.
   C.   Drains shall not be required in parking or service garages unless the
garage or portions thereof is equipped with provisions for either washing
vehicles or rinsing the floor. Where such cleaning facilities are provided the
area subject to waste drainage shall be provided with a system of one or more
floor drains, complete with sand and oil interceptors, and the drainage from
the oil interceptor shall be connected to the sanitary sewer. Any storm water
shall be drained separately and directly to the storm sewer.
   D.   The waste oil tank used with the oil interceptor shall not be used to
store or contain any other waste oil or hazardous fluid. Crankcase oil cannot
be dumped into or stored in this waste oil tank.
   Subsection 1003.4.2.1 is hereby amended to add the following text.
   A.   Oil separators shall have a 3" minimum discharge line and a 2" minimum
vent to atmosphere. The discharge line shall have a full-size cleanout extended
to grade.
   B.   The oil draw-off or overflow from oil separators shall be connected to
an approved waste oil tank meeting the environmental requirements of the
administrative authority. The waste oil from the separator shall flow by
gravity or may be pumped to a higher elevation by an automatic pump. Pumps
shall be adequately sized, explosion-proof and accessible. Waste oil tanks
shall have a 2" minimum pump out connection and a 1-1/2" minimum vent to
atmosphere and shall be equipped with a high level alarm.
   C.   Where oil separators are subject to backflow from a sewer or other
point of disposal, their discharge line shall include a backwater valve
installed in accordance with the requirements of Section 715.
   D.   Oil interceptors, waste oil tanks, oil pump out connections, backwater
valves, and atmospheric vent piping shall be permanently identified by suitable
labels or markings.
   E.   Combination oil and sand interceptor may be installed if approved by
the administrative authority.
   Subsection 1003.5 is hereby amended to add the following text:
   A.   A sand interceptor shall be provided upstream from each oil
interceptor, except when combination oil and sand interceptor is used.
   B.   When the discharge of a drain may contain solids or semi-solids that
would either be harmful to the drainage system or tend to obstruct the system,
the drain shall discharge through a sand interceptor.
   C.   Sand interceptors shall be constructed of concrete, brick, fabricated
coated steel, or other watertight material and shall be internally baffled to
provide an inlet section for the accumulation of sediment and a separate outlet
section.
   D.   The outlet pipe of the sand interceptor shall be the same size as the
drain served (or inlet pipe to the oil separator). The internal baffle in the
interceptor shall have two tip skimming openings, each the same size as the
outlet pipe and at the same invert elevation as the outlet opening. The
openings in the baffle shall be offset to prevent straight-line flow through
the interceptor from any of its inlets to its outlet.
   E.   The inlet to the interceptor shall be at the same elevation as or
higher than the outlet. The bottom of the inlet section shall be at least 24
inches below the invert of the outlet pipe.
   F.   The bottom of the inlet section shall be at least 2 feet wide and 2
feet long for flow rates up to 20 gallons per minute. The bottom of the inlet
section shall be increased by 1 square foot for each 5 gpm of flow or fraction
thereof over 20 gpm. The area of the bottom of the outlet section shall be not
less than 50" of the area of the bottom of the inlet section.
   G.   The outlet section shall be covered by a solid removable cover. The
inlet section shall be covered by an open grating suitable for the traffic in
the area in which it is located. Covers shall be set flush with the finished
floor.
   Subsection 1003.9 is hereby amended to add the following text:
Vapor venting:
   The atmospheric vents from oil separators and their waste oil tanks shall be
separate from other plumbing system vents and shall be extended to an approved
location at least 12 feet above grade or the surrounding area.
   Section 1201 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   New Section 1201 is hereby added to read as follows:
      Section 1201. Installation of gas appliances and gas piping. All
installations of gas appliances and gas piping shall conform to requirements
contained in the International Fuel Gas Code, 2021, which is incorporated by
reference. For installation of elevated 2 psig gas pressure use guidelines for
copper tubing natural gas systems manual, incorporated by reference.
   Section 1303.6 is hereby deleted in its entirety, and new Section 1303.6 is
hereby added to read as follows:
   Section 1303.6 Estimating gray water discharge. The system shall be sized in
accordance with all applicable requirements of COMAR 26.04.02.
   Section 1303.7 is hereby deleted in its entirety, and new Section 1303.7 is
hereby added to read as follows:
   Section 1303.7 Percolation tests. The permeability of the soil shall be
determined in accordance with all applicable requirements of COMAR 26.04.02.
   Section 1303.8 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   The soil absorption system shall be located with a minimum horizontal
distance between various elements in accordance with all applicable
requirements of COMAR 26.04.02.
   Table 1303.8 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   Section 1303.9 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   New Section 1303.9 is hereby added to read as follows:
   Section 1303.9. Installation. Absorption systems shall be installed in
accordance with all applicable requirements of COMAR 26.04.02.
   Table 1303.9 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   Section 1303.10 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   New Section 1303.10 is hereby added to read as follows:
   Section 1303.10 Distribution piping. Distribution piping shall be installed
in accordance with all applicable requirements of COMAR 26.04.02.
   Chapter 1 of the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code is hereby deleted in its
entirety.
   The following incorporation by reference is hereby added:
COMAR 26.04.02 Sewage Disposal and Certain Water Systems for Homes and Other
Establishments in the Counties of Maryland Where Public Sewage System Is Not
Available.
COMAR 26.04.03 Water Supply and Sewage Systems in the Subdivisions of Land in
Maryland.
   The following requirements for show rooms, offices, shops and trucks is
hereby added:
Subsection 1-14-1(f). Licensing of plumbers. Every person who holds himself or
herself out to the public as a master plumber by advertising, telephone
directory listing, business card, stationary, or any exhibit, shall display in
a conspicuous place at his or her principal place of business and on all
vehicles used for plumbing work by him or her or under his or her direction and
control:
   1)   The name or names of each registered master plumber;
   2)   The words “registered plumber” or “registered plumbers;”
   3)   The Maryland State Certificate Number or Numbers; and
   4)   The Frederick County Certificate Number.
(1959 Code, § 42-1) (Ord. 85-35-367, 9-3-1985; Ord. 86-29-406, 5-27-1986; Ord.
88-30-507, 6-21-1988; Ord. 91-30-030, 11-12-1991; Ord. 94-20-115, 10-18-1994;
Ord. 99-11-238, 7-29-1999; Ord. 02-08-304, 4-4-2002; Ord. 05-33-394, 11-29-
2005; Ord. 08-16-492, 6-17-2008; Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 11-22-588, 9-
29-2011; Ord. 12-12-607, 6-14-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 15-05,
7-7-2015; Bill No. 19-22, 1-21-2020; Bill No. 23-05, 3-21-2023; Bill No. 24-06,
5-21-2024)
§ 1-14-58. WELL SYSTEM INSTALLATION.
   Anything to the contrary notwithstanding in the state plumbing regulations,
a minimum diameter of a 1-inch pipe shall be used for connections from
submersible pumps to a storage tank as part of a well system installation.
(1959 Code, § 42-20.1) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 23-05, 3-21-2023)
§ 1-14-59. CONDEMNED EQUIPMENT.
   The Plumbing Inspector shall condemn any used plumbing material or equipment
which is so worn, damaged, defective or constructed as to constitute a sanitary
or safety hazard and such condemned material or equipment shall not be reused
for plumbing purposes. Where in the opinion of the Plumbing Inspector condemned
material or equipment should be destroyed to prevent its reuse, he may order
such destruction.
(1959 Code, § 42-22) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-14-60 – 1-14-89. RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION (§§ 1-14-90 — 1-14-99)
Section
   
1-14-90   Permits required
   
1-14-90.1   Exempt work
   
1-14-90.2   Refusal
   
1-14-91   Application generally
   
1-14-91.1   Special provisions for homeowners
   
1-14-92   [Reserved]
   
1-14-93   Special provisions for public water and sewer systems
   
1-14-94   Fees
   
1-14-95   Transfer
   
1-14-96   Expiration
   
1-14-97   Suspension or revocation
   
1-14-98   Civil plumbing infractions
   
1-14-99   Penalties
Cross reference:
   Local law relating to permits, see § 2-13-21
Statutory reference:
   Permits, see Md. Ann. Code, Local Government Article §§ 13-915 and 13-916
§ 1-14-90. PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Except as specifically provided in §
1-14-90.1, no person shall perform any plumbing work as defined in the Plumbing
Code adopted in this chapter or install any plumbing appliance which affects or
connects with any water supply, sewage disposal or plumbing system or
appliances connected with any water or sewer system without a permit issued by
the administrative authority.
(1959 Code, §§ 42-9, 42-14; 1981, Chapter 222, § 1; Ord. 91-30-030, 11-12-1991;
1992, Chapter 52, § 1; Ord. 94-20-115, 10-18-1994; Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010;
Ord. 11-05-571, 3-15- 2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-90.1. EXEMPT WORK.
   (A)   The following work shall be exempt from the requirement for a permit:
      (1)   The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe,
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or
vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the
same with new material, such work shall be considered new work which is not
exempt, and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this
chapter.
      (2)   The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes,
valves or fixtures. The replacement of fixtures, including but not limited to
faucets and water closets, provided such repairs or replacements of fixtures do
not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of concealed valves,
pipes or fixtures.
      (3)   The replacement of a dishwasher, garbage disposal, washing machine,
or water closet (toilet) with a like-kind plumbing fixture or appliance in an
owner-occupied residential dwelling unit or associated residential accessory
structure by the owner or by a licensed master plumber. For purposes of this
subsection, a "like-kind plumbing fixture or appliance" shall have the same
mechanical and electrical ratings as the plumbing appliance being replaced.
      (4)   The replacement of an electric water heater with a like-kind
electric water heater by a licensed master plumber in an owner-occupied
residential dwelling unit or associated residential accessory structure. For
purposes of this subsection, a "like-kind electric water heater" shall have the
same mechanical and electrical ratings as the water heater being replaced.
Replacement of gas water heaters is not exempt from the permit requirement.
   (B)   Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the
provisions of this code or any other applicable laws or ordinances.
(Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 11-05-571, 3-15-2011; Ord. 12-12-607, 6-14-
2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-90.2 REFUSAL.
   The administrative authority may refuse to issue new permits to any person
who has not: corrected previous code violations, recognized their
responsibility, and/or agreed to correct such violations within a reasonable
time; or to any person who has not made proper appeal application if there is a
dispute as to whether a violation has occurred.
(Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-91. APPLICATION GENERALLY.
   Application for a permit for plumbing work shall be made on forms prepared
and provided by the Department of Permits and Inspections. All applications
must be accompanied by the appropriate fee computed in accordance with the
schedule of fees set forth in this article. Such applications must be signed by
the master plumber holding a county plumbing license and doing the work. Such
application shall give the location and description of the property and the
description of the proposed plumbing work. If, in the opinion of the Plumbing
Inspector, the description is not adequate to cover the proposed work, 2 sets
of plans in such detail as is necessary must be submitted to the Plumbing
Inspector when application is made. All plans shall be in accordance with the
Plumbing Code.
(1959 Code, § 42-11) (Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-91.1. SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR HOMEOWNERS.
   If the plumbing permit is for work to be done by the property owner himself,
such permit shall not be issued unless such property owner signs a homeowner's
affidavit stating that the owner occupies or will immediately occupy the house
himself. The licensing provisions of §
1-14-1 shall not apply to the owner of a residential single family dwelling
wherein the owner resides or is about to reside, who obtains a homeowner's
plumbing permit. To obtain this permit the owner must sign a homeowner's
affidavit on file in the Office of Permits and Inspections, and successfully
pass with a grade of 70% or more an examination, which will consist of 10 code
questions. This examination will be given in the Office of Permits and
Inspections and will be an open book examination but without the assistance of
any other person. This examination will not be allowed to be taken outside of
the Office of Permits and Inspections. The questions for the examination will
be determined by the Chairperson of the Advisory Plumbing Board, the Chief
Plumbing Inspector, and the administrative authority. The owner will be
required to produce a photo identification before being allowed to take the
examination. The owner of a residential dwelling who signs a homeowner's
affidavit for a plumbing permit, after successfully passing an examination,
shall have the permit granted. The owner can do plumbing work except for
natural and propane gas piping. All such private work must be inspected and
meet all requirements of this chapter before it is ready for use or the work
covered or closed.
(1959 Code, § 42-10) (Ord. 94-20-115, 10-18-1994; Ord. 99-11-238, 7-29-1999;
Ord. 01-16-290, 7-12-2001; Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-14-92. [RESERVED.]
§ 1-14-93. SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR PUBLIC WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   All applications for connections to public water and sewer systems
shall give an exact location of the building site, the owner thereof, the
licensed county plumber, the builder, size of the property and the name of the
public authority into which the water and sewer lines will be connected. No
plumbing application will be accepted until proper evidence has been submitted
showing proof that the applicant has paid to the appropriate public authority
having jurisdiction over such water and sewer systems the fees charged by that
public authority.
   (B)   Connections to the county's public water supply must comply with the
cross-connection control requirements found in the Frederick County Water and
Sewer Rules and Regulations, as amended.
(1959 Code, § 42-13) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 23-05, 3-21-2023)
§ 1-14-94. FEES.
   A fee for each plumbing permit, inspection, etc. shall be paid in accordance
with the fee schedule for plumbing permits as adopted by separate resolution of
the county governing body; but in no event shall the fees charged be more than
the costs incurred by the county government.
(1959 Code, § 42-9(a), 42-15) (Ord. 76-12-72, 9-14-1976; Ord. 81-8-198, 3-3-
1981; Ord. 81-40-230, 11-17-1981; Ord. 82-17-261, 8-24-1982; Ord. 85-35-367, 9-
3-1985; Ord. 87-23-455, 8-4-1987; Ord. 91-21-021, 8-8-1991; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-
13-2014)
§ 1-14-95. TRANSFER.
   If the plumber to whom a permit has been issued does not complete the work
for which a permit was issued, upon a written request from the owner of the
premises for which the permit was issued or other person or entity who hired
the plumber to do the work, the permit shall be canceled by the administrative
authority. The administrative authority is hereby authorized to issue another
permit.
(1959 Code, § 42-9(b)) (Ord. 94-20-115, 10-18-1994; Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-96. EXPIRATION.
   All plumbing permits shall expire 1 year from the date issued except where
an extension has been granted by the administrative authority. Any permittee
holding an unexpired permit shall be allowed to apply for an extension. Each
permit may be extended for one year. The fee for an extension shall be the fee
as set by resolution of the county governing body.
(1959 Code, § 42-9) (Ord. 91-30-030, 11-12-1991; Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord.
14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-97. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The administrative authority shall have the authority to suspend or revoke a
permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued
in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or
in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this
code.
(Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-98. CIVIL PLUMBING INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to §
2-2-29 of the Frederick County Code, any violation of any of the provisions of
this entire chapter, which is
Chapter 1-14 entitled "Plumbing," is a civil plumbing infraction. If, after
investigation, a civil plumbing infraction is believed to exist, the Frederick
County administrative authority or authorized agent shall deliver a citation or
warning to the property owner or any others responsible for the civil plumbing
infraction. If the administrative authority or authorized agent is unable to
locate the owner or other responsible party, the administrative authority or
authorized agent may post the citation or warning in a conspicuous place on the
property and mail a copy of same to the owner or other responsible person,
which shall be sufficient for delivery of the warning or citation under this
section.
   (B)   The citation or warning, as provided for in this section, shall be in
writing and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the person charged or warned;
      (2)   The nature of the violation;
      (3)   The location of the violation;
      (4)   The date(s) of the violation;
      (5)   The amount or potential amount of the fine assessed;
      (6)   The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid, or
violation corrected, if applicable;
      (7)   The person's right to stand trial for the violation if applicable;
      (8)   A certification by the administrative authority or authorized agent
attesting to the truth of the matters set forth.
   (C)   Whenever an alleged or possible civil infraction comes to the
attention of the administrative authority, the following procedures shall
apply:
      (1)   The administrative authority or authorized agent will investigate
whether a violation has occurred;
      (2)   If the administrative authority finds that a violation has
occurred, a warning will be issued to the person(s) responsible in the form and
manner as outlined in this section, with reasonable time stated to abate or to
prevent future infractions;
      (3)   If the violation continues or is allowed to occur after the
reasonable time stated, the administrative authority or authorized agent will
issue a citation to the person(s) responsible in the form and manner as
outlined in this section. Notwithstanding the provision of step (2) above, the
administrative authority or authorized agent may issue a citation at step (2)
without the prior issuance of a warning.
   (D)   A fine of $200 shall be imposed upon any person responsible for each
civil plumbing infraction. Each day that a violation exists shall be considered
a separate civil plumbing infraction. All fines shall be payable to the
Treasurer of Frederick County, Maryland, in the Office of the Department of
Permits and Inspections.
   (E)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
civil plumbing infraction by filing with the administrative authority a notice
of intention to stand trial. The notice shall be delivered to the
administrative authority at least 10 days before the due date for payment of
the fines as set forth in the citation. Upon receipt of the notice of intention
to stand trial, the administrative authority or authorized agent shall forward
to the District Court of Frederick County, Maryland, a copy of the citation and
the notice of intention to stand trial. Upon receipt of the citation, the
District Court shall schedule the case for trial and notify the defendant of
the trial date. All fines, penalties, or forfeitures collected by the District
Court for any civil plumbing infraction shall be remitted to the Treasurer of
Frederick County, Maryland.
   (F)   If a person who receives a citation for a civil plumbing infraction
fails to pay the fine by the payment date set forth on the citation and fails
to file a notice of intention to stand trial at least 10 days prior to the
payment date, a formal notice of the civil plumbing infraction shall be sent to
the person's last known address. If the citation is not satisfied within 15
days from the date specified on the notice, the person shall be liable for a
fine of $400 for each civil plumbing infraction. If the citation is not
satisfied within 35 days of the date specified on the formal notice, the
administrative authority may request adjudication of the case through the
District Court by following appropriate civil procedures.
   (G)   Adjudication of a civil plumbing infraction under this subsection is
not a criminal conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities
ordinarily imposed by a criminal conviction.
   (H)   In a proceeding before the District Court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Code, Local Government Article, Title 6. However, the County
Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute all civil plumbing infractions under
this section.
   (I)   If a person is found by the District Court to have committed a civil
plumbing infraction, that person shall be liable for the costs of the
proceedings in the District Court.
   (J)   Depending on the circumstances of each case and after consultation
with the County Attorney, the administrative authority or authorized agent has
the discretionary authority to reduce or suspend all or a portion of the fine
payable through the Permits and Inspections Office.
   (K)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit or prevent the
administrative authority or authorized agent from seeking other legal remedies,
such as injunctions or criminal prosecution.
   (L)   Provisions of this section are in addition to, not in lieu of, those
penalties specified in other sections of this chapter.
   (M)   The fines specified in this section may be modified at any time by
resolution of the county governing body.
(Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-14-99. PENALTIES.
   Any person, whether individually or as a member or employee of a
partnership, or an officer, agent or employee of a corporation, who directs or
knowingly permits any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or
any rule or regulation duly promulgated hereunder, or who aids or assists
therein, either on its own behalf or in the interests of its employer or
principal shall, upon conviction thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction,
be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $100 or by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, for each separate violation.
Every day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and be
punishable as such.
(Ord. 10-15-550, 6-8-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
CHAPTER 1-15: ROADS AND BRIDGES
Editor’s note:
   Ord. No. 97-01-179, adopted Jan. 21, 1997, repealed and re-enacted
Chapter 1-15
ARTICLE I: COUNTY ROADS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY (§§ 1-15-1 — 1-15-19)
Section
   
1-15-1   Acceptance of roads by county
   
1-15-2   Construction in or obstruction of road rights-of-way
   
1-15-3   Permits for construction within road rights-of-way
   
1-15-4   Owners to repair sidewalks and driveways
   
1-15-5   Notice to property owner
   
1-15-6   Erection of traffic-control devices and temporary signs
   
1-15-7   Snow emergencies
   
1-15-8   Penalty for violations of Article I
§ 1-15-1. ACCEPTANCE OF ROADS BY COUNTY.
   The county governing body shall accept into the county road system, roads
which are constructed in compliance with the county’s subdivision regulations
and other applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations upon favorable
recommendation of the Director of the Division of Public Works. Acceptance of a
road by the county includes the roadway and appurtenances such as drainage
facilities, curbs and approved traffic-control devices, but does not include
acceptance of sidewalks, driveways, or other items which may be located within
the right-of- way.
(Ord. 97-01-179, 1-21-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15-2. CONSTRUCTION IN OR OBSTRUCTION OF ROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Except in accordance with a permit issued by the Division of Public
Works, no person shall:
      (1)   Construct, grade, fill, scrape, surface, tear up, dig into or under
or engage in any road work of any nature or description in or on any county
road or right-of- way, or place or erect therein or thereon any obstruction
whatsoever; or
      (2)   Construct, build, or repair any entrance or exit from any property
to any road owned, maintained, or dedicated to public use and accepted by the
county where the property is located in the county or in whole or in part
within the boundaries of a city or town or other municipality and is served by
the county road.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or place any structure,
fence, post or other movable or permanent object of any kind whatsoever in or
on, or obstruct in any other manner, any county road, highway or right-of- way.
This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection and maintenance
within public rights-of-way of mailboxes, temporary fences, name and farm signs
adjacent to properties, as long as these objects do not obstruct the traveled
portions or shoulders of roads, drainage ditches, adversely affect vehicular
movement or traffic safety, and other maintained easements (signs may be
prohibited under zoning or other ordinances).
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to, and no permit
provided for herein shall be required of vehicles of fire or rescue
departments, first-aid services or public utilities whenever these vehicles are
engaged in emergency services, and shall not be deemed to prohibit lawful
parking, loading or unloading, or emergency repair of a vehicle, or parking
while awaiting emergency repair or towing service for a vehicle.
(Ord. 97-01-179, 1-21-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15-3. PERMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION WITHIN ROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The Director of the Frederick County Division of Public Works is
hereby authorized to issue the following permits in accordance with the
applicable ordinances and regulations governing the same:
      (1)   Permits for the grading and construction of roads and sidewalks;
and
      (2)   Permits to tear up, dig into or under, and temporarily obstruct a
public highway or right-of-way, whenever the Director shall find that such
activity is necessary in order to install, repair, locate or replace
underground utilities, pipes or lines, or for similar purposes; and
      (3)   Driveway entrance permits where vehicular driveway entrance or
entrances to off-street parking areas and/or sidewalks are required by the
subdivision, zoning or other regulations of the county after:
         (a)   Plans for such installations to be constructed in the county
right- of-way have been approved by the Division of Public Works; and
         (b)   The Director of the Division of Public Works has set the amount
of the guarantee to ensure the installation of such improvements in accordance
with county standards; and
         (c)   The owner/agent has guaranteed payment of the driveway entrance
improvements by irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement in the name of
the county and approved by the County Executive; and
         (d)   The appropriate application fee per driveway entrance has been
received; and
      (4)   Such other permits as he may be authorized to issue by law or
ordinance or regulations duly adopted.
   (B)   No person who is in receipt of such permit from the Director of Public
Works shall leave unprotected any ditch, excavation, hole or other obstruction
brought about by work being done in furtherance of the privilege granted him by
permit, but shall provide adequate safeguards at all times, including lighting
when necessary.
(Ord. 97-01-179, 1-21-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15-4. OWNERS TO REPAIR SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   After a sidewalk has been improved or constructed within the road right-of-
way, either alone or in combination with a driveway entrance, the owner of land
abutting the street area in which the sidewalk has been constructed shall be
responsible for maintaining such sidewalk and driveway entrance in good repair,
including snow removal. The owner of land abutting the street area in which the
sidewalk has been constructed shall also be responsible for maintaining the
space between the sidewalks and the curbs of the roadway or edge of road
pavement and between the sidewalk and property line. After a driveway has been
constructed, it shall be deemed a part of the sidewalk whether or not there is
a sidewalk improvement extending along the balance of the frontage of the
property for the purposes of repair. Requirements relating to the construction
or reconstruction of the sidewalk as provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to reconstruction of a driveway.
(Ord. 97-01-179, 1-21-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15-5. NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNER.
   Should it be brought to the attention of the Director of the Division of
Public Works that a sidewalk or driveway apron is in such a condition so as to
cause a hazard to public safety or damage to the abutting roadway, the
Director, or his designee, will notify, in writing, the owner (as shown in the
records of the Department of Assessments and Taxation) of the property abutting
the street area in which the sidewalk or driveway entrance has been constructed
of the need to repair the sidewalk or driveway apron. Such notice shall be
mailed by ordinary mail and registered mail, return receipt requested. The
property owner shall make the repairs within the time specified in the notice
from the Director of the Division of Public Works.
(Ord. 97-01-179, 1-21-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15-6. ERECTION OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   (1)   The Director of the Frederick County Division of Public Works is
hereby delegated the authority to cause to be erected traffic-control devices
referred to in Md. Code Ann., Transportation Art. § 25-102, which is hereby
incorporated by reference in this section.
      (2)   Such traffic-control devices may be erected on any roads, streets,
alleys, highways, or rights-of-way under the jurisdiction of the county,
provided that any such traffic-control devices or signals shall conform to the
system set forth in the most recent edition of the “Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices” for streets and highways adopted by the State Highway
Administration. Provided further that the Director of the Division of Public
Works shall file in the office of the Chief Administrative Officer a memorandum
of any action taken pursuant to this section indicating the action and the
location, time, and reason for the action taken.
   (B)   Temporary directional signs may be erected in the county right-of-way,
provided that all of the requirements of the Frederick County Zoning Ordinance
are satisfied.
(Ord. 97-01-179, 1-21-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15-7. SNOW EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   Definition of snow tires. In this section, SNOW TIRES means those
tires that are in a good state of repair and that:
      (1)   Are normally designated by their manufacturer as snow tires;
      (2)   Are approved by the State of Maryland Motor Vehicle Administrator
as meeting the standards of effectiveness required of normally designated snow
tires; or
      (3)   Have anti-skid patterns cut into the treaded surfaces to form bars,
buttons, or blocks specially designed to give effective traction on snow- or
ice-covered highways.
   (B)   Roads declared snow emergency routes. Each and every county road in
the county is hereby declared to be a “snow emergency route” for the purposes
of this section. No further designation is necessary for this purpose, and no
signs are necessary to be posted or placed along the county roads; the normal
promulgation of this section shall be considered sufficient notice.
   (C)   Declaration of snow emergencies. Whenever the Superintendent of the
Maryland State Police or his representative shall declare a snow emergency for
all state highway snow emergency routes in the county, such declaration shall
likewise apply at that time to all the county roads as snow emergency routes;
and the snow emergency shall continue in effect until the Superintendent or his
representative declares it to be no longer necessary. In addition, the
Superintendent of the Maryland State Police or his representative may declare a
snow emergency for all county roads in the county separately from the state
highways as he considers necessary. The snow emergency for the county roads
shall continue in effect until the Superintendent or his representative
declares it to be no longer necessary.
   (D)   Chains or snow tires required on county roads during snow emergencies.
A person may not drive or attempt to drive a motor vehicle, other than a
motorcycle, on any county road for which a snow emergency has been declared and
is in effect unless the vehicle is equipped with chains or snow tires on at
least 1 wheel at each end of a driving axle.
   (E)   Parking prohibited on county roads during snow emergencies. A person
may not park a vehicle on the traveled portion of any county road, paved or
unpaved, for which a snow emergency has been declared and is in effect. The
state police or any authorized local police authority in the county may have
any vehicle parked in violation of this section towed from the road at the
owner’s expense.
   (F)   Penalty for violation. It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate
any of the provisions of this section. Any person convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions of this section is subject to a fine of not more than
$500.
(Ord. 97-01-179, 1-21-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15-8. PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS OF ARTICLE I.
   Any person who violates any provision of Article I of this chapter of this
Code or the provisions of any permit granted hereunder shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by
imprisonment of not more than 30 days in jail, or both, for each violation.
Each day that such violation continues or occurs shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense. In addition, the county may proceed by way of an injunction
in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain compliance with the aforesaid
provisions.
(Ord. 97-01-179, 1-21-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-15-9 – 1-15-19. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: COUNTY PROPERTY (§ 1-15-20)
Section
   
1-15-20   Parking on county property
§ 1-15-20. PARKING ON COUNTY PROPERTY.
   (A)   In the parking area adjacent to Winchester Hall, and on all county
property, parking shall be restricted to those who are authorized by the county
to park thereon. In addition, the Director of the Division of Parks and
Recreation may assign specific parking spaces to be used by particular persons
or Department vehicles. If spaces are so assigned, only those particular
persons or departments may park a motor vehicle in the assigned space. Parking
of a motor vehicle in a space that is assigned to someone or something else
during the time so assigned is hereby declared to be a violation of this
subsection and parking of a motor vehicle in any area that is not marked as a
parking space is a violation of this subsection, except for the necessary
parking to load and unload county supplies or with the approval of the Director
of the Division of Parks and Recreation or his authorized agent under unusual
circumstances.
   (B)   The Director of the Division of Parks and Recreation is authorized to
erect signs giving appropriate notice of this section and the times and days of
applicability.
   (C)   Pursuant to §
2-2-29 of the Frederick County Code, and Md. Code Ann., Transportation Article,
§ 26-301, any violation of any of the provisions of subsection (A) is a civil
infraction and shall be called a civil parking infraction.
   (D)   Whenever a civil parking infraction occurs, the Director of the
Division of Parks and Recreation or his authorized agent will issue a written
citation on a State of Maryland citation form and serve it on the driver of the
illegally parked vehicle if the driver is present or attach the citation to the
front windshield securely by means of the windshield wiper or tape.
   (E)   A fine of $25 is hereby imposed upon any person responsible for a
civil parking infraction. All fines shall be payable to the county, in the
Office of Parks and Recreation Division, which shall remit the same on a weekly
basis to the County Treasurer.
   (F)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
offense by filing with the Director of the Division of Parks and Recreation of
a notice of intention to stand trial. The notice shall be given at least 5 days
before the date of payment of the fine as set forth in the citation. On receipt
of a notice of intention to stand trial, the Director shall forward to the
District Court for Frederick County, Maryland, a copy of the citation and the
notice of intention to stand trial. On receipt of the citation, the district
court shall schedule the case for trial and notify the defendant of the trial
date. All fines, penalties, or forfeitures collected by the district court for
parking infractions shall be remitted to the county, through the County
Treasurer.
   (G)   If a person who receives a citation for an infraction fails to pay the
fine by the date of payment set forth on the citation and fails to file a
notice of intention to stand trial, a formal notice of the infraction shall be
mailed to the owner of the motor vehicle at his or her address. If the citation
is not satisfied within 15 days from the date of the notice, the person is
liable for a fine of $50 for each infraction. If, after 35 days, the citation
is not satisfied, the Director may request adjudication of the case through the
district court. The district court shall schedule the case for trial and summon
the defendant to appear.
   (H)   Adjudication of an infraction under this section is not a criminal
conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities ordinarily imposed
by a criminal conviction.
   (I)   In a proceeding before the district court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Ann. Code, Local Government Article, Title 6. However, the
County Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute parking infractions under
this section.
   (J)   If a person is found by the district court to have committed a civil
parking infraction, he shall be liable for the costs of the proceedings in the
district court.
   (K)   In addition to the issuance of civil parking infraction citations, any
vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of subsection (A) above may be
towed away and impounded. Before any impounded vehicle is released, the towing
and impoundment charge shall be paid by the owner or his agent.
(Ord. 97-01-179, 1-21-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE III: PARKING RESTRICTIONS (§§ 1-15-30 — 1-15-31)
Section
   
1-15-30   Parking restrictions on county roads
   
1-15-31   Parking spaces designated for a plug-in vehicle
§ 1-15-30. PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON COUNTY ROADS.
   (A)   Definitions. As used herein:
      PARK. To halt a vehicle, whether or not it is occupied, other than
temporarily:
         (a)   When necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device;
or
         (b)   For the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading property or passengers.
      RESTRICTED VEHICLE.
         (a)   A motorized vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating, or
gross vehicle weight, of 14,001 pounds or more;
         (b)   A motorized vehicle with attached trailer(s) having a gross
combination weight rating, or gross combination weight, of 14,001 pounds or
more;
         (c)   A trailer having a gross vehicle weight rating, or gross vehicle
weight, of 10,001 pounds or more;
         (d)   Motor homes, recreational vehicles and buses are deemed to be
RESTRICTED VEHICLES;
         (e)   Vehicles owned by a public utility, the county, or by any other
governmental agency and used primarily for carrying property or passengers are
not RESTRICTED VEHICLES.
      TRAILER. A vehicle that:
         (a)   Has no motive power; and
         (b)   Is designed to carry people or property and to be towed by a
motor vehicle.
      VEHICLE. Any device in, on, or by which any individual or property is or
might be transported or towed on a highway, with the exception of an electronic
personal assistive mobility device as defined in Md. Code Ann., Transportation
Article, § 21-101(G-1).
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park a restricted vehicle on a public right-
of-way.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park a trailer that is not properly coupled to
a motor vehicle, which is rated for towing the trailer, on a public right-of-
way.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for more than 48 hours on any
public right-of-way, except when the vehicle is parked:
      (1)   Adjacent to the property lines of the owner's residence or
business; and
      (2)   Where parking is not otherwise prohibited.
   (E)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit any vehicle from
parking on a public right-of-way for a reasonable period of time necessary to
load or unload property or passengers.
   (F)   Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount not exceeding $100 for
each offense. Each day that a violation of this section continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (G)   Any law enforcement agency may tow and impound any vehicle parked in
violation of this section, and the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible
for paying all towing, storage and other fees.
(Ord. 04-17-361, 12-21-2004; Ord. 13-21-649, 10-24-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 23-11, 6-6-2023)
§ 1-15-31. PARKING SPACES DESIGNATED FOR A PLUG-IN VEHICLE.
   (A)   Definitions. As used herein:
      PLUG-IN VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is:
         (a)   1.   Made by a vehicle manufacturer for primary use on a public
street, road, and highway;
            2.   Has a maximum speed capability of at least 55 miles per hour;
and
            3.   Is propelled to a significant extent by an electric motor that
draws electricity from a battery that:
               a.   For a four-wheeled vehicle, has a capacity of at least four
kilowatt-hours;
               b.   For a two-wheeled vehicle or a three-wheeled vehicle, has a
capacity of at least two and one- half kilowatt-hours; and
               c.   Can be recharged from an external source of electricity.
         (b)   Plug-in vehicle includes a vehicle that has been modified from
the original manufacturer's specifications to be compliant with section (A).
      PLUG-IN VEHICLE PARKING SPACE. A parking space designated for the use of
plug-in vehicles with official sign that conforms to the system set forth in
the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" for streets and highways
adopted by the State Highway Administration, as amended from time to time which
provides access to a plug-in vehicle recharging station.
   (B)   A person may not stop, stand, or park a vehicle that is not a plug-in
vehicle in a plug-in vehicle parking space.
   (C)   A person may not stop, stand, or park a plug-in vehicle in a plug-in
vehicle parking space where the charging equipment is not compatible with the
vehicle's charging equipment.
   (D)   A person may only stop, stand, or park a plug-in vehicle in a plug-in
vehicle parking space for the purpose of charging the plug-in vehicle.
   (E)   This section applies only to plug-in vehicle parking spaces on county
roads or county owned property. A violation of this section shall be a Class C
offense as defined in §
1-1-9. Each day that a violation of this section continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Bill No. 21-09, 11-16-2021)
ARTICLE IV: SCHOOL BUS MONITORING CAMERA (§ 1-15-41)
Section
   
1-15-41   School bus monitoring camera authorized
§ 1-15-41. SCHOOL BUS MONITORING CAMERA AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The county governing body authorizes the use of a school bus
monitoring camera.
   (B)   The purpose of this section is to authorize all uses to the full
extent provided in Md. Code Ann., Transportation Article, § 10-706(c)(1).
   (C)   The terms used in this section have the same meaning as the
corresponding terms used or defined in Md. Code Ann., Transportation Article, §
21-706.1.
(Ord. 12-02-597, 2-7-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE V: RUSTIC ROADS COMMISSION (§§ 1-15-51 — 1-15-57)
Section
   
1-15-51   Definitions
   
1-15-52   Establishment, powers
   
1-15-53   Composition
   
1-15-54   Terms, reappointments, vacancies
   
1-15-55   Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary
   
1-15-56   Meetings and quorum
   
1-15-57   Compensation
§ 1-15-51. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings described below.
   CANDIDATE ROADS. A list, created by the Rural and Scenic Roads Advisory
Committee, of predominately tar and chip roads, which are the result of
applying 3 objective criteria to all County roads: speed limits of 35 mph or
less; less than 1,000 trips per day; and not inside growth area planning zones
or rural major subdivisions.
   DESIGNATED RUSTIC ROADS. Refers to those roads that have been approved by
the County Council for inclusion in the Rustic Roads program.
(Bill No. 23-18, 11-7-2023)
§ 1-15-52. ESTABLISHMENT, POWERS.
   (A)   The Frederick County Rustic Roads Program will be the successor to the
Frederick County Rural Roads Program that was created by Resolution No. 02-23,
and approved by the Board of County Commissioners on September 24, 2002.
   (B)   The Rustic Roads Commission will administer the Rustic Roads Program
which was approved by the County Executive on November 29, 2022.
   (C)   The existing Rural Roads Program will be included under the
jurisdiction of the Rustic Roads Commission.
   (D)   Among its powers and duties, the Rustic Roads Commission shall:
      (1)   Adopt bylaws to govern its procedures and activities;
      (2)   Establish a nomination procedure for citizens to propose a road for
inclusion into or removal from the Rustic Roads Program;
      (3)   Identify and oversee the designation of Designated Rustic Roads and
Candidate Roads in Frederick County and submit recommendations to the County
Executive and County Council;
      (4)   Advise the County on the protection of Designated Rustic Roads and
Candidate Roads, to include the review of proposed substantial changes to these
roads;
      (5)   Develop and encourage community efforts and resources for action on
Designated Rustic Roads; and
      (6)   Consult with County staff, the County Executive, and the County
Council as requested relative to specific rustic road preservation issues and
related needs that may arise.
      (7)   Develop advisory standards and practices to be considered to
maintain Designated and Candidate Rustic Roads, promote preservation, maintain
the roads' eligibility, preserve character defining features, and ensure
safety. The advisory standards and practices will also identify actions that
are not considered maintenance, but changes or modifications that may
negatively impact features that contribute to a rustic road's eligibility for
designation.
   (E)   In fulfilling its duties and responsibilities under this Article, the
Rustic Roads Commission may consult and cooperate with federal, state, county,
city, town, or other governmental or public agencies, commissions, and
committees, citizens, community groups, academic institutions, and other
entities on matters relating to rustic roads.
   (F)   The Division of Planning and Permitting will serve as staff to the
Rustic Roads Commission, with a representative of the Division of Public Works
assigned to the Rustic Roads Commission for advisory purposes.
   (G)   When Frederick County receives a petition to open, close, or alter a
designated or candidate Rustic Road, the petition will be submitted to the
Rustic Roads Commission for timely comment. Any comments from the Commission
will be included in the staff report submitted to the County Executive and
County Council.
(Bill No. 23-18, 11-7-2023)
§ 1-15-53. COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Subject to confirmation by the County Council, the County Executive
shall appoint up to 7 members to the Rustic Roads Commission.
   (B)   Members of the Rustic Roads Commission shall have a demonstrable
interest in rustic roads and relevant experience, knowledge, skills, and
training that may include, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Civil engineering;
      (2)   Environmental science;
      (3)   Farming;
      (4)   Landscape architecture;
      (5)   Parks and recreation management;
      (6)   Law; and
      (7)   Historic Preservation.
(Bill No. 23-18, 11-7-2023)
§ 1-15-54. TERMS, REAPPOINTMENTS, VACANCIES.
   (A)   The term of office of each of the members of the Rustic Roads
Commission shall be for a period of 3 years, based on the County's fiscal year,
July 1 to June 30. The terms of the members shall be staggered so that no more
than 3 members are replaced each year. Initial appointments will be for 2
members to serve 1 year terms, 3 members to serve 2 year terms, and 2 members
to serve 3 year terms.
   (B)   Members may be reappointed but may not serve more than 2 full
consecutive 3-year terms.
   (C)   Any member may resign at any time by giving written notice of such
resignation to the County Executive.
   (D)   Vacancies shall be filled on the same basis as the original
appointments for the unexpired terms. Members shall continue in office until
their successors are appointed and qualified.
   (E)   A Rustic Roads Commission member may be removed by the County
Executive for cause.
(Bill No. 23-18, 11-7-2023)
§ 1-15-55. CHAIR, VICE-CHAIR AND SECRETARY.
   (A)   The Chair, Vice Chair, and Secretary will be selected by the members
of the Rustic Roads Commission.
   (B)   The terms of officers shall be one year or until a successor shall be
elected and qualified.
   (C)   The duties and eligibility of officers shall be established by the
Bylaws of the Rustic Roads Commission.
(Bill No. 23-18, 11-7-2023)
§ 1-15-56. MEETINGS AND QUORUM.
   (A)   The Rustic Roads Commission shall meet monthly, or more frequently, as
determined by the Rustic Roads Commission members at a location in Frederick
County that is open to the public and is ADA accessible. If the meeting is all
or partly virtual, then it must be accessible to the public via a toll-free
number so that members of the public can hear the meeting.
   (B)   Meeting notices shall be publicized and minutes will be taken and
approved by a majority of the members attending a meeting. The notices and
minutes will be part of the public record of the Rustic Roads Commission.
   (C)   A majority of the Rustic Roads Commission members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of regular business.
   (D)   Any member of the Rustic Roads Commission who shall fail to attend at
least 50% of the meetings during any period of 12 consecutive months shall be
considered to have resigned, subject to confirmation by the County Council, the
County Executive shall appoint a replacement.
(Bill No. 23-18, 11-7-2023)
§ 1-15-57. COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Rustic Roads Commission shall receive no compensation for
their services.
(Bill No. 23-18, 11-7-2023)
CHAPTER 1-15.1: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Former Chapter 1-15.1, entitled “Safety Board,” has been repealed by
adopting ordinance 04-04-348, 4-20-2004.
CHAPTER 1-15.2: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Editor’s note:
   Section 1 of Ord. 10-09-544, adopted May 20, 2010, repealed Chapter 1-15.2
in its entirety and enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out.
Section 1 of Ord. 01-10-284, adopted June 5, 2001, had previously repealed
Chapter 1-15.2 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions. Former Chapter
1-15.2 derived from Ord. 90-18-616, adopted May 15, 1990; Ord. 91-11-011,
adopted May 7, 1991; and Ord. 98-04-206, adopted April 7,1998.
ARTICLE I: GENERAL (§ 1-15.2-1.0)
Section
   
1-15.2-1.0   Purpose and authority
Cross references:
   Buildings, see
Chapter 1-6,
Chapter 2-4;
   Grading and sediment control, see
Chapter 1-10;
   Planning and development, see
Chapter 1-13;
   Subdivision rules and regulations, see
Chapter 1-16;
   Water, sewers and drains, see
Chapter 2-13;
   Water, sewers and sewage disposal, see
Chapter 1-18;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 1-19
Statutory reference:
   Storm water management, see Md. Code Ann., Environment Art., §§ 4-201 et
seq.
§ 1-15.2-1.0. PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain, and enhance the
public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements
and procedures that control the adverse impacts associated with increased
stormwater runoff. The goal is to manage stormwater by using environmental site
design (ESD) to the maximum extent practicable (MEP) to maintain after
development as nearly as possible, the predevelopment runoff characteristics,
and to reduce stream channel erosion, pollution, siltation and sedimentation,
and local flooding, and to use appropriate structural best management practices
(BMPs) only when necessary. This will restore, enhance, and maintain the
chemical, physical, and biological integrity of streams, minimize damage to
public and private property, and reduce the impacts of land development.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter, pursuant to the Md. Code Ann.,
Environment Article, Title 4, Subtitle 2, 2009 replacement volume, are adopted
by the county and shall apply to all development occurring within the
unincorporated areas of Frederick County and may apply to the incorporated
areas within the geographical limits of Frederick County, if the municipal
government adopts these regulations and enters into an enforcement agreement
with the county. The application of this chapter and provisions expressed
herein shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statute. The
Frederick County Community Development Division (the "Division") shall be
responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE II: DEFINITIONS (§ 1-15.2-2.0)
Section
   
1-15.2-2.0   Definitions
§ 1-15.2-2.0. DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions are provided for the terms used in this chapter:
   100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN. That area defined by an elevation established from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maps or a state- approved hydrologic
and hydraulic study that would be inundated by water runoff from a storm
equivalent to the heaviest rainfall in a 100-year period.
   ADMINISTRATION. The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) Water
Management Administration (WMA).
   ADVERSE IMPACT. Any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands, including
their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics or
usefulness for human or natural uses which are or may potentially be harmful or
injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, to biological
productivity, diversity, or stability or which unreasonably interfere with the
enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Those methods and procedures used in
the cultivation of land in order to further crop and livestock production and
conservation of related soil and water resources.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, or governmental agency that is authorized to
and executes the necessary forms to procure approval of a development or a
permit to carry out construction of a development.
   APPROVING AGENCY. The entity responsible for the review and approval of
plans submitted for stormwater management.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). A structural device or nonstructural
practice designed to temporarily store or treat stormwater runoff in order to
mitigate flooding, reduce pollution directly or indirectly to stormwater,
receiving waters, and stormwater conveyance systems, and provide other
amenities.
   CHANNEL PROTECTION STORAGE VOLUME (CPV). The volume used to design
structural management practices to control stream channel erosion. Methods for
calculating the channel protection storage volume are specified in the 2000
Maryland Stormwater Design Manual.
   CONCEPT PLAN or SWM CONCEPT PLAN. A plan that is typically the first of
three required stormwater-related plan approvals and includes the information
necessary to allow an initial evaluation of a proposed development.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY COUNCIL. County Council of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY EXECUTIVE. County Executive of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY GOVERNING BODY. County Council and County Executive of Frederick
County, Maryland.
   DESIGN MANUAL. The 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, and all
subsequent revisions, that serves as the official guide for stormwater
management principles, methods, and practices.
   DEVELOP LAND or DEVELOPMENT. To change the runoff characteristics of a
parcel of land in conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional or other construction or alteration, and includes redevelopment,
infill, paving of existing gravel and new impervious areas.
   DEVELOPER. A person, firm, or governmental agency undertaking or proposing
the construction of a structure, a development consisting of interrelated
structures or other construction, and who has primary financial responsibility
for the proposal.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Community Development Division or his or her
designee.
   DISTURB or DISTURBANCE. For the purposes of this chapter, to develop land.
See the definition of "develop land" above.
   DIVISION. The Frederick County Community Development Division.
   DRAINAGE AREA. That area contributing runoff to a single point measured in a
horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridge line.
   EASEMENT. A written grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of
such land by others for a specific purpose or purposes which is recorded in the
land records. The benefits and burdens of an easement transfer with the land to
subsequent owners.
   ENGINEER. Any professional engineer duly registered by the State of Maryland
to practice professional engineering under the requirements of Business
Occupations and Professions, Md. Ann. Code, Title 14.
   ENVIRONMENTAL SITE DESIGN (ESD). Using small-scale stormwater management
practices, nonstructural techniques, and better site planning to mimic natural
hydrologic runoff characteristics and minimize the impact of land development
on water resources. Methods for designing ESD practices are specified in the
Design Manual.
   EROSION. The process by which the ground surface is worn away by the action
of wind and/or water.
   EXEMPTION. Those land development activities that are not subject to the
stormwater management requirements contained in this chapter.
   EXTENDED DETENTION. A stormwater design feature that provides gradual
release of a volume of water in order to increase settling of pollutants and
protect downstream channels from frequent storm events. Methods for designing
extended detention BMPs are specified in the Design Manual.
   EXTREME FLOOD VOLUME (Qf). The storage volume required to control those
infrequent but large storm events in which overbank flows reach or exceed the
boundaries of the 100-year floodplain.
   FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT. A final plat submitted in accordance with
Chapter 1-16 of the Frederick County Code.
   FINAL SWM PLAN. The last of three required plan approvals that includes
drawings and other documents submitted by a registered professional pertaining
to construction of stormwater management systems and facilities. The final SWM
plan contains all of the information and specifications necessary to allow all
SWM approvals and permits to be issued by the approving agency.
   GRADING. Any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled, excavated,
scarified, filled, or any combination thereof.
   GRADING PERMIT. Any permit validly issued by the Division for Erosion and
Sediment Control, Stormwater Management or Public Improvements.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Has the following meanings:
      (1)   A drain or conveyance, either on the surface or subsurface, and
whether located on public or private property, which allows a discharge that is
prohibited under §
1-15.2-12.1 of this article, to enter or to be capable of imminent discharge to
a municipal separate storm sewer system, regardless of whether the drain or
conveyance had been previously allowed by the county; or
      (2)   A drain or conveyance, whether located on public or private
property, which is connected to a municipal separate storm sewer system and
which has not been documented in a plan, map, or equivalent record and approved
by the county.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to an MS4 that is not composed entirely of
stormwater, except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES
permit for discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer system) and
discharges resulting from firefighting activities. Discharges identified in §
1-15.2-12.1(B)(1) are generally not illicit discharges unless the Manager
(defined below) determines that these discharges are not properly managed.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA. Any surface that does not allow stormwater to infiltrate
into the ground at a rate at least the same as "woods in good condition" (as
defined in the Design Manual).
   IMPROVEMENT PLANS. A plan which contains all of the information,
computations and specifications necessary to construct roads, storm drain,
water lines, sanitary sewer and all other appurtenances.
   INFILL DEVELOPMENT. Development of a parcel of land, less than 1 acre in
size, which is completely surrounded by property which was developed more than
5 years ago.
   INFILTRATION. The passage or movement of water into the soil surface.
   LAND RECORDS. The land records of Frederick County, Maryland.
   LAND SURVEYOR. A professional land surveyor duly registered by the State of
Maryland to practice land surveying in accordance with the provisions of Md.
Code Ann., Business Occupations and Professions, Title 15.
   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A person, partnership, or corporation that is licensed
in accordance with the provisions of Md. Code Ann., Business Occupations and
Professions, Title 9.
   MANAGER. The Manager of Frederick County Office of Sustainability and
Environmental Resources or their authorized designee.
   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP). Designing stormwater management systems so
that all reasonable opportunities for using ESD planning techniques and
treatment practices are exhausted and only where absolutely necessary, a
structural BMP is implemented.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) owned or
operated by, among other public entities, a county that has jurisdiction over
sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, that discharge to
surface waters and that are designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater. See 40 CFR 122.26(b)(8). Combined sewers and systems associated
with a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW), as defined at 40 CFR 122.2, are
not included as a part of the municipal separate storm sewer system.
   MXD PHASE II PLAN. A plan submitted in accordance with §
1-19-10.500(H)(2) of the Frederick County Zoning Ordinance (prior to November
20, 2010).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT.  A permit issued by the Environmental Protection Agency or by a state
acting under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States from a
point source, whether the permit is applicable to an individual or group.
   OFF-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. The design and construction of a facility
necessary to control stormwater from more than one development.
   ON-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. The design and construction of systems
necessary to control stormwater within an immediate development.
   OVERBANK FLOOD PROTECTION VOLUME (QP). The volume controlled by structural
BMPs to prevent an increase in the frequency of out-of-bank flooding generated
by development. Methods for calculating the overbank flood protection volume
are specified in the Design Manual.
   PERSON. The federal government, the state, any county, municipal
corporation, or other political subdivision of the state, or any of their
units, or an individual receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator,
fiduciary, or representative of any kind, or any partnership, firm,
association, public or private corporation, an individual, or any other entity.
   PLANNING TECHNIQUES. A combination of strategies employed early in
development design to reduce the impact from development and to incorporate
natural features into a final SWM plan.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)), heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
   PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT. A preliminary plat submitted in accordance
with
Chapter 1-16 of the Frederick County Code.
   PREMISES OR PROPERTY. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the
structures on it.
   PROHIBITED MATERIAL. Material or objects which are imminently capable of
creating interference with an MS4 or becoming an illicit discharge, such as,
but not limited to, trash, litter, floatables, stockpiles used for
construction, pet waste, containers of pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers,
cut grass clippings from landscaping activities, or hazardous substances as
defined in 40 CFR 122.
   PUD PHASE II PLAN. A plan submitted in accordance with the Frederick County
Zoning Ordinance (prior to November 20, 2010).
   RECHARGE VOLUME (REV). That portion of the water quality volume used to
maintain groundwater recharge rates at development sites. Methods for
calculating the recharge volume are specified in the Design Manual.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Any construction, alteration, or improvement performed on
sites where existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional, or
multifamily residential and existing site impervious area exceeds 40 percent.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL. An engineer, surveyor or landscape architect who is
licensed by the State of Maryland to practice his or her profession and holds
the appropriate license to submit the information and plans required under this
chapter.
   SECURITY. An escrow account or an irrevocable letter of credit or similar
agreement from a lending institution or any recognized lender satisfactory to
the Office of the County Attorney that guarantees payment for the installation
of the required storm drain, stormwater management facility and appurtenances.
   SEDIMENT. Soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited by the
action of wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.
   SITE. All or any portion of any tract, lot, or parcel of land, or
combination of tracts, lots, parcels of land that are in one ownership, or are
contiguous and in diverse ownership, where development is to be performed as
part of a unit, subdivision, or development.
   SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT (SCD). A political subdivision of the State of
Maryland, defined under Md. Code Ann., Agriculture, Title 8, and by specific
geographic boundaries.
   STABILIZATION. The prevention of soil movement by any of various vegetative
and/or structural means.
   STORMWATER. Water that originates from a precipitation event, including but
not limited to stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage. See 40 CFR 122.26(b)(13).
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. Natural areas, ESD practices, stormwater
management measures, and any other structure through which stormwater flows,
infiltrates, or discharges from a site.
   SWM CONCEPT PLAN or CONCEPT PLAN. A plan that is typically the first of
three required stormwater-related plan approvals and includes the information
necessary to allow an initial evaluation of a proposed development.
   SWM DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Has the same meaning as the term "site development
plan" in the Design Manual and is typically the second of three required plan
approvals that includes the information necessary to allow a detailed
evaluation of a proposed development.
   VARIANCE. The modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements
for specific circumstances where strict adherence to the requirements would
result in unnecessary hardship and would not fulfill the intent of this
chapter.
   WAIVER. A determination to reduce the stormwater management requirements for
a specific development based on a case-by-case review.
   WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQV). The volume needed to capture and treat 90
percent of the average annual rainfall events at a development site. Methods
for calculating the water quality volume are specified in the Design Manual.
   WATERSHED. The total drainage area contributing runoff to a single point.
   WATERSHED MANAGEMENT PLAN. An MDE-approved plan for a county or local
municipality.
   WETLANDS.
      (1)   An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal conditions
does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
      (2)   An area considered a nontidal wetland in accordance with the
publication known as the "Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands," published in 1987 and as may be amended and
interpreted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
   ZONING SITE PLAN. A site development plan submitted under §
1-19-3.300.3 of the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 19 of the Frederick County Code).
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 19-14, 11-5-
2019)
ARTICLE III: APPLICABILITY (§§ 1-15.2-3.1 — 1-15.2-3.6)
Section
   
1-15.2-3.1   Scope
   
1-15.2-3.2   Exemptions
   
1-15.2-3.3   Waivers/watershed management plans
   
1-15.2-3.4   Redevelopment
   
1-15.2-3.5   Variance
   
1-15.2-3.6   Fees
§ 1-15.2-3.1. SCOPE.
   Unless exempt under §
1-15.2-3.2 of this chapter, no person shall develop any land without providing
stormwater management (SWM) measures that control or manage runoff from such
developments. All stormwater management measures must be in compliance with the
Design Manual and constructed in accordance with the approved final SWM plan
for the development or the policies stated in §
1-15.2-3.4 of this chapter for redevelopment.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-3.2. EXEMPTIONS.
   The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter and the requirements of providing stormwater management:
   (A)   Agricultural land management practices (upon written verification from
the SCD);
   (B)   Any developments that do not disturb more than a total of 5,000 square
feet of land area; and
   (C)   Land development activities that the administration determines will be
regulated by the administration.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-3.3. WAIVERS/WATERSHED MANAGEMENT PLANS.
   (A)   General requirements. Except as provided in §§
1-15.2-3.3(B) and
1-15.2-3.3(D), waivers may be granted only if:
      (1)   The applicant has demonstrated that ESD has been implemented to the
MEP;
      (2)   The cumulative effects of waivers previously granted have been
considered; and
      (3)   The development will not adversely impact stream quality.
   (B)   Quantitative waivers. Except as provided in §
1-15.2-3.3(D), quantitative waivers may be granted for projects:
      (1)   For developments within areas where watershed management plans have
been developed and implemented under §
1-15.2-3.3(F) and (G) of this chapter; or
      (2)   That are in-fill development located in a priority funding area
where the economic feasibility of the project is tied to the planned density,
and where implementation of the 2009 regulatory requirements would result in a
loss of the planned development density provided that:
         (a)   Stormwater conveyance systems and public water and sewer exist;
         (b)   The quantitative waiver is applied to the project for the
impervious cover that previously existed on the site only;
         (c)   ESD to the MEP is used to meet the full water quality treatment
requirements for the entire development; and
         (d)   ESD to the MEP is used to provide full quantity control for all
new impervious surfaces; or
      (3)    When the approving agency determines that circumstances exist that
prevent the reasonable implementation of quantity control practices.
   (C)    Qualitative waivers. Except as provided in §
1-15.2-3.3(D), stormwater management qualitative control waivers may be granted
only when ESD has been implemented to the MEP, and in the following
circumstances:
      (1)   Infill developments where it has been demonstrated that other BMPs
are not feasible; or
      (2)   Redevelopment if the requirements of §
1-15.2-3.4 of this chapter are satisfied; or
      (3)   Underground utilities projects where ESD has been implemented to
the MEP and the development will return the work area to predeveloped
hydrologic conditions (existing drainage patterns will not be changed and there
is no redevelopment and no increase in impervious area), or
      (4)   In areas of karst terrain, management of recharge volume (REV)
shall not be required. The presence of karst terrain shall be confirmed by a
geotechnical report prepared by a geotechnical engineer, and shall be provided
as part of the written request for waiver.
   (D)   Stormwater management quantitative and qualitative control waivers may
be granted for phased development projects if a system designed to meet the
applicable 2000 regulatory requirements and the Frederick County requirements
for phased projects has been constructed by May 4, 2010. If the current
regulatory requirements under this chapter cannot be met for future phases
constructed after May 4, 2010, all reasonable efforts to incorporate ESD in
future phases must be demonstrated.
   (E)   Waiver requests. Written waiver applications shall be submitted along
with sufficient descriptions, drawings, and other information necessary to
demonstrate that ESD has been implemented to the MEP. A separate written waiver
request shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of this section
for each eligible drainage area where runoff leaves the development site, and
for subsequent additions, extensions, or modifications to a development that
has received a waiver.
   (F)    Waivers granted. The applicant shall be provided with a written
decision on the waiver request.
   (G)   If the county has established an overall watershed management plan for
a specific watershed and this watershed management plan has been approved by
the administration, then the Division may develop quantitative waiver and
redevelopment provisions that differ from §§
1-15.2-3.3(B) and
1-15.2-3.4 of this chapter.
   (H)   A watershed management plan developed for the purpose of implementing
different stormwater management policies for waivers and redevelopment shall:
      (1)   Include detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses to determine
hydrograph timing;
      (2)   Evaluate both quantity and quality management and opportunities for
ESD implementation;
      (3)   Include a cumulative impact assessment of current and proposed
watershed development;
      (4)   Identify existing flooding and receiving stream channel conditions;
      (5)   Be conducted at a reasonable scale;
      (6)   Specify where on-site or off-site quantitative and qualitative
stormwater management practices are to be implemented;
      (7)   Be consistent with the general performance standards for stormwater
management in Maryland found in the Design Manual;
      (8)   Include any other conditions, not specifically addressed herein but
considered necessary by the Director or assignees, to fully evaluate the study
area; and
      (9)   Be approved by the administration.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-3.4. REDEVELOPMENT.
   Stormwater management plans are required for all redevelopment. Stormwater
management measures must be consistent with the Design Manual.
   (A)   All redevelopment shall:
      (1)   Reduce impervious area within the limit of disturbance (LOD) by at
least 50 percent according to the Design Manual; or
      (2)    Implement ESD to the MEP to provide water quality treatment for at
least 50 percent of the existing impervious area within the LOD; or
      (3)    Use a combination of subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) above for at
least 50 percent of the existing impervious area within the LOD; and
      (4)   Provide stormwater management for 100% of any net increase in
impervious area.
   (B)   The following structural BMPs may be used to meet the requirements in
subsection (a) above provided that the applicant demonstrates that impervious
area reduction has been maximized and ESD has been implemented to the MEP:
      (1)   On-site structural BMP; or
      (2)   Off-site structural BMP to provide water quality treatment for an
area equal to or greater than 50 percent of the existing untreated impervious
area.
   (C)   The Division may develop separate policies for providing water quality
treatment for redevelopment in the event the requirements of this section
cannot be met. Any separate redevelopment policy shall be reviewed and approved
by the administration and may include, but not be limited to:
      (1)    A combination of ESD and an on-site or off-site structural BMP;
      (2)   Retrofitting including existing BMP upgrades, filtering practices,
and off-site ESD implementation;
      (3)    Participation in a stream restoration project;
      (4)   Pollution trading with another entity;
      (5)    Payment of a fee-in-lieu; or
      (6)    A partial waiver of the treatment requirements if ESD is not
practicable.
   (D)   The determination of what alternatives will be available may be made
by the Division at the appropriate point in the development review process. The
Division shall consider the prioritization of alternatives in §
1-15.2-3.4(C) of this chapter after it has been determined that it is not
practicable to meet the current requirements using ESD. In deciding what
alternatives may be required, the Division may consider factors including, but
not limited to:
      (1)   Whether the project is in an area targeted for development
incentives such as a priority funding area, a designated transit oriented
development area, or a designated base realignment and closure revitalization
and incentive zone;
      (2)   Whether the project is necessary to accommodate growth consistent
with comprehensive plans; or
      (3)    Whether bonding and financing have already been secured based on
an approved development plan.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-3.5. VARIANCE.
   The Division may grant a written variance from any requirement of Article
IV, Stormwater Management Criteria, if there are exceptional circumstances
applicable to the site such that strict adherence will result in unnecessary
hardship and will not fulfill the intent of this chapter. A written request for
variance shall be provided to the Division and shall state the specific
variances sought and reasons for their granting. The Division shall not grant a
variance unless and until sufficient justification is provided by the developer
that the implementation of ESD to the MEP has been met.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-3.6. FEES.
   Fees charged for review and approval of stormwater management plans, waiver
and variance requests, permits, inspections and extensions shall be
established, revised or amended by resolution of the county governing body.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE IV: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CRITERIA (§§ 1-15.2-4.1 — 1-15.2-4.2)
Section
   
1-15.2-4.1   General requirements
   
1-15.2-4.2   Stormwater management techniques and practices
§ 1-15.2-4.1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The general requirements established in this section and the Design Manual
are as follows:
   (A)   The planning techniques, nonstructural practices, and design methods
contained in the Design Manual shall be used to implement ESD to the MEP.
Stormwater management plans shall be developed using ESD sizing criteria,
recharge volume, water quality volume, and channel protection storage volume
criteria from the Design Manual.
   (B)   The use of ESD planning techniques and treatment practices must be
exhausted before any structural BMP is implemented. The MEP standard is met
when channel stability is maintained, predeveloped groundwater recharge is
replicated, nonpoint source pollution is minimized, and structural stormwater
management practices are used only if determined to be absolutely necessary.
   (C)   Development shall comply with flood management plans as approved by
the administration in accordance with the Flood Hazard Management Act of 1976
(Md. Code Ann., Environment Article, Title 5, Subtitle 8). Carroll Creek and
its tributaries are designated as an interjurisdictional flood hazard
watershed.
   (D)   The 10-year frequency storm event (QP) and the 100-year frequency
storm event (Qf) must be analyzed by the applicant.
   (E)   Stormwater management and development plans where applicable, shall be
consistent with adopted and approved watershed management plans or flood
management plans as approved by the Maryland Department of the Environment
(MDE) in accordance with the Flood Hazard Management Act of 1976.
   (F)   Alternate minimum control requirements may be adopted subject to
administration approval. The administration shall require a demonstration that
alternative requirements will implement ESD to the MEP and control flood
damages, accelerated stream erosion, water quality, and sedimentation.
Comprehensive watershed studies may also be required.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-4.2. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES AND PRACTICES.
   The ESD planning techniques and practices and structural BMPs as established
herein shall be used to develop stormwater management plans. A developer shall
demonstrate that ESD has been implemented to the MEP before the use of a
structural BMP is considered in developing the stormwater management plan.
   (A)   ESD planning techniques and practices.
      (1)   The following ESD planning techniques shall be applied according to
the Design Manual (or as otherwise approved by the administration) to satisfy
the applicable general requirements established in this chapter, and shall not
conflict with existing state law or local ordinances, regulations, or policies:
         (a)   Preserving and protecting natural resources;
         (b)   Conserving natural drainage patterns;
         (c)   Minimizing impervious area;
         (d)   Reducing runoff volume;
         (e)   Using ESD practices to maintain 100 percent of the annual
predevelopment groundwater recharge volume;
         (f)   Using green roofs, permeable pavement, reinforced turf, and
other alternative surfaces;
         (g)   Limiting soil disturbance, mass grading, and compaction;
         (h)   Clustering development; and
         (i)   Any practices approved by the administration.
      (2)   The following ESD treatment practices shall be designed according
to the Design Manual (or as otherwise approved by the administration) to
satisfy the applicable general requirements established in this chapter, and
shall not conflict with existing state law or local ordinances, regulations, or
policies:
         (a)   Disconnection of rooftop runoff;
         (b)   Disconnection of non-rooftop runoff;
         (c)   Sheetflow to conservation areas;
         (d)   Rainwater harvesting;
         (e)   Submerged gravel wetlands;
         (f)   Landscape infiltration;
         (g)   Infiltration berms;
         (h)   Dry wells;
         (i)   Micro-bioretention;
         (j)   Rain gardens;
         (k)   Swales;
         (l)   Enhanced filters; and
         (m)   Any practices approved by the administration.
   (B)   Structural BMPs.
      (1)   Structural BMPs shall be designed in accordance with the Design
Manual (or as otherwise approved by the administration) to satisfy the
applicable general requirements established in this chapter:
         (a)   Stormwater management ponds;
         (b)   Stormwater management wetlands;
         (c)   Stormwater management infiltration;
         (d)   Stormwater management filtering systems; and
         (e)   Stormwater management open channel systems.
      (2)   The performance criteria specified in the Design Manual related to
general feasibility, conveyance, pretreatment, treatment and geometry,
environment and landscaping, and maintenance shall be considered when selecting
structural stormwater management practices. Structural stormwater management
practices shall be selected to accommodate the unique hydrologic or geologic
features of Frederick County.
   (C)   Alternative ESD planning techniques and practices and structural BMPs.
Alternative ESD planning techniques and practices and structural BMPs may be
used if they meet the performance criteria established in the Design Manual and
are approved by the administration. Practices used for redevelopment projects
shall be approved by the Division.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE V: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS (§§ 1-15.2-5.1 — 1-15.2-5.2)
Section
   
1-15.2-5.1   Stormwater management plans
   
1-15.2-5.2   Contents and submission of stormwater management plans
§ 1-15.2-5.1. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS.
   (A)   Prior to any subdivision or development activity, the developer shall
submit SWM plans for review and approval. Plan review shall be a three-step
process, including:
      (1)   A SWM concept plan;
      (2)   A SWM development plan; and
      (3)   A final SWM plan, including a final erosion and sediment control
plan.
   (B)    Combined plan applications.
      (1)   The Director may allow certain project types with minor impacts,
including but not limited to those listed below in subsection (B)(2), to submit
combined plan applications, provided that:
         (a)   Compliance with ESD to the MEP standard is demonstrated;
         (b)   All of the information required for each plan review phase is
included.
      (2)   Project types that may be considered for combined plan applications
include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Plat applications proposing no more than 5 lots, a common
driveway, road layback, frontage improvements, utility work, or entrance/road
widening improvements;
         (b)   Bridge repair and rehabilitation projects;
         (c)   Road widening and repair projects;
         (d)   Minor building additions disturbing less than 1 acre of total
area;
         (e)   Utility projects which do not propose any additional impervious
area;
         (f)    Certain redevelopment projects where the SWM concept plan
requirement to identify natural resources could be combined with the SWM
development plan requirements;
         (g)   Residential projects consisting of 1 lot and disturbing less
than 1 acre of total area; and
         (h)   Projects designated as fast track projects, based on criteria
approved by the county.
   (C)    Approval of a SWM concept plan, a SWM development plan, or a final
SWM plan under this chapter shall not relieve the developer from the obligation
to comply with all other applicable requirements for development.
   (D)   Plans and designs for stormwater management shall be prepared, signed
and sealed by a registered professional.
   (E)   If a stormwater BMP requires either a dam safety permit from MDE or
small pond approval from the local SCD, the Division shall require that the
design be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 11-04-570, 3-1-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-15.2-5.2. CONTENTS AND SUBMISSION OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS.
   (A)   SWM concept plan. The SWM concept plan shall be prepared prior to the
submittal of a subdivision plan, zoning site plan, MXD Phase II plan, or PUD
Phase II plan. The SWM concept plan may be submitted prior to or concurrently
with a subdivision, zoning site plan, MXD Phase II plan, or PUD Phase II plan.
The SWM concept plan shall contain sufficient information for an initial
assessment of the proposed development and whether stormwater management can be
provided in accordance with this chapter and the Design Manual. Plans submitted
for SWM concept plan approval shall include:
      (1)   A map at a scale not smaller than 1" = 100 feet showing site
location, existing natural features, water and other sensitive resources,
topography, and natural drainage patterns;
      (2)   The anticipated location of all proposed impervious areas,
buildings, roadways, parking, sidewalks, utilities, and other site
improvements;
      (3)   The location of the proposed limit of disturbance, erodible soils,
steep slopes, and areas to be protected during construction;
      (4)   Preliminary estimates of stormwater management requirements, the
selection and location of ESD practices to be used, and the location of all
points of discharge from the site;
      (5)   A narrative that supports the concept design and describes how ESD
will be implemented to the MEP; and
      (6)   Any other information requested by the Division.
   (B)   SWM development plan. After the SWM concept plan has been approved,
the developer shall submit a SWM development plan consistent with the approved
SWM concept plan and all conditions of approval, and any written waiver or
variance request. The SWM development plan may be submitted concurrently with
or after the submission of a zoning site plan or preliminary subdivision plan
application, or MXD Phase II plan or PUD Phase II plan. SWM development plans
shall include:
      (1)   All details developed during the SWM concept plan review phase;
      (2)   Final site layout, impervious area locations and acreages, proposed
topography, delineated drainage areas at all points of discharge from the site,
proposed hydrologic analysis for runoff rates, storage volumes, and discharge
velocities, individual ESD locations and sizing computations for ESD practices,
locations and sizing computations for structural BMPs, and discharge
calculations demonstrating safe conveyance off-site;
      (3)   Adequate information to determine the level of control required for
the 10-year and 100-year frequency storm events;
      (4)   For waiver or variance requests under this chapter, the developer
shall submit an analysis of the cumulative impacts of stormwater flows
downstream in the watershed. The analysis shall include hydrologic and
hydraulic calculations necessary to determine the impact of hydrograph timing
modifications of the proposed development upon a dam, highway, structure, or
natural point of restricted streamflow. The point of investigation is to be
established with the concurrence of the Division, downstream of the first
downstream tributary whose drainage area equals or exceeds the contributing
area to the development or stormwater management facility.
      (5)   A proposed erosion and sediment control plan that contains the
construction sequence, any phasing necessary to limit earth disturbances and
impacts to natural resources, and an overlay plan showing the types and
locations of ESD and erosion and sediment control practices to be used;
      (6)   A narrative that supports the SWM development design, describes how
ESD will be used to meet the minimum control requirements, and justifies any
proposed structural BMP; and
      (7)   Any other information required by the Division.
   (C)   Final SWM plans. After the SWM development plan has been approved, the
developer shall submit final erosion and sediment control plans (in accordance
with COMAR 26.17.01.05.) and final SWM plans that are consistent with the
approved SWM development plan and all conditions of approval. Final SWM plans
shall be submitted as a part of the improvement plans for the subdivision or
development.
      (1)   Final SWM plans shall include:
         (a)   A vicinity map, at a scale not to exceed 1" = 2000';
         (b)   Existing and proposed topography (including source and date) and
proposed drainage areas, including areas necessary to determine downstream
analysis for safe conveyance and proposed stormwater management facilities;
         (c)   Any proposed improvements including location of buildings or
other structures, impervious surfaces, storm drainage facilities, and all
grading;
         (d)   The location of existing and proposed structures and utilities;
         (e)   All existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way, including
recording references where applicable;
         (f)   The delineation, if applicable, of the 100-year floodplain and
any on-site wetlands;
         (g)   Structural and construction details including representative
cross sections for all components of the proposed drainage system or systems,
and stormwater management facilities;
         (h)   All necessary construction specifications;
         (i)   A sequence of construction;
         (j)   Data for total site area, disturbed area, new impervious area,
and total impervious area;
         (k)   A table showing the ESD and unified sizing criteria volumes
required in the Design Manual;
         (l)   A table of materials to be used for stormwater management
facility construction;
         (m)   All soil boring logs and locations;
         (n)   An inspection and maintenance schedule;
         (o)   Certification by the developer that all stormwater management
construction will be done according to this plan;
         (p)   An as-built certification signature block to be executed after
development completion; and
         (q)   Any other information requested by the Division.
      (2)   The final SWM plan shall also include a report that includes:
         (a)   Geotechnical investigations including soil maps, borings, site
specific recommendations, and any additional information necessary for the
final stormwater management design;
         (b)   Drainage area maps depicting predevelopment and post development
runoff flow path segmentation and land use;
         (c)   Hydrologic computations of the applicable ESD and unified sizing
criteria according to the Design Manual for all points of discharge from the
site;
         (d)   Hydraulic and structural computations for all ESD practices and
structural BMP measures to be used;
         (e)   A narrative that supports the final stormwater management
design; and
         (f)   Any other information requested by the Division.
   (D)   If a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all
runoff off of the site, it is the responsibility of the developer, in
accordance with state law, to obtain from adjacent property owners any
easements or other necessary property interests concerning flowage of water.
Approval of a stormwater management plan does not create or affect any right to
direct runoff onto adjacent property without that property owner's permission.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE VI: PERMITS (§§ 1-15.2-6.1 — 1-15.2-6.3)
Section
   
1-15.2-6.1   Permit requirement
   
1-15.2-6.2   Permit suspension and revocation
   
1-15.2-6.3   Permit conditions
§ 1-15.2-6.1. PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   No grading or building permit may be issued for any site unless:
      (1)   The development is exempt from this chapter under §
1-15.2-3.2; or
      (2)    Final erosion and sediment control plans and final SWM plans have
been approved; and
      (3)   Easements for the stormwater management facility and easements to
provide adequate access for inspection and maintenance from a public right-of-
way have been approved and recorded in the land records; and
      (4)   A stormwater management maintenance agreement as described in §
1-15.2-9.1 of this chapter has been approved and recorded in the land records;
and
      (5)   Security as described in §
1-15.2-7.2 of this chapter has been provided.
   (B)   In limited circumstances established by the Division, a grading permit
may be issued prior to recordation of the documents described in subsections
(3) and (4) above.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-6.2. PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Division or its agents have the right to enter and inspect any
site in order to verify that the site complies with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Division or its agent has the power to take any lawful action to
prevent or to abate a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Written notice, stating the nature of the violation and ordering such
lawful action as will prevent or abate the violation shall be provided to the
appropriate person identified at the preconstruction meeting. If the violation
is of such a nature that continuing work will worsen the situation or cause a
more severe violation, the Division is authorized to immediately suspend or
revoke the grading or building permit and issue a stop-work order on the
development.
   (D)   The Division shall allow a reasonable period of time for compliance
with the written order.
   (E)   Any grading or building permit may be suspended or revoked after
written notice is given for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Violation(s) of any of the conditions of the final SWM plan
approval;
      (2)   Changes in site runoff characteristics upon which an approval or
waiver was granted;
      (3)   Construction not in accordance with the approved plans;
      (4)   Noncompliance with correction notice(s) or stop work order(s)
issued for the construction of any stormwater management practice;
      (5)   Creation of an immediate danger in a downstream area.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-6.3. PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   In granting an approval for any phase of development, the Division may
impose conditions as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and the preservation and protection of the public health and
safety.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE VII: PERFORMANCE AGREEMENT AND SECURITY (§§ 1-15.2-7.1 — 1-15.2-7.2)
Section
   
1-15.2-7.1   Performance agreement
   
1-15.2-7.2   Security
§ 1-15.2-7.1. PERFORMANCE AGREEMENT.
   The owner must enter into a stormwater management performance agreement with
the county. The agreement will be reviewed by the Office of the County Attorney
and executed by the Director. Performance agreements shall have a maximum term
of 2 years, and may be extended in one-year increments. Prior to approval of an
extension, the owner shall provide a new cost estimate for all remaining work,
and if the new cost estimate exceeds the remaining security, an increase in the
amount of the security will be required.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-7.2. SECURITY.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of any building and/or grading permit or
recordation of a subdivision plat for an activity requiring stormwater
management, security shall be provided in the form of an escrow account,
irrevocable letter of credit, or other means of security acceptable to the
Office of the County Attorney, in an amount not less than 115% of the total
estimated construction cost of all stormwater management facilities. The
security required in this section shall be subject to forfeiture for failure
to: 
      (1)   Complete work specified in the approved final SWM plan; or
      (2)   Comply with all of the provisions of this chapter, the performance
agreement and other applicable laws and regulations, and any time limitations.
   (B)   The security shall not be fully released until after:
      (1)    Final inspection by the Division; and
      (2)   "As-built" plans and a certification of completion have been
submitted by the owner or developer and approved by the Division, confirming
that all stormwater management facilities comply with the approved plan and the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Partial release of the security may occur as stages of construction
have been completed and inspected.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE VIII: INSPECTION (§§ 1-15.2-8.1 — 1-15.2-8.2)
Section
   
1-15.2-8.1   Inspection schedule and reports
   
1-15.2-8.2   Inspection requirements during construction
§ 1-15.2-8.1. INSPECTION SCHEDULE AND REPORTS.
   (A)   No grading or other site work may start until after a preconstruction
meeting between the Division and the developer has occurred. The developer
shall contact the Division to request this meeting, which will be scheduled to
occur within 72 hours of the developer's request.
   (B)   During the preconstruction meeting, the parties will determine
responsibility for, and the frequency of inspections, certifications and
documentation for each ESD treatment practice. At a minimum, all ESD and other
nonstructural practices shall be inspected upon completion of final grading,
the establishment of permanent stabilization, and before issuance of use and
occupancy approval.
   (C)   The Division's written inspection reports shall include:
      (1)   The date and location of the inspection;
      (2)   Whether construction was in compliance with the approved final SWM
plan;
      (3)   Any variations from the approved construction specifications; and
      (4)   Any violations that exist.
   (D)   No work shall proceed on the next phase of development until the
Division inspects and approves the work previously completed. The Division will
provide copies of the inspection reports to the developer.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-8.2. INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS DURING CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Regular inspections shall be made and documented at each of the
following stages of construction:
      (1)   Environmental site design (in accordance with the Design Manual and
the approved final SWM plans);
      (2)   For ponds:
         (a)   Upon completion of excavation to sub-foundation, and during
installation of structural supports or reinforcement for structures, including
but not limited to:
            (i)   Core trenches for structural embankments;
            (ii)   Inlet and outlet structures, anti-seep collars or
diaphragms, and watertight connectors on pipes; and
            (iii)   trenches for enclosed storm drainage facilities;
         (b)   During placement of structural fill, concrete, and installation
of piping and catch basins;
         (c)   During backfill of foundations and trenches;
         (d)   During embankment construction; and
         (e)   Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent
stabilization.
      (3)   Wetlands - At the stages specified for pond construction in §
1-15.2-8.2(A)(2) of this chapter, during and after wetland reservoir area
planting, and during the second growing season to verify a vegetation survival
rate of at least 50 percent.
      (4)   For infiltration trenches:
         (a)   During excavation to subgrade;
         (b)   During placement and backfill of under drain systems and
observation wells;
         (c)   During placement of geotextiles and all filter media;
         (d)   During construction of appurtenant conveyance systems such as
diversion structures, pre-filters and filters, inlets, outlets, and flow
distribution structures; and
         (e)   Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent
stabilization.
      (5)   For infiltration basins - At the stages specified for pond
construction in §
1-15.2-8.2(A)(2) of this chapter and during placement and backfill of under
drain systems.
      (6)   For filtering systems:
         (a)   During excavation to subgrade;
         (b)   During placement and backfill of under drain systems;
         (c)   During placement of geotextiles and all filter media;
          (d)   During construction of appurtenant conveyance systems such as
flow diversion structures, pre-filters and filters, inlets, outlets, orifices,
and flow distribution structures; and
         (e)   Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent
stabilization.
      (7)   For open channel systems:
         (a)   During excavation to subgrade;
         (b)   During placement and backfill of under drain systems for dry
swales;
         (c)   During installation of diaphragms, check dams, or weirs; and
         (d)   Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent
stabilization.
   (B)   After construction is complete, "as-built" plan certification shall be
prepared by a registered professional, certifying that ESD planning techniques
and practices, and structural BMPs and conveyance systems comply with the
specifications contained in the approved plans. "As-built" certification shall
include a set of drawings comparing the approved final SWM plan with what was
constructed. The Division may require additional information and
certifications.
   (C)   Within 45 days of construction completion, the Division shall submit
notice of construction completion to the administration on a form supplied by
the administration for each structural stormwater management practice. The
type, number, total drainage area, and total impervious area treated by all ESD
planning techniques and practices shall be reported to the administration on a
site by site basis. If BMPs requiring SCD approval are constructed, notice of
construction completion shall also be submitted to the local SCD.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE IX: MAINTENANCE (§§ 1-15.2-9.1 — 1-15.2-9.3)
Section
   
1-15.2-9.1   Easement/maintenance agreement
   
1-15.2-9.2   Maintenance inspection
   
1-15.2-9.3   Maintenance responsibility
§ 1-15.2-9.1. EASEMENT/MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Prior to the recordation of a final subdivision plat, or the issuance
of a building permit where no subdivision is taking place, and for any
development of property which will require stormwater management, an easement/
maintenance agreement(s) necessary for perpetual maintenance of ESD treatment
systems and structural BMPs shall be executed by all those having an interest
in the property to be affected and shall be recorded among the land records.
   (B)   The easement/maintenance agreement shall be binding on all subsequent
property owners. The easement/maintenance agreement shall:
      (1)   Provide for the creation of an easement for all ESD treatment
systems and structural BMPs;
      (2)   Provide for the Division to have access for inspection and/or
maintenance of the ESD treatment systems and structural BMPs;
      (3)   Specifically identify all lots or parcels that are benefitted by
the ESD treatment systems and structural BMPs;
      (4)   Specify the party or entity (e.g. a property owners association)
that is responsible for maintenance of ESD treatment systems and structural
BMPs; and
      (5)   Provide that upon receipt of notice of any problems or deficiencies
in the ESD treatment systems or structural BMPs the responsible party will
correct problems as ordered by the Division. If the requested corrections are
not made within 30 days, the Division may, at its option, perform all the
necessary work to bring the ESD planning techniques and practices and
structural BMPs into compliance with statutory requirements, and the owner of
the land(s) upon which the facility is located and any benefitted property may
be assessed for the cost of the work. If not paid within 30 days, the
assessment shall create a lien on the property upon which the facility is
located or any benefitted property and may be included in the tax bill and
collected as taxes by the county.
   (C)   Satisfactory proof of the identities of all those having an interest
in the encumbered and benefitted property shall be provided to the Division in
a form acceptable to the office of the County Attorney.
   (D)   To the extent the county agrees to accept maintenance responsibility
or ownership of ESD planning techniques and practices and structural BMPs,
these facilities shall be maintained by an agency appointed by the county. The
county reserves the right to set up storm drainage districts to pay for this
service.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-9.2. MAINTENANCE INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Division shall ensure that preventative maintenance is performed
by inspecting all ESD treatment systems and structural BMPs. Inspection shall
occur during the first year of operation and at least once every 3 years
thereafter.
   (B)   Inspection reports shall be maintained by the Division for all ESD
treatment systems and structural BMPs.
   (C)   Inspection reports for ESD treatment systems and structural BMPs shall
include the following:
      (1)   The date of inspection;
      (2)   Name of inspector;
      (3)   An assessment of the quality of the stormwater management system
related to ESD treatment system efficiency and the control of runoff to the
MEP;
      (4)   The condition of:
         (a)   Vegetation or filter media;
         (b)   Fences or other safety devices;
         (c)   Spillways, valves, or other control structures;
         (d)   Embankments, slopes, and safety benches;
         (e)   Reservoir or treatment areas;
         (f)   Inlet and outlet channels or structures;
         (g)   Underground drainage;
         (h)   Sediment and debris accumulation in storage and forebay areas;
         (i)   Any nonstructural practices to the extent practicable; and
         (j)   Any other item that could affect the proper function of the
stormwater management system.
      (5)   Description of needed maintenance.
   (D)   After notifying an owner or other responsible person of the inspection
results, the owner or other responsible person shall have 30 days, or other
time frame mutually agreed to between the Division and the owner or other
responsible person, to correct the deficiencies discovered. The Division shall
conduct a subsequent inspection to ensure completion of the repairs.
   (E)   If repairs are not properly undertaken and completed, the enforcement
procedures described in Article X of this chapter shall be followed.
   (F)   If, after an inspection by the Division, the condition of ESD
treatment systems or structural BMPs is determined to present an immediate
danger to public health or safety, the Division shall take such action as may
be necessary to protect the public and make the facility safe. Any cost
incurred by the Division shall be assessed against the owner(s) or other
responsible person(s), as provided in §
1-15.2-9.1(B)(4) of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-9.3. MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The person responsible for maintenance of ESD treatment systems and
structural BMPs, shall maintain in good condition and promptly repair and
restore all ESD practices, grade surfaces, walls, drains, dams and structures,
vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other protective devices
in perpetuity. Such repairs or restoration and maintenance shall be in
accordance with previously approved or newly submitted plans.
   (B)    A maintenance schedule shall be developed and shown on the approved
final SWM plan, and shall indicate the necessary maintenance and frequency
thereof.
   (C)   ESD treatment systems and structural BMPs shall be owned and
maintained by a property owners association, a private property owner, or
another private person. Only those ESD planning techniques and practices and
structural BMPs that provide a recreational benefit and access to the general
public may be considered for acceptance and maintenance by the county; provided
that: (1) the request for public maintenance is made prior to approval of the
SWM concept plan; and (2) the Division and any affected county agency provides
an affirmative recommendation to the county. ESD planning techniques and
practices and structural BMPs to be dedicated to the county shall be maintained
by the developer until such time as they are accepted by the county. To the
extent the county agrees to accept ESD treatment systems and structural BMPs,
the facilities shall be maintained by an agency appointed by the county. The
county reserves the right to set up storm drainage districts to pay for this
service.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE X: PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT (§§ 1-15.2-10.1 — 1-15.2-10.3)
Section
   
1-15.2-10.1   Enforcement actions
   
1-15.2-10.2   Civil infractions
   
1-15.2-10.3   Penalties for continuing a violation
§ 1-15.2-10.1. ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
   (A)   The Division may utilize any 1 or a combination of the following
actions for enforcement of this chapter:
      (1)   A notice of violation, specifying the need for corrective action if
noncompliance with any plan or agreement is identified;
      (2)   A stop work order, if a violation persists;
      (3)   Collection of the security if reasonable efforts to correct the
violation have not been undertaken within a reasonable time period; or
      (4)   Civil citation, civil action or criminal prosecution may be brought
against any person in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Any step in the enforcement process may be taken at any time,
depending on the severity of the violation.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-10.2. CIVIL INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority provided in §
2-2-29 of the Frederick County Code, any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is a civil offense and shall be called a civil infraction. If
after investigation a civil infraction is believed to exist, the Director shall
deliver a citation or a warning to the property owner and any other person or
persons responsible for the infraction. If the person responsible for the
infraction cannot be located, the Director may post the citation or warning in
a conspicuous place on the property and shall mail a copy of same by registered
mail to the person who obtained the permit, if any, and to the property owner,
which shall constitute notice sufficient for delivery under this section.
   (B)   The citation or warning, as provided for in this section, shall be in
writing and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the person charged (or warned);
      (2)   The nature of the violation;
      (3)   The location of the violation;
      (4)   The date(s) of the violation;
      (5)   The amount of the fine assessed (or possible assessment);
      (6)   The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid (or
violation corrected, if applicable);
      (7)   The person's right to stand trial for the violation (if
applicable); and
      (8)   A certification by the Director or his or her agent attesting to
the truth of the matters set forth.
   (C)   Whenever an alleged or possible civil infraction comes to the
attention of the Director, the procedure will be as follows:
      (1)   The Director will investigate whether an infraction has occurred;
      (2)   If the Director determines that an infraction has occurred, a
warning notice will be issued to the person or persons responsible in the form
and manner as outlined in this section, with a time period of no more than 10
days within which to correct that infraction and to prevent further
infractions;
      (3)   If the infraction continues or is allowed to occur after the time
stated in the warning notice, the Director will issue a citation to the person
or persons responsible and/or the property owner in the form and manner as
outlined in this section.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (C)(2) above, the
Director may issue a citation without the prior issuance of a warning notice.
   (D)   A fine of $1,000 shall be imposed upon any person responsible for a
civil infraction for each violation. Each day such violation is permitted to
exist shall be considered a separate infraction. All fines shall be payable
within 20 days to the county and delivered to the Division, which shall remit
same to the County Treasurer.
   (E)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
offense by filing with the Director a notice of intention to stand trial. The
notice shall be given at least 5 days before the date of payment as set forth
in the citation. Upon receipt of the notice of intention to stand trial, the
Director shall forward to the District Court of Maryland for Frederick County a
copy of the citation and the notice of intention to stand trial. Upon receipt
of the citation, the District Court shall schedule the case for trial and
notify the defendant of the trial date. All fines, penalties, or forfeitures
collected by the District Court for civil infractions shall be remitted to the
county, through the County Treasurer.
   (F)   If a person who receives a citation for an infraction fails to pay the
fine by the date of payment set forth on the citation and fails to file a
notice of intention to stand trial, the fine shall be doubled and the person is
liable for the assessed fine. The Director may request adjudication of the case
by the District Court, including the filing of a demand for judgment on
affidavit. The District Court shall schedule the case for trial and summon the
defendant to appear. The defendant's failure to appear to such summons shall
result in the entry of judgment against the defendant in favor of the county in
the amount then due if a proper demand for judgment on affidavit has been made.
   (G)   Adjudication of an infraction under this section is not a criminal
conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities ordinarily imposed
by a criminal conviction.
   (H)   In a proceeding before the District Court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Ann. Code, Local Government Article, Title 6.
   (I)   If a person is found by the District Court to have committed a civil
infraction, the person shall be liable for the costs of the proceedings in the
District Court; and the Court may permit the county to abate any such condition
at the person's expense, the same as provided in Md. Ann. Code, Local
Government Article, Title 6.
   (J)   Depending on the circumstances of each case and after consultation
with the Office of the County Attorney, the Director has the discretionary
authority to reduce or suspend all or a portion of the fine assessed under this
article.
   (K)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit or prevent the
Director or Frederick County from seeking other legal remedies, such as
injunctions or criminal prosecution.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-10.3. PENALTIES FOR CONTINUING A VIOLATION.
   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 1 year or both for
each violation with costs imposed in the discretion of the court and not to
exceed $50,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate
offense. In addition, the Division may institute injunctive, mandamus or other
appropriate action or proceedings of law to correct violations of this chapter.
Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue temporary or
permanent restraining orders, injunctions or mandamus, or other appropriate
forms of relief.
(Ord. 10-09-544, 5-20-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE XI: WATERSHED PROTECTION AND RESTORATION PROGRAM (§§ 1-15.2-11.0 — 1-
15.2-11.6)
Section
   
1-15.2-11.0   Definitions
   
1-15.2-11.1   Watershed Protection and Restoration Program
   
1-15.2-11.2   Watershed Protection and Restoration Special Revenue Fund
   
1-15.2-11.3   Stormwater remediation fee
   
1-15.2-11.4   Appeals
   
1-15.2-11.5   Exemptions; substantial financial hardship
   
1-15.2-11.6   Reduction of fee
§ 1-15.2-11.0. DEFINITIONS.
   In this article, a part of
Chapter 1-15.2 of the Frederick County Code, the following words have the
meanings indicated.
   DIRECTOR. Director of Frederick County Community Development Division,
sometimes acting through his or her designee.
   DIVISION. The Community Development Division of Frederick County.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Has the meaning stated in Md. Code Ann., Environment
Article, § 4-201.1(d).
   STORMWATER REMEDIATION FEE. The fee charged in accordance with this title to
fund or support, in full or in part, the purposes set forth in §§
1-15.2-11.1 and
1-15.2-11.2 of this Code.
(Ord. 13-06-634, 5-30-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-11.1. WATERSHED PROTECTION AND RESTORATION PROGRAM.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Watershed Protection and Restoration
Program.
   (B)   The purposes of the Watershed Protection and Restoration Program are
to support and fulfill those stormwater management goals set forth in Md. Code
Ann., Environment Article, § 4-202.1.
(Ord. 13-06-634, 5-30-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-11.2. WATERSHED PROTECTION AND RESTORATION SPECIAL REVENUE FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Watershed Protection and Restoration
Special Revenue Fund into which shall be paid the revenue required by Md. Code
Ann., Environment Article, § 4-202.1(h)(3).
   (B)   The Watershed Protection and Restoration Special Revenue Fund is a
special, nonlapsing fund.
   (C)   Revenue paid into this Watershed Protection and Restoration Special
Revenue Fund shall be dedicated to and appropriated only for those purposes set
forth in Md. Code Ann., Environment Article, § 4-202.1(h)(4).
   (D)   General Fund and other revenues may be used to supplement
appropriations from the Watershed Protection and Restoration Special Revenue
Fund for the purposes set forth in subsection (C) above.
(Ord. 13-06-634, 5-30-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-11.3. STORMWATER REMEDIATION FEE.
   (A)   A stormwater remediation fee is imposed on the use of all real
property located within Frederick County that is subject to the county's system
benefit charge set forth in Frederick County Code, § 1-11-44. However, this
stormwater remediation fee shall not be imposed on real property that is
located within a Frederick County incorporated municipality or otherwise exempt
under Md. Code Ann., Environment Article, § 4-202.1(e)(2).
   (B)   The stormwater remediation fee for each tax parcel of real property
within the covered area of Frederick County shall be one cent ($00.01) per
year.
   (C)   The stormwater remediation fee shall be a lien on the real property on
which it is imposed and shall be billed annually to the owner of the real
property on which it is imposed. The stormwater remediation fee shall remain as
a lien on the real property until paid. Delinquent stormwater remediation fees
may be collected in any manner as provided under Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property
Article (including through tax sale), by civil action, or as otherwise
permitted by law or equity.
(Ord. 13-06-634, 5-30-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-11.4. APPEALS.
   (A)   A property owner may appeal a stormwater remediation fee assessment to
the Division. An appeal shall be submitted on or before September 30 in order
to receive a correction of the stormwater remediation fee.
   (B)   Grounds for appeal of the stormwater remediation fee include:
      (1)   Mathematical errors in calculating the stormwater remediation fee;
      (2)   The real property is not subject to the stormwater remediation fee
under §
1-15.2-11.5;
      (3)   The property owner is exempt from the stormwater remediation fee
under §
1-15.2-11.6; or
      (4)   Errors in the identification of the property owner of real property
subject to the stormwater remediation fee.
   (C)   An appeal must be submitted in writing to the Frederick County
Director of Treasury on an application form provided by the Division. A
property owner shall include a detailed statement of the grounds of the appeal
and all information or supporting documentation as required by the Division.
Failure to provide all information required on the application form is a basis
for a denial of an appeal.
   (D)   The Director shall issue a written decision indicating whether the
appeal is granted or denied and a copy shall be provided to the property owner,
the Director of Treasury, and any counsel of record. The written decision of
the Director shall set forth all reasons for the decision and shall set forth
any change in the amount of the stormwater remediation fee.
   (E)   If the decision of the Director changes the amount of the stormwater
remediation fee, the Director of Treasury shall issue a new bill to the
property owner.
   (F)   A property owner who is aggrieved by a decision of the Director on an
appeal or by the imposition of a stormwater remediation fee shall pay the
stormwater remediation fee and may request a refund in accordance with Md. Code
Ann., Local Government Article § 20-113, and may appeal to the Maryland Tax
Court in accordance with Md. Code Ann., Local Government Article § 20-117.
(Ord. 13-06-634, 5-30-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-11.5. EXEMPTIONS; SUBSTANTIAL FINANCIAL HARDSHIP.
   (A)   There is a substantial financial hardship exemption program whose
purpose is to exempt from the payment of the stormwater remediation fee a
property owner who is able to demonstrate substantial financial hardship as a
result of the fee.
   (B)   To qualify for a substantial financial hardship exemption, the real
property for which the exemption is requested must qualify for and receive a
financial hardship exemption from the county's Bay Restoration Fund fee, which
hardship exemption program is adopted as the Stormwater Remediation Fee
Substantial Financial Hardship Exemption Program.
   (C)   The Director of Treasury shall administer the Substantial Financial
Hardship Exemption Program and, to the extent not inconsistent with the
county's Bay Restoration Fund hardship exemption, may adopt rules and
regulations governing the program to include, but not be limited to, the
following:
      (1)   The application deadline;
      (2)   The form of the application;
      (3)   Documentation required of applicants; and
      (4)   Any other matters deemed necessary by the Director of Treasury to
administer the Substantial Financial Hardship Exemption Program.
   (D)   Any hardship exemption granted is only valid for the year that payment
of the stormwater remediation fee is due.
(Ord. 13-06-634, 5-30-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-15.2-11.6. REDUCTION OF FEE.
   The Director shall adopt rules and regulations in accordance with Md. Code
Ann., Environment Article, § 4-202.1(f)(1) to reduce a portion of the
stormwater remediation fee for a real property to account for on site systems,
facilities, services, or activities that reduce the quantity or improve the
quality of stormwater discharged from a property.
(Ord. 13-06-634, 5-30-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE XII: DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWERS (§§ 1-15.2-12.1 — 1-15.2-12.4)
Section
   
1-15.2-12.1   Prohibited activities
   
1-15.2-12.2   Right of entry, investigation, and inspection
   
1-15.2-12.3   Prevention and control of illicit discharges, prohibited
materials, and illicit connections
   
1-15.2-12.4   Enforcement and penalties
§ 1-15.2-12.1. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Illicit discharges. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this
section, a person shall not discharge an illicit discharge into an MS4, nor
cause or allow an illicit discharge to be introduced or discharged into an MS4.
   (B)   Exceptions. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibitions
set forth in subsection (A) of this section:
      (1)   Waterline flushing; landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows;
rising ground waters; uncontaminated ground water infiltration to separate
storm sewers; uncontaminated pumped ground water; discharges from potable water
sources; foundation drains; air conditioning condensation; irrigation waters;
springs; footing drains; lawn watering; individual residential car washing;
flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; de-chlorinated swimming pool
discharges (not including filter backwash); street wash water; and firefighting
activities; or
      (2)   Discharges permitted under an NPDES stormwater discharge permit or
a non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES discharge permit.
In the event of any questions or complaints concerning the exceptions listed in
subsection (B)(1) above, the Manager may take steps to determine if they are
properly managed, and if not, may require mitigation measures necessary for
proper management of these discharges.
   (C)   Illicit connections. A person shall not construct, use, maintain, or
allow the continued existence of an illicit connection.
   (D)   Interference. A person shall not take or permit any action that
interferes with, or is likely to interfere with, the proper operation of an
MS4, including having or maintaining a prohibited material.
   (E)   Reporting to Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE). The county
may report illicit connections and illicit discharges to MDE for enforcement
and/or permitting in accordance with applicable law.
§ 1-15.2-12.2. RIGHT OF ENTRY, INVESTIGATION, AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   Generally. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, if
the county becomes aware of a discharge that enters, or is capable of imminent
discharge to, or to be discharged from, an MS4 or a waterbody within the
county, that may be or include prohibited material, or is the result of an
illicit discharge or an illicit connection, the Manager may seek access to any
premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting for a violation
of this article.
   (B)   Consent. The Manager may enter private property to inspect for a
violation of this article with the consent of the occupant or owner. If entry
is refused, the Manager may request that the County Attorney seek a court order
to permit entry to the property.
   (C)   Investigations. The Manager may inspect, sample, examine, and
investigate the source, location, and extent of any spill, discharge, the
existence of any illicit connection, the existence of any prohibited material,
or the condition of any BMPs. In support of any investigation under this
article, the Manager may review and copy any records that will assist in
determining whether there is a violation of this article, including but not
limited to, records maintained pursuant to the conditions of any discharge
permit or approvals given under this chapter.
   (D)   Follow up inspections. To determine compliance with required abatement
and mitigation measures, the Manager may conduct follow-up inspections of any
premises from which the discharge or other violation may have occurred, as
needed to assess the existence and extent of a violation of this article.
   (E)   Threat to public health and safety. The Manager shall have the right
to enter any premises where there is evidence that a violation of this article
exists which poses an immediate threat to the public health and safety for the
purpose of performing duties pursuant to the provisions of this article. The
Manager shall produce proof of identity prior to entry, and must also provide
evidence of the imminent threat to public health and safety.
   (F)   Emergency repairs. If the Manager has evidence that an illicit
discharge, illicit connection, or prohibited material presents an immediate
threat to public health or safety, the Manager may enter the premises and make
repairs in order to abate the public health or public safety hazard without
prior written notice to the owner or occupant of the premises. The Manager may
request that the County Attorney seek a court order assessing the costs of the
abatement against the owner, tenant, licensee, or any other person causing or
permitting an illicit discharge or illicit connection, or that has or is
maintaining a prohibited material.
(Bill No. 19-14, 11-5-2019)
§ 1-15.2-12.3. PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES, PROHIBITED
MATERIALS, AND ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Prevention. The owner, tenant, licensee, or any other person who
occupies any premises shall prevent entry into an MS4 of any spills, materials
from an illicit connection, any prohibited material, or illicit discharges
through the use of BMPs or other appropriate measures as directed by the
Manager. In the case of an illicit connection, the owner of the premises shall
disconnect the illicit connection in a manner as directed by the Manager.
   (B)   Control measures. If the Manager determines, after an initial
inspection, that the spill, prohibited material, material from an illicit
connection, or illicit discharge has entered an MS4, the Manager may require
the owner or other responsible person to take steps to abate and mitigate the
material or discharge, including but not limited to: (1) disconnection and
redirection, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system
or to the public sanitary sewer upon approval of the Frederick County Division
of Utilities and Solid Waste Management or, if applicable, the municipality
that owns and operates the public sewer system; (2) delineation and containment
of the discharge; (3) recovery and proper disposal of the pollutant or
prohibited materials and any impacted media; and (4) restoration of the area of
the discharge to pre- discharge conditions to the county's satisfaction. The
owner or responsible person shall take the steps listed above in order to
mitigate the full extent of the prohibited materials, illicit discharge, or
illicit connection.
   (C)   BMPs. Any owner or other person responsible for a spill, illicit
discharge, illicit connection, or prohibited material shall be required to
implement, at the owner's or responsible person's expense, additional BMPs to
prevent the further discharge or introduction of any prohibited material,
illicit discharge, or spilled material from entering into an MS4. Compliance
with the terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge
constitutes compliance with this subsection.
   (D)   Monitoring. The Manager may require a person responsible for a spill,
illicit connection, or illicit discharge to install monitoring equipment if the
nature of the discharge warrants such installation. The sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be calibrated to ensure accuracy and maintained in safe and
proper operating condition at the responsible person's expense.
   (E)   Abatement. If the owner or any person responsible for the spill,
illicit connection, or illicit discharge refuses to follow the required cleanup
and mitigation measures, the county may enter the property and make the
required repairs. The Manager may request that the County Attorney seek a court
order assessing the costs of the abatement against the owner or any other
person that causes or permits a spill, an illicit discharge, illicit
connection, or that has or maintains a prohibited material.
   (F)   Costs. All mitigation and remediation measures under this article
shall be completed at the owner's or responsible person's sole cost and
expense.
(Bill No. 19-14, 11-5-2019)
§ 1-15.2-12.4. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   A violation of this article shall be subject to enforcement by the
Manager or the Manager's designee ("Enforcement Official"), pursuant to §
1-1-9 of the Code.
   (B)   The Enforcement Official is not required to issue a warning notice.
   (C)   A first offense shall be deemed a Class C civil offense. Each
subsequent offense by the same individual or property owner(s) shall be cited
at the next highest Class of offense.
   (D)   The Enforcement Official may, in consultation with the County
Attorney, seek additional legal remedies as appropriate under the
circumstances.
(Bill No. 19-14, 11-5-2019)
CHAPTER 1-16: SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-16-1 — 1-16-25)
Section
   
1-16-1   Authority
   
1-16-2   Intent
   
1-16-3   Definitions and rules of construction
   
1-16-4   Scope of chapter; agreement; other regulations
   
1-16-5   General requirements
   
1-16-6   Correction plats
   
1-16-7   Additions to lots
   
1-16-8   Minor subdivisions
   
1-16-9   Major subdivisions
   
1-16-10   Approval of building permits
   
1-16-11   Subdivision name
   
1-16-12   Public facilities
   
1-16-13   Conflict with other regulations
Cross references:
   Adequate public facilities, see
Chapter 1-20;
   Building Code, see
Chapter 1-6;
   Grading, erosion and sediment control, see
Chapter 1-10;
   Planning, see
Chapter 1-13;
   Roads and bridges, see
Chapter 1-15;
   Storm water management, see
Chapter 1-15.2;
   Trailers and trailer parks, see
Chapter 1-17;
   Zoning, see
Chapter 1-19
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of subdivision regulations, see Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article,
Title 5, Subtitle 1
§ 1-16-1. AUTHORITY.
   The County Planning Commission has the power and authority to prepare rules
and regulations governing the subdivision of land and building development
within the county, excluding municipalities. After adoption of such rules and
regulations by the local legislative body, the Planning Commission is empowered
to review and rule upon such subdivision of land and building development under
the authority granted by Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article.
(1959 Code, § 38A-10) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-2. INTENT.
   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the county by:
   (A)   Assisting orderly, efficient and integrated development of land;
   (B)   Providing for the coordination of existing streets and public
utilities with new facilities;
   (C)   Ensuring that proper provisions shall be made for drainage, water
supply, sewerage and other needed improvements;
   (D)   Providing for efficient and orderly extension of community services
and facilities at minimum cost and maximum convenience;
   (E)   Ensuring conformance of land utilization with the County Comprehensive
Plan;
   (F)   Guiding development and the erection of structures in areas free from
risk of flooding, erosion, stream siltation, soil slump and/or unsuitable
sanitary conditions and other hazards;
   (G)   Preservation of the wetlands, streams, mountains and steep slope areas
of the county;
   (H)   Securing equitable handling of all subdivision plats by providing
uniform procedures and standards for observance, both by subdividers and the
county;
   (I)   Assisting county officials in securing adequate records of land
titles;
   (J)   Assisting to secure water systems of adequate size and pressure for
fire fighting and streets where fire equipment can maneuver properly;
   (K)   Securing land for neighborhood parks so that the cost necessary to
serve the residents of new developments may be equitably apportioned on the
basis of needs created by the new development.
(1959 Code, § 38A-11) (Ord. 86-1-378, 1-7-1986; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-3. DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The following definitions apply to the text of this chapter.
      (1)   The particular shall control the general.
      (2)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of these regulations and any caption, illustration, summary table or
illustrative table, the text shall control.
      (3)   The words “shall” and “will” are always mandatory and not
discretionary. The word “may” is permissive, except when the context indicates
otherwise, such as in the phrase “may not”.
      (4)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural; and the plural implies
the singular, unless the context indicates the contrary.
      (5)   A “building” or “structure” includes any part thereof.
      (6)   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for,” “designed for,”
“intended for,” “maintained for,” or “occupied for.”
      (7)   The word “person” includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an incorporated association or any other similar entity.
      (8)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves 2 or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected
by the conjunction “and,” “or” or “either ... or,” the conjunction shall be
interpreted as follows:
         (a)   “And” indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply;
         (b)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply separately or in any combination;
         (c)   “Either ... or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply separately but not in combination;
      (9)   The word “includes” or “including” shall not limit a term to the
specified examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances or circumstances of like kind or characters;
      (10)   All terms defined under various sections of the county development
regulations (including but not limited to zoning, adequate public facilities,
forest resource, and stormwater management) or in the County Building Code,
where occurring in these regulations, shall have the meanings specified in
those regulations, except where specifically defined in these regulations;
      (11)   The word “county” means Frederick County, Maryland. The word
“state” means the State of Maryland. The term “county boundary” means any
exterior boundary of the county;
      (12)   Throughout this chapter all words, other than the terms
specifically defined herein, shall have the meaning implied by their context in
these regulations or their ordinarily accepted definitions.
   (B)   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows.
      ALLEY. See ROAD AND STREETS.
      APPLICATION DATE. The date on which all plans, forms, fees and other
items necessary for review of an application submitted under this chapter are
received by the Division.
      BLOCK. An area of land containing 1 or more lots and bounded by streets
providing access to such lot or lots.
      BOARD OF APPEALS. The Frederick County Board of Appeals.
      BOUNDARY SURVEY. A means of marking real property for sufficient
definition and identification to uniquely locate each lot, parcel, or tract.
The purpose of a boundary survey is to establish, reestablish, or describe, or
all of these, the physical position and extent of the boundaries of real
property.
      BUILDING DEVELOPMENT. The improvement of land by the addition thereto of
structures.
      BUILDING ENVELOPE. The area formed by the front, side and rear building
restriction lines or setbacks in which the principal buildings must be located.
The building envelope shall not include other setbacks, such as stream or
floodplain setbacks and buffers, as specified in the Zoning Regulations in
Chapter 1-19 of the County Code.
      BUILDING RESTRICTION LINE (BRL). A line beyond which the foundation walls
and/or any enclosed porch vestibule or other enclosed portion of a building or
structure shall not project equal to the depth of the minimum required yard for
the zoning district in which the lot is located as established by the zoning
regulations in
Chapter 1-19 of this Code. The handle of a panhandle lot shall not be
considered in determining the location of the building line.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM. An annual document prepared by the county
indicating county capital projects having an authorization for the current
fiscal year and those capital projects which are currently planned for the
following 5 year period.
      CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. A subdivision using varying lot sizes in group
houses while maintaining the same density as a conventional subdivision within
a specific zoning district.
      COMBINED PRELIMINARY/FINAL PLAT. The final drawing, for subdivisions from
1 to 5 lots, upon which the subdivider’s plat of subdivision is presented to
the Planning Commission for approval along with certain information normally
shown only on the preliminary plat, as described in §
1-16-72 and which, if approved, will be recorded in the land records of the
county.
      COMMON DRIVEWAY. A privately owned travelway shared and maintained by 2
or more property owners for the purpose of providing ingress and egress to
their properties.
      COMMUNITY SEWERAGE SYSTEM. Any system serving 2 or more lots for the
collection and disposal of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature,
including various devices for the treatment of such sewage and industrial
wastes.
      COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A source of water and a distribution system,
including treatment and storage facilities, serving 2 or more lots.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A composite of mapped and written proposals to guide
the systematic physical development of the county, adopted by the  county
governing body, including all changes and additions thereto made under the
provisions of Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article. The Comprehensive Plan includes
a land use plan, a transportation plan, a community facilities plan, a
recreation plan and other attendant facility plans.
      CONDOMINIUM. As defined by the Maryland Condominium Act, Md. Code Ann.,
Real Property Article, Title 11, an ownership arrangement, not a land use;
therefore, it is allowed in any district and under the same restrictions as the
land uses that it comprises. A condominium shall not negate lot requirements or
other requirements intended to provide adequate light, air and privacy. A
condominium has all of the following characteristics:
         (a)   The use (the interior and associated exterior areas designated
for private use in the development plan) is owned by the occupant;
         (b)   The unit may be any permitted dwelling type;
         (c)   All or a portion of the exterior open space and any community
interior spaces are owned and maintained in accordance with the Condominium Act
of the state and other requirements specified in the county code regarding such
open spaces.
      CORNER LOT. See LOT TYPES.
      COUNTY COUNCIL. The County Council of Frederick County, Maryland.
      COUNTY EXECUTIVE. The County Executive of Frederick County, Maryland.
      COUNTY GOVERNING BODY. The County Council and County Executive of
Frederick County, Maryland.
      CROSSWALK. A pedestrian crosswalk affording means of pedestrian travel
from 1 side of the street to the other.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A short street or series of streets designed and approved as
part of a subdivision or development project having but 1 end open for
vehicular traffic, the other being permanently terminated by a turnaround for
vehicles.
      DEAD END STREET. A street or series of streets having but one end open
for vehicular traffic, the other end being terminated by a temporary turnaround
or by a significant manmade or natural barrier. Dead end streets include:
         (a)   County streets that existed as of August 18, 1976 that were not
designed as dead end streets, but have become dead end streets over time, and
         (b)   Streets designed as part of a subdivision or development project
that are not designed as permanent cul-de-sacs, but are designed to facilitate
extensions to adjoining tracts with the intent of establishing a through street
in the future, and
         (c)   Streets designed as a loop system with only one access point.
      DEDICATION. The deliberate setting aside or appropriation of land by its
owner for any general and public uses, reserving no other rights  than such as
are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which
the property has been devoted.
      DEED PLOTTING. A plot plan drawn accurately based on the title or deed of
the certain parcel and/or the titles or deeds of the adjoining properties.
      DESIGN MANUAL. Those manuals (including any amendments or replacements)
which establish criteria for the construction and design of all public
improvements.
      DEVELOPER or SUBDIVIDER. An individual, partnership or corporation (or
agent therefor) that undertakes the responsibility for any or all of the
activities covered by this chapter, particularly the designing of a subdivision
or development plan or plat showing the layout of the land and the public
improvements involved therein. Inasmuch as the subdivision plat is merely a
necessary means to the end of assuring a satisfactory development, the term
DEVELOPER is intended to include the term “subdivider,” even though the
personnel involved in successive stages of the project may vary.
      DEVELOP or DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including the subdivision of land, or the construction, alteration or
expansion of buildings, structures, storm drainage facilities, roads or other
public improvements.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Community Development Division or the
director's designated representative.
      DIVISION. The Frederick County Community Development Division.
      DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT (THROUGH LOT). See LOT TYPES.
      EASEMENT RESERVATION. A strip of land extending along a property line or
across a lot for which an easement has been or is to be granted for a specific
purpose or purposes. All easement reservations are to be maintained in
perpetuity for intended purposes unless otherwise noted on the record plat.
      ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
         (a)   Those uses listed in §
1-19-4.110 of the zoning ordinance.
         (b)   For the purposes of recording an outlot under this chapter, an
ESSENTIAL SERVICE shall include fire, ambulance, or police stations required by
the county for public health, safety, and welfare.
      FINAL PLAT. The final map, drawing or chart which represents the
subdivider's plan of subdivision, and which, if approved, will be submitted to
the County Courthouse for recording. Final plats must be in compliance with an
approved preliminary plan and follow the requirements described in Article III
of this chapter.
      FLOODPLAIN. Those areas defined as floodplains in §
1-19-11.100 of the Frederick County Zoning Ordinance.
      FORMAL APPLICATION. An application is formal at such time as the
appropriate agency determines that all fees, plans and attendant documents are
in proper form, content and number required by these regulations.
      FRONTAGE. See LOT FRONTAGE.
      FRONT LOT LINE. The lot line or lines abutting a road, except in cases of
panhandle lots in which case the handle shall not be counted; and the front lot
line shall be that line determined to be closest to being the most parallel to
the street on which the lot has frontage.
      GRAVEL SURFACE. Shall consist of a cleared, leveled, travelway that has
been treated with aggregates, compacted, and may or may not also be treated
with calcium chloride for the purpose of dust and erosion control.
      GROSS ACRE. A commonly referred to measure of gross area. See also GROSS
AREA.
      GROSS AREA. All area within a subdivision plan or plat, including that
intended for residential use, steep slopes, local access streets and alleys,
off- street parking spaces, subdivision recreation sites, and floodplains.
      GROSS DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per gross acre of a
subdivision or land development.
      HALF OR PARTIAL STREETS. See STREETS.
      HEALTH AUTHORITY. The local health official for the county, having
jurisdiction over the county health, or a duly authorized representative of the
local health official.
      HIGHWAY PLAN. The official plan of highways, roads and other ways adopted
by the county in accordance with Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article, including all
subsequent revisions of the plan.
      IMPROVEMENT PLAN. A plan which contains all of the information,
computations and specifications necessary to construct roads, storm drain,
water lines, sanitary sewer and all other public improvements.
      INDIVIDUAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM. A single system of sewers, piping, treatment
tanks or other facilities serving only a single lot, and which has treatment
discharge capacity of 5,000 GPD treatment or less.
      INDIVIDUAL WATER SYSTEM. A single system of piping, pumps, tanks, or
other facilities utilizing a source of ground or surface water to supply only a
single lot and which has the capacity to supply less than 5,000 GPD capacity.
      LOT. A parcel, tract or portion of land separated from other parcels,
tracts or portions by separate description as on a recorded subdivision plat ,
or by metes and bounds, for the purpose of sale, lease, transfer of ownership
or separate use.
      LOT AREA. The total horizontal area included within the rear, side and
front lot lines excluding any streets.
      LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines of a lot.
      LOT OF RECORD. Any lot legally recorded in the land records of the county
as of January 24, 1977. A lot must satisfy all zoning and subdivision
regulations in effect at the time the lot was recorded.
      LOT TYPES. The following terminology is used in this chapter with
reference to various types of lots.
         (a)   CORNER LOT. A lot located at the intersection of 2 or more
streets. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if
straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the  side lot lines to the
foremost points of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
         (b)   INTERIOR LOT. Defined as a lot (other than a corner) with only 1
frontage on a street other than an alley.
         (c)   OUTLOT. 
            1.   A parcel of land within a subdivision which has been included
on a preliminary plan, but not designated as a buildable lot. Establishment
shall only be due to the necessity of providing access to adjoining properties,
a continuation of appropriate street patterns, and stormwater management
facilities.
            2.   A parcel of land created for the sole purpose of being used
for an approved governmental use and those uses defined as "essential services"
in this chapter.
         (d)   PANHANDLE LOT. A polygonal shaped lot with the appearance of a
“frying pan” or “flag and staff’ in which the handle is most often used as the
point of access to a street or road. The “handle,” when less than the minimum
width for a building lot in the zoning district in which it is located, is not
to be used in computing the minimum required area or delineating the minimum
required “building envelope.” The handle must also be of a uniform width.
         (e)   THROUGH LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than 1 street other than an alley.
         (f)   TAPER LOT. A lot in which the side lot lines emanating from the
street do not break in direction before the minimum lot width is achieved. If
the side lot lines break before the minimum lot width is achieved, then the lot
will be defined as a panhandle lot, except where side lot line breaks are
necessitated by proposed septic area and well locations.
      MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision that would bring the total number of
lots off the original parcel to 6 or more (not including the remainder parcel).
      MINIMUM LOT FRONTAGE. As established by the zoning regulations in
Chapter 1-19 of this Code, the least permissible width of a lot line abutting a
street.
      MINIMUM LOT WIDTH. A building line, the least permissible width of a lot
measured horizontally along the front building line.
      MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision containing not more than 5 lots off
the original parcel (not including the remainder parcel).
      MOBILE HOME. A portable dwelling unit designed and built to be towed on
its own chassis, comprised of frame and wheels, connected to utilities and
designed without a permanent foundation for year- round living. A unit may
contain parts that may be combined, folded, collapsed or telescoped when being
towed and expanded later to provide additional cubic capacity. It must be
listed by the state as a mobile home. This does not include modular or
sectional homes as classified by the state.
      MOBILE HOME PARK. Any site, lot or parcel of groups maintained or
intended for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodation for 2 or more
mobile homes for living quarters and including all buildings, structures,
vehicles, accessories and appurtenances used or intended as equipment in such a
park.
      OPEN SPACE. An area designated on a preliminary plan or final plat as an
area where development is prohibited, except for recreational facilities owned,
maintained, and utilized solely by the home owners association. An OPEN SPACE
is an area of a subdivision that is generally reserved for passive or active
recreation, or as otherwise permitted or required by this chapter or
Chapter 1-19.
      ORIGINAL AGRICULTURAL TRACT.  An agriculturally zoned tract of land
described in the county land records as of August 18, 1976. The term ORIGINAL
AGRICULTURAL TRACT shall be used for the purpose of determining the number of
lot(s) permitted to be recorded from an agriculturally zoned tract of land in
accordance with §
1-16-162 of this chapter, and shall not be used to determine major/minor
subdivision status or applicability of the adequate public facilities
ordinance.
      ORIGINAL PARCEL. A lot, tract or parcel of land as it existed by deed or
plat description on April 6, 1965 (the date of the original adoption of these
regulations) by the Board of County Commissioners.
      OUTLOT. See LOT TYPES.
      OWNER. The person, partnership, corporation, company or other legal
entity holding current legal title.
      PANHANDLE LOT. See LOT TYPES.
      PAVED SURFACE. Shall consist of bituminous concrete or portland cement
concrete on a prepared base or subgrade.
      PERFORMANCE AGREEMENT. See PUBLIC WORKS AGREEMENT.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The Frederick County Planning Commission.
      PLAT. See SURVEY PLAT.
      PRELIMINARY PLAN. The preliminary drawings and supplementary material
indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the
Planning Commission for its consideration.
      PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. That construction or assembly of materials which
combine to form an occupiable building, dwelling or dwellings, the intent of
which is to provide for the main function of the principal structure. Accessory
buildings attached to principal structure either directly or by breezeway will
also be considered principal structure.
      PRIVATE COURT. A privately owned vehicular right-of-way in multifamily
residential developments designated for ingress, egress and parking.
      PUBLIC. Open to common use, whether or not public ownership is involved.
      PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Any of the following: streets, with or without curbs
and gutters, alleys, sidewalks, bridges, crosswalks, water mains; sanitary
sewers, storm drainage systems and stormwater management facilities, with
appurtenant construction; or screen planting, street trees, street lighting and
street signs.
      PUBLIC WORKS AGREEMENT or PERFORMANCE AGREEMENT. A contract, between the
developer and the county, to complete the necessary improvements in accordance
with approved plans and specifications by a given date; such contract to be
guaranteed by a certified check, cash or an irrevocable letter of credit from a
bank or other accredited institution, or other means as approved by the County
Attorney.
      REAR LOT LINE. The lot line or lines generally opposite or parallel to
the front lot line, except in a through lot. If the rear lot line is less than
10 feet long or the lot comes to a point at the rear, such rear lot line is
assumed to be a line not less than 10 feet long, lying wholly within the lot,
parallel to the front lot line, or in the case of a curved front lot line,
parallel to the chord of the arc of such front lot line.
      REMAINDER. The portion of an original agricultural tract or original
parcel that remains following the recordation of lot(s) off the original
agricultural tract or original parcel. An original agricultural tract or
original parcel shall have no more than 1 designated remainder.
      RESERVATION. The assignment of land by a subdivider for a specified use,
to be held for that use and no other to a future time.
      RESUBDIVISION. A further division or modification of an existing
subdivision either previously approved by the Planning Commission and recorded
or recognized by the Planning Commission and recorded in either the land or
plat record of the county. Resubdivision or modification of existing lots shall
conform with the current zoning of the property, the Comprehensive Plan, and
shall fully conform with the subdivision regulations.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land designated for the use of a street,
highway, driveway, alley or walkway, or for any drainage or public utility
purpose or other similar uses.
      ROAD. See STREET.
      SCD. Soil Conservation District.
      SETBACK. Same as BUILDING RESTRICTION LINE.
      SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
      SIDEWALK. A walkway for pedestrian traffic only, placed generally
parallel to a street or highway and within the street right-of-way.
      SIGHT DISTANCE. Visual distance both vertically and horizontally along a
road or at intersection.
      SIGNIFICANT TREE(S). Native trees that are 30 inches or greater in
diameter; trees that are rare, threatened, or endangered tree species; trees
that are currently used as habitat for rare, threatened, or endangered species;
trees that are part of or are associated with a historic site or structure;
trees that have been designated by the state or the Division as a national,
state, or county champion tree or are 75% or more of the diameter of the
current state champion tree of that species; trees that are historically,
socially, or culturally important to a community.
      SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN or SITE PLAN. The plan indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, structures, paved areas, stormwater
management, water and sewer utilities, walkways, vegetative cover, landscaping
and screening within a site proposed for development which is to be submitted
to the Planning Commission or, where allowed, the Planning Commission's
authorized representatives for approval prior to the release of building
permits on the site. See §
1-19-3.300 et seq.
      SKETCH PLAT. A sketch indicating to the Division the subdivider’s general
objectives and desires in regard to the future development of the land.
      STABILIZED SURFACE. Shall consist of a cleared, leveled travelway with an
aggregate base course that has been treated with a bituminous emulsion seal
coat. The bituminous emulsion seal coat is then covered with a layer of stone
chips. This surface is typically referred to as a tar-and-chip surface and is
commonly applied in a 2-step field process.
      STEEP SLOPE. Areas that contain slopes over 25% and are characterized by
increased run-off, erosion and sediment hazards.
      STREET, ROAD or HIGHWAY. A public way for vehicular traffic of such
width, design, construction and specifications as the Highway Plan and
regulations now require or might hereafter require. A public right-of-way which
provides primary access to abutting properties. The term also applies to
rights-of-way under county ownership prior to the enactment of these
regulations. The county’s highways and streets are classified according to the
Comprehensive Plan (highway section) into 1 of the following.
         (a)   RESIDENTIAL LOCAL ACCESS STREET. This is the lowest order street
in the hierarchy. It is intended to carry the least amount of traffic at the
lowest speed and provide the safest and most desirable environment for a
residential neighborhood. Developments shall be designed so that the maximum
number possible of homes will front on this classification of streets.
         (b)   RESIDENTIAL SUBCOLLECTOR STREET.. This is the middle order
street in the residential hierarchy. It will carry more traffic than the
residential access street, have lot access and provide for through traffic and
on-street parking. It shall provide an acceptable if not an optimum environment
for a residential neighborhood.
         (c)   RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR STREET. This is the highest order street
that could be classed as residential. It will carry the largest volume of
traffic at higher speeds. In large residential developments, this class of
street may be necessary to carry traffic from one neighborhood to another or
from the neighborhood to streets connecting to other areas in the community.
This level of street is unsuitable for providing direct access to homes and
such access shall be avoided.
         (d)   SPECIAL PURPOSE STREETS (RESIDENTIAL). Under special
circumstances, a new residential street may be classified and defined as 1 of
the following.
            1.   ALLEY. A special type of street which provides a limited
(i.e., access to parking or trash collection, cut-through) secondary means of
access to lots. It will normally be on the same level in the hierarchy as a
residential access street, although different design standards will apply.
Refer to § 1.01.12 of the Design Manual.
            2.   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A marginal access street is a street
parallel and adjacent to a collector or higher level street which provides
access to abutting properties and separation from through traffic. It may be
designed at the level of a residential access street or a residential
subcollector as anticipated traffic volumes will dictate.
            3.   MEDIAN DIVIDED STREETS. For the purpose of protecting
environment and aesthetic features or avoiding excessive grading, or to provide
tow points of ingress/egress in case of long cul-de-sac, the county may require
that the street be divided. In such a case, the Design Standards shall be
applied to the aggregate dimensions of the 2 street segments.
         (e)   NONRESIDENTIAL STREETS.
            1.   COLLECTORS. Primarily provide intra-county access. They are
spaced to connect residential and employment populations with like generators.
The rural collectors provided service to the scattered smaller communities and
the commercial and industrial collectors accumulate traffic from local urban
streets.
            2.   ARTERIALS. Provide the primary access to the expressway system
and supplement the system by providing inter- and intra-county access through
the more rural areas. Efficient movement is the primary function of arterial
roads; hence, private access and frontage shall be controlled and limited to
high volume generators of vehicle trips.
            3.   FREEWAYS AND EXPRESSWAYS. Limited access interregional
arterial routes (“superhighways”). They are designed exclusively for
unrestricted movement, have no private access and intersect only with selected
arterial highways or major streets by means of interchanges engineered for
free-flowing movement.
         (f)   EXISTING STREETS. Each street abutting or affecting the design
of a subdivision or land development which is not already classified in the
Comprehensive Plan shall be classified to its function,  design and use by the
county at the request of the applicant or during plan review. The
classification of existing streets shall include the hierarchy noted above or
classification of higher order as determined by the county.
      STRUCTURE. Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
      SUBDIVIDER. See DEVELOPER.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into 2 or
more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development. It
includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the
process of resubdividing or to the land or territory subdivided.
      SURVEY. The process of conducting research, performing field measurements
and observations, and applying mathematical principles to determine or obtain
the data necessary to record, display or indicate, or all of these, land
boundaries, land areas, and the position and characteristics of any natural or
artificial, or both, features on or near the surface of the earth.
      SURVEYOR. A professional land surveyor, a licensed property line
surveyor, or an individual otherwise authorized to practice professional land
surveying or property line surveying as stated in Md. Code Ann., Business
Occupations and Professions Article, Title 15.
      SURVEY PLAT. A drawing prepared at an appropriate scale to show the
results of the findings and conclusions of a survey. A survey plat must be
based on a boundary survey and show accurately to scale the results of the
field survey and office computations which will portray the size and shape of a
certain parcel of land.
      TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE. A group composed of county staff members,
and, where appropriate, staff members of the State Highway Administration,
County Health Department, County Soil Conservation District and any other
department or agency concerned with development. See §
1-16-27.
      TRAVELWAY. The vehicle-traveled portion of any road surface, exclusive of
the immediately adjacent drainage ditches, embankments, or grass shoulders not
typically intended to handle daily traffic. Improved shoulders (gravel,
stabilized, or paved) capable of handling occasional traffic or parking can be
considered part of the travelway.
      WALKWAY. As distinguished from a sidewalk and a crosswalk which are
incorporated in a street right-of-way, a WALKWAY is a pedestrian right-of-way
usually extending from a street into a block or across a block to another
street.
      WET SOILS. Soils set forth in the “Soils Interpretation and Water
Features Report” as extracted from the Frederick County, Maryland Soils Survey
Supplement Text and Tables published by the Catoctin and Frederick Soil
Conservation Districts (issued in 2001 or as amended).
      YARD. An area on the same lot with a building or group of buildings,
lying between the building, or outer building of a group, and the nearest lot
or street line, and unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except
as provided for in
Chapter 1-19 of this Code.
(1959 Code, § 38A-80, 38A-81) (Ord. 76-1-61, 1-12-1976; Ord. 78-11-109, 4-3-
1978; Ord. 79-10-136, 5-8-1979; Ord. 80-15-167, 6-10-1980; Ord. 81-44-234, 12-
22-1981; Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-83; Ord. 92-14-049, 7-7-1992; Ord. 93-05-069, 2-
2-1993; Ord. 94-11-106, 6-21-1994; Ord. 96-17-169, 8-6-1996; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-15, 10-15- 2024)
§ 1-16-4. SCOPE OF CHAPTER; AGREEMENT; OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be considered as the minimum
requirements to promote and protect public health, safety and general welfare,
as set forth in the statement of legislative intent. Any subdivision or
development that does not comply with these minimum requirements and any
regulations pursuant thereto shall not be approved.
   (B)   The Division shall require each subdivision and development to conform
to all applicable state, local and federal regulations.
(1959 Code, § 38A-32) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Zoning, see
Chapter 1-19
§ 1-16-5. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In planning and developing a subdivision, the subdivider or agent
shall comply with the general principles of design and minimum requirements for
the layout of subdivisions set forth in this chapter and with the regulations
concerning improvements, as set forth in this chapter, and in every case the
procedures outlined in this chapter shall be observed.
   (B)   Plans submitted under this chapter shall be prepared, signed, and
sealed by registered professionals licensed in the State of Maryland by the
Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation.
   (C)   Any owner or proprietor of any tract of land located in the territory
to which this section may apply, who subdivides the same for the creation of a
subdivision to be made in accordance with the regulations set forth herein and
in Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article and after having secured the approval
thereof by the Planning Commission, shall cause a copy of such plat to be
recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the county.
   (D)   Platting and recording of a subdivision plat under this chapter shall
not be required in the following cases.
      (1)   Court action. The recordation of a subdivision plat under this
chapter for the partition of lands by will and confirmed by a court order, or
through other action of a court of competent jurisdiction is not required
unless or until development or subdivision of the land is proposed. When
development or subdivision is proposed, a subdivision plat meeting all county
code requirements that are not inconsistent with the court order shall be
submitted in accordance with this chapter. Whether deeded or platted, a lot
created by court action shall be counted against the number of lots permitted
to be created from an original agricultural tract, and shall be counted when
determining the major/minor subdivision status of the original parcel. For the
purposes of this section, the term DEVELOPMENT does not include interior
building renovations or porch construction on residential structures that
existed prior to the partition of land and that do not involve a change of use.
      (2)   Public taking.
         (a)   Where a property that was legally recorded in the land records
as of August 18, 1976 has been divided by a county or state maintained public
road which existed prior to August 18, 1976 or by construction of a new public
road by any governmental agency, the property on one side of the road may be
created as a separate lot of record; provided, that the bearings and dimensions
of the lot being created must be described on a public taking plat which shall
be submitted to the Division for approval.
         (b)   A public taking plat shall contain the following information:
            1.   "Plat of public taking" in title block;
            2.   A note stating "This lot is a lot of record because of public
taking;"
            3.   A note to the clerk of the court stating the plat complies
with this paragraph signed by the Director;
            4.   The Planning Commission shall require, by dedication to public
use, full right-of-way dedication as prescribed in the subdivision regulations
and the highway plan section of the Comprehensive Plan along the frontage of
both the lot of public taking and that of the remainder from which the lot of
public taking was derived. Improvements to lands dedicated when creating a lot
by public taking will not be required unless or until development or
subdivision is proposed;
            5.   A certification and dedication by the owner or owners of the
property to the effect that the lot created by public taking as shown on plat
is made with the owner's consent and that the owner desires to record the plat.
         (c)   An agriculturally zoned lot of record created by a public taking
plat shall be considered an original agricultural tract as defined in this
chapter and in §
1-19-7.300 of the zoning ordinance. Any lots created since August 18, 1976
shall be counted against the number of lots that may be subdivided from an
original agricultural tract.
         (d)   Where a property has been the subject of a previously recorded
subdivision plat(s), a lot of record created by public taking may be permitted
if:
            1.   The owner provides the same full road right-of-way dedication
that could have been provided with the previously recorded subdivision plat(s);
and,
            2.   The previously recorded subdivision plat(s) did not create a
new lot that is situated on both sides of the public road.
         (e)   When determining whether a proposed subdivision of a lot created
by public taking is a major or minor subdivision, all subdivision activity that
has occurred since April 6, 1965 on the side of the road where the subdivision
is proposed shall be counted.
         (f)   An unrecorded public taking plat shall become void 3 years after
the application date.
         (g)   When a previously recorded public taking plat must be corrected,
the correction plat requirements and procedures shall be followed.
      (3)   Utility right-of-way. A bona fide division of a tract of land in
order that 1 or more of the resulting parcels may be used as part of an
electric transmission line of right-of-way or other public utility right-of-
way; provided, that if a parcel resulting from such division is ever to be used
for any purpose other than an electric transmission line or other public right-
of-way, then before a building or grading permit may be issued for such other
use, a plat must be filed in accord with this chapter and recorded.
      (4)   Farm lots. If land zoned agricultural or resource conservation is
subdivided in order to transfer land for continuing existing farm activities,
including plowing, tillage, cropping, seeding, cultivating, and harvesting for
production of food and fiber products (except commercial logging and timber
harvesting operations), the grazing and raising of livestock, aquaculture, sod
production, orchards, and other cultivated products, then the general
requirements for subdivision platting shall not be required provided that the
following provisions are met:
         (a)   The proposed farm lot must be at least 25 acres in size and have
fee-simple road frontage.
         (b)   Farm lots shall not be approved if the proposed lots include
existing or proposed sewage disposal systems, potable water systems, or
residential or commercial structures.
         (c)   A farm lot shall not be approved unless the majority of the
proposed lot is unforested and is suitable for farming.
         (d)   Farm lots shall comply with the requirements of the forest
resource ordinance (
Chapter 1-21) prior to lot recordation.
         (e)   A survey plat must be submitted to the Division to establish the
farm lot. The plat shall provide all of the applicable information required for
final plats under §
1-16-88, with the following additions:
            1.   A note shall be placed on the plat stating: the farm lot(s)
shown on this plat (is/are) being created for the sole purpose of transfer for
use as a farm and not for development; such land to be used for crops, pasture,
or other pursuits normally associated with farming. Any future development of
this land, including installation of a sewage disposal system, installation of
a potable water system, application for a residential or nonresidential
building permit, or resubdivision shall require the owner to file an
application for subdivision in accordance with this chapter, and the owner
shall comply with all other applicable state and county laws and regulations.
Approval of farm lots does not guarantee the future approval of a buildable
lot.
            2.   A note to the clerk of the court, stating the plat complies
with §
1-16-5 of the subdivision regulations, must be signed by the Director.
         (f)   Whenever land which is being subdivided for use as a farm
includes or abuts streets designated on the County Comprehensive Plan, the
division shall require, by dedication to public use, adequate right of way, as
described in §
1-16-235 of this chapter.
         (g)   The platting of the remainder parcel shall comply with §
1-16-8(D).
         (h)   If development is ever proposed on a recorded farm lot, the farm
lot must be replatted as a buildable lot in accordance with this chapter. All
subdivision requirements, including road frontage improvements, road adequacy
requirements, and driveway location requirements must be met. All other
applicable county codes, including the adequate public facilities ordinance and
forest resource ordinance must also be complied with.
         (i)   A farm lot plat application shall be valid for 5 years. If the
plat is not recorded within this timeframe, the application will become void.
(1959 Code, § 38A-21) (Ord. 76-1-61, 1-12-1976; Ord. 78-28-126, 1-4-1979; Ord.
80-4-156, § 1, 2-13-1980; Ord. 80-15-167, 6-10-1980; Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-81;
Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-1983; Ord. 95-15-139, 8-1-1995; Ord. 07-36-476, 12-18-
2007; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Recording unapproved subdivision plat, see Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article §
5-302 and § 9-1004
§ 1-16-6. CORRECTION PLATS.
   (A)   Whenever a change is to be made to a previously recorded plat, a
correction plat may be used as long as no additional lots are created. The
corrected plat shall make reference to the recording reference of the original
plat, shall be filed in accordance with the requirements for the platting and
recording of a subdivision, shall be reviewed by those agencies normally
approving final plats, and shall be recorded by the Division. In the case of a
correction plat the county’s requirement of setting 4 monuments as stated in §
1-16-108 of these regulations will not be required if the proposed plat is in
compliance with the requirements of Md. Code Ann., Real Property Book, Title 3,
Subtitle 1, § 3-108, and as enacted or amended so far as it may concern the
setting of monuments and markers.
   (B)   Correction plats shall not be used to nullify a previously recorded
plat unless:
      (1)   A single owner holds current legal title to the affected property
(ies), and
      (2)   The proposed correction will not violate this chapter,
Chapter 1-19, or any Board of Appeals or Planning Commission decisions related
to the property(ies).
   (C)   Correction plats shall include all of the information shown on the
original plat and shall include a note declaring the purpose of the correction
plat.
   (D)   When revisions to a previously approved septic area are proposed, the
note shall state: “The purpose of this plat is to revise a septic system
easement area. The revised septic system easement area as shown is approved for
on-site sewage disposal.”
   (E)   When the correction plat abandons an existing recorded septic system
easement area, the following note shall be added to the correction plat: “The
purpose of this plat is to abandon the existing sewage disposal area as shown.
This parcel may not be considered for development until such a time as either
the parcel can be served by a community sewage disposal system or evaluation of
the parcel demonstrates that the parcel meets the provisions set forth in the
Code of Maryland Regulations 26.04.02 and 26.04.03, in place at the time the
proposal is submitted. Furthermore, development must be consistent with
applicable state and county codes.”
   (F)   An unrecorded correction plat shall become void 3 years after the
application date.
(1959 Code, § 38A-22) (Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-1981; Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-1983;
Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
Cross reference:
   Zoning, see
Chapter 1-19
§ 1-16-7. ADDITIONS TO LOTS.
   (A)   Types of plats.
      (1)   When the owner of a lot or parcel wishes to add additional land to
a lot or parcel, an addition plat must be filed.
      (2)   When 2 or more lots in the same ownership are effectively utilized
so as to virtually eliminate the interior lot lines, such as by the
construction of a permanent structure across lot lines, an addition plat
combining the affected lots, or the affected portions of said lots or property
thereof, into 1 or more property/lot(s) will be required, with the result being
to bring the affected property/lot(s) into conformance with applicable county
regulations.
      (3)   When an addition of land to a lot of record is required in order to
create a buildable lot, a combined preliminary/final subdivision plat and
addition plat must be filed. The applications shall meet all of the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   General requirements of addition plats.
      (1)   An addition plat shall not be approved if it results in the
creation of any lot (or remainder parcel) less than the minimum lot size
required for its zoning district, or results in the creation of any lot (or
remainder parcel) which would be in violation of any other applicable zoning or
health regulations.
      (2)   All resulting lots and any remaining parcels created by an addition
plat shall conform to all existing zoning regulations, with the exception of
preexisting, nonconforming zoning conditions.
      (3)   When an addition parcel adjoins a public road, a right-of-way
dedication must be provided along the addition portion. Road improvements by
the owner will not be required, unless required by the Planning Commission. In
the case of a combined preliminary/final subdivision plat and addition plat,
dedication must be provided along the entire frontage of the new buildable lot,
and road improvements may also be required.
      (4)   Building on addition parcels is permitted; however, building on
addition parcels in agriculturally zoned land must satisfy the criteria in
subsection (5) below;
      (5)   On agriculturally zoned land, no principal dwelling may be built on
the addition parcel unless the criteria set forth in subsection (a) or (b)
below have been met.
         (a)   A principal dwelling may be constructed on the addition parcel
only if the original parcel met the minimum lot size requirements and:
            1.   A house, well, and septic area meeting all applicable
regulations could potentially be located on the original parcel;
            2.   An improvement in lot layout results;
            3.   All other zoning/subdivision requirements have been met; or
         (b)   An addition parcel of 2 acres or less containing an existing
principal dwelling structure may be added to a lot. Other required
improvements, such as septic and wells, may be located on the addition portion.
         (c)   Any modifications to these requirements will require Frederick
County Planning Commission’s approval.
      (6)   Additions shall not be made to agriculturally zoned parcels in
order to create development potential on original parcels which have
floodplain, failed septic percolation test results, size or configuration
limitations, or other features which limit the original parcel's development
potential as determined by the Planning Commission.
      (7)   Accessory structures, including garages, barns, or tenant houses
are allowed on the addition parcel. However, in the agricultural zoning
district, the number of permitted tenant houses will be based on the size of
the lot of record prior to any additions of land from property that is not a
part of the original agricultural tract.
      (8)   Additions shall not be permitted in cluster development so as to
increase individual or average lot sizes above those permitted in the zoning
ordinance or by the approved cluster plan.
   (C)   Methods of recordation.
      (1)   The Director, or a designated staff person, shall be empowered to
approve addition plats and such approval shall be noted on the plat.
      (2)   The approved addition plat shall be recorded with the clerk of the
circuit court of the county.
         (c)   Any modifications to these requirements will require Frederick
County Planning Commission’s approval.
   (D)   Required information. When filing an addition plat, the following
information must be provided:
      (1)   A boundary survey for the land to be added must be provided at the
following scales:
         (a)   For resulting lots less than 3.01 acres, no smaller than 1” =
100’;
         (b)   For resulting lots equal to or greater than 3.01 acres, no
smaller than 1” = 200’.
      (2)   The lot or parcel to which the addition is to be added shall be
shown at the above mentioned scales. If the required information will not fit
on the plat page, the following scales shall be used:
         (a)   For parcels under 25.01 acres, 1” = 200’;
         (b)   For parcels equal to or greater than 25.01 acres, 1” = 400’.
      (3)   For the lot or parcel from which the addition parcel is to be
removed, the following information is required.
         (a)   If less than 5.01 acres remains:
            1.   If the land is unimproved, the original lot or parcel shall be
shown at the scale listed under subsection (2) above, and a note shall be
placed on the plat stating that the remainder is not an approved building lot
until such time as the Health Department approves water and sewer services and/
or proper water and/or sewer classification is obtained for property which will
be served by public water and/or sewer.
            2.   If the land is improved land, the lot or parcel shall be shown
at the scale listed under subsection (2) above. Structures, well and septic
locations and/or proper water and sewer appurtenances shall be shown if they
are visible from above ground or if shown in Health Department records;
         (b)   If 5.01 acres or greater remain, platting of the remaining lot
or parcel is not required, although the vicinity map shall be used to
illustrate the remaining lands. House, well and septic locations shall be shown
if they are within 100 feet of the addition line, and if they are visible or
shown in Health Department records.
      (4)   Vicinity map indicating the location of the property with respect
to surrounding property and streets at a scale no smaller than 1” = 2,000’. Tax
map page and parcel number shall also be shown.
      (5)   The owners’ names and liber and folio deed references for all
adjoining property. In the event that a recorded subdivision adjoins the land,
the subdivision name, lot number, block number and recording reference shall be
indicated. (All this information shall be shown with dashed lines.)
      (6)   North arrow and a statement indicating the origin and method of
determination of the bearings or coordinate system shall be made on the plat.
      (7)   Title block, including the following information:
         (a)   Label “addition plat;”
         (b)   Proposed name;
         (c)   Scale of plat (feet);
         (d)   Location by street;
         (e)   Election district (both name and number), county and state;
         (f)   Date;
         (g)   Tax map and parcel number, and tax ID number; and
         (h)   Planning region.
      (8)   Name, address and phone number of the owner(s) and registered
surveyor. The surveyor must be licensed in the state.
      (9)   A surveyor’s certificate stating how, when, and from whom the
present owner(s) obtained the land and that the plat as shown is correct. The
Division shall specify the exact wording to be used.
      (10)   A certification and dedication by the owner(s) of the property and
all those having an interest in the affected property, to the effect that the
subdivision as shown on the addition plat is made with the owner’s consent, and
that the owner desires to record the plat. The Division shall specify the exact
wording to be used.
      (11)   The owner’s certification and dedication must be notarized in
accordance with applicable law.
      (12)   If a road dedication is required, drafting information for
dedicated areas as described in §
1-16-88.
      (13)   The following note shall be added to the plat:
      “Application is hereby made for your approval of the indicated transfer
of land solely for the purpose of adding to adjoining holdings and not for
development. Any future subdivision or development of this land will be
submitted in the regular manner for approval in accordance with all applicable
regulations.”
      (14)   A note “to the clerk of court” stating:
      “This plat complies with §
1-16-7 of the Frederick County Code,” dated and signed by the Director.
      (15)   All structures, driveways, septics, well and manmade features
within 100 feet of the addition parcel on the original land from which the
transfer was made, or a note stating there are none visible or shown in Health
Department records to be within 100 feet of the addition parcel.
      (16)   All septic and well locations and building restriction lines which
are shown on existing lots of record to which the addition is being made.
      (17)   A note stating that a 6-foot drainage and utility easement is to
be reserved along all resulting external lot lines.
      (18)   A note stating that a confirmatory deed shall be recorded in the
county land records, that the recorded addition plat shall be referenced in
this and all successive deeds, and that the addition parcel(s) shall not be
sold, transferred, or developed as a separate lot, parcel, or tract.
      (19)   When an addition is made to a lot of record in order to provide a
means of fee-simple road frontage (such as when a panhandle is added to a
landlocked parcel), or when an addition of land results in a significant
decrease of fee-simple road frontage (such as when an addition creates a
panhandle), it must be demonstrated that: (a) adequate sight distances exist at
the potential future driveway entrance location; or (b) no alternative driveway
entrance location can be provided.
      (20)   An unrecorded addition plat shall become void 5 years after the
application date.
(1959 Code, § 38A-23) (Ord. 78-11-109, 4-3-1978; Ord. 80-15-167, 6-10-1980;
Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-1981; Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-1983; Ord. 90-43-641, 11-9-
1990; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-8. MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   The Director may approve minor subdivisions of land and/or minor
adjustments in lot lines without the necessity of the subdivider following the
separate preliminary plan procedures under this chapter, subject to the
requirements listed in subsection (B) below.
   (B)   A property owner may apply to the Division for approval of up to 5
lots by submitting a combined preliminary/final plat; provided that the
proposed subdivision does not involve a proposed new street or highway, does
not propose or require a public water or sewer reclassification, and the
property does not lie within any proposed park or recreation area. The combined
preliminary/final plat application shall be submitted on forms provided and
fees shall be paid as required under §
1-16-46 of this Code. The combined preliminary/final plat shall follow all
requirements of a normal preliminary plan and final plat as specified in this
chapter. The combined preliminary/final plat shall also contain the following
information.
      (1)   Topographic information according to the following:
         (a)   Existing topography at 2 or 5 foot contour intervals. Elevations
shall be based on government bench marks when available within 1,000 feet of
property or if greater than 1,000 feet then by estimation from U.S. Geological
Survey (USGS) quadrangle maps. Datum shall be stated in all cases together with
elevation. Source of contours shall be stated on the plat, such as field run
topo, or aerial topo, and the date thereof. Interpolation contours from USGS
quadrangle maps will not be accepted.
         (b)   On residential lots of less than 2 acres with new features,
contour lines shall be indicated 25 feet beyond lot lines.
         (c)   On residential lots of 2 or more acres with new features,
topography shall be shown for the proposed developmental area of the lot and
100 feet beyond the house site, septic area, well, driveway, entrance, and
panhandle of the lot(s).
         (d)   On residential plats, where house, well, septic area, and
driveways are existing, topographic information is not required except over any
new panhandles or if requested by the Division or the Health Department.
         (e)   Plats of institutional, commercial and industrial lots shall
show full topography, extending 25 feet beyond the property line.
         (f)   On minor subdivisions or combined preliminary/final plats,
topographical information shall be provided as above, but may be deleted from
the plat prior to recording.
      (2)   All existing pertinent features either natural or manmade that may
influence the design of the subdivision, including important trees or wooded
areas, easements, power transmission towers, existing buildings and structures
and water courses.
      (3)   Location of existing utilities (including gas, water and sewer
lines and electric and telephone poles and wires) and recorded utility
easements on or within 100 feet of the tract with approximate pipe sizes and
directions of gravity flow indicated.
      (4)   Location and extent of stormwater management measures.
      (5)   Soil type(s) information shall be provided and appropriate
boundaries shown on the plat. In the event that residential structures are
proposed on or within 100 feet of “wet soils,” then a soils delineation report
prepared by a licensed soil scientist or professional engineer registered in
the State of Maryland may be required at the time of building permit
application.
      (6)   If a residential structure(s) with a basement(s) is proposed within
“wet soils,” the developer must:
         (a)   Perform 1 of the following at the time of building permit
application:
            1.   Construct a gravity drainage system in accordance with the
Frederick County Building Code (
Chapter 1-6); or
            2.   Utilize another similar solution acceptable to the Division;
or
            3.   Submit a geotechnical report by a registered professional
engineer in the State of Maryland; and
         (b)   Place a note on the plat stating that construction of a
residential structure with a basement within 100 feet of the wet soils boundary
may require a geotechnical report and gravity drainage systems (or other
similar solution acceptable to the County) at the time of building permit
application.
      (7)   The locations of existing or planned facilities shown in the
Comprehensive Plan that may be located on the subject property, including
roads, trails, transit lines, and parks.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall require that the major subdivision
procedures be followed in the event that any subsequent or concurrently
submitted plat brings the number of lots off the original parcel to 6 or more,
except when the application proposes 5 or fewer lots and involves no new
streets or when a new public water or sewer reclassification is proposed or
required. If these requirements are met, the plat may be processed as a
combined preliminary/final plat with approval by the Planning Commission. The
subject property must be posted according to the regulations found in §
1-16-71(E) of this chapter. Percolation testing and well drilling shall not be
conducted on major subdivision applications until the lot layout is approved by
the Planning Commission.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall require that the remainder be shown as
stated in the appropriate section below.
      (1)   If less than 5 acres of land remain in the original parcel after
the lots are excluded, then all the tract (lots and remainder) must be platted.
      (2)   If more than 5 acres of land remain in the original parcel after
the lots are excluded, then the owner is not required to plat the remaining
acreage. The owner shall provide a sketch of the tax map showing the entire
acreage and the location of the lots being platted and any previously platted
lots.
      (3)   If the remainder has no further subdivision rights the remainder
shall bear a statement to the effect that the remainder cannot be further
subdivided unless rezoned.
   (E)   The Planning Commission shall require the preliminary plan procedure
to be followed if the minor subdivision is not in the combined preliminary/
final plat form. Preliminary plans for minor subdivisions will be reviewed
within the time periods shown in §
1-16-71(B) and (C).
   (F)   A minor subdivision shall remain immune from any changes to this
chapter for 5 years from the date of the original submission of the minor
subdivision application to the Division.
   (G)   A combined preliminary/final plat application shall be valid for 5
years or the period of APFO approval, whichever is less. If the plat is not
recorded within this timeframe, the application will become void.
   (H)   If the minor subdivision application proposes the creation of more
than one new lot, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to place a
public notice sign for all minor subdivision applications within 10 feet of
each property line that abuts a public road. If the property does not abut a
public road, a sign shall be placed in such a manner so that it may be most
readily seen by the public.
      (1)   The Division of Permitting and Development Review shall provide the
required sign(s).
      (2)   The sign(s) shall include the project name, case number, a
description of the application, staff contact information, and a final date and
time for requesting information concerning the minor subdivision.
      (3)   The sign(s) shall be placed on the property within 10 business days
after the date on which the first agency review comments are sent to the
applicant. The sign(s) shall remain on the property for at least 30 days.
Failure to post the sign(s) as required will preclude further review of the
application.
      (4)   The sign(s) shall be affixed to a rigid board and maintained at all
times by the applicant until the final date and time noted on the sign for
requesting information concerning the minor subdivision.
      (5)   The applicant shall file a notarized affidavit certifying that the
required sign(s) has been posted for the required 30 day period.
      (6)   If any person removes or tampers with a posted sign during the
posting period, that person, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (I)   Whenever a previously recorded lot or lots are being resubdivided to
create an additional lot or lots, then a plat of resubdivision shall be filed
in accordance with the requirements under this chapter. The plat shall be
approved by those agencies normally approving preliminary plans and final plats
and recorded by the Division, together with a notation on the plat, which shall
make reference to the plat book and page number of the original plat. Changes
occurring as a result of highway, road, or street improvements which require
additional right-of-way shall not require a resubdivision plat to be recorded,
but may require approval and recording of a road dedication or road amendment
plat. Resubdivision shall not be permitted in residential cluster development
if the lot areas will be reduced below those lot areas shown on the originally
recorded final plat.
(1959 Code, § 38A-24) (Ord. 79-70-136, 5-8-1979; Ord. 80-15-167, 6-10-1980;
Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-1981; Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-1983; Ord. 90-02-600, 3-8-
1990; Ord. 95-15-139, 8-1-1995; Ord. 96-17-169, 8-6-1996; Ord. 00-20-262, § 1,
7-18-2000; Ord. 05-27-388, 10-25-2005; Ord. 08-01-477, 1-8-2008; Ord. 10-23-
558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-9. MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General. The Planning Commission shall require the major subdivision
procedures to be followed if a subdivision or resubdivision is determined to be
a major subdivision as defined in §
1-16-3, except those subdivisions that comply with §
1-16-8(C).
   (B)   Major subdivision procedure.
      (1)   Preliminary plan submission shall conform to Division 3,
Preliminary Plan.
      (2)   Final plat submission shall conform to Division 4, Final Plat.
      (3)   Fees shall be paid as shown in §
1-16-46.
      (4)   Percolation testing and well drilling shall not be conducted on
major subdivision applications until the lot layout is approved by the Planning
Commission through the sketch plan or preliminary plan process.
   (C)   Whenever a previously recorded lot or lots are being resubdivided to
create 6 or more additional lots, then a preliminary plan and final plat of
resubdivision shall be filed in accordance with the requirements under this
chapter. These plans and plats shall be approved by those agencies normally
approving preliminary plans and final plats and shall be recorded by the
division, together with a notation on the plat, which shall make reference to
the plat book and page number of the original plat. Changes occurring as a
result of highway, road, or street improvements which require additional right-
of-way shall not require a resubdivision plat to be recorded, but may require
approval and recording of a road dedication or road amendment plat.
Resubdivision shall not be permitted in residential cluster development if the
lot areas will be reduced below those lot areas shown on the originally
recorded final plat.
   (D)   Subdivision applications shall be processed on a first come-first
serve basis. In the event two or more property owners submit subdivision
applications for development of portions of the same original parcel, and one
or more of the applications proposes the 6th or greater lot off the original
parcel, the determination of which application is a minor subdivision and which
application is a major subdivision will be based on the date and time the
initial complete application is submitted. In the event the plat reviewed as a
minor subdivision becomes void, the voided plat may lose its minor subdivision
status and the later submitted plat may then qualify as a minor subdivision.
(Ord. 80-15-167, 6-10-1980; Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-1983; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-
2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-10. APPROVAL OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permits will be approved by the Department of Permits and
Inspections on any subdivision or development until and unless the requirements
of this chapter have been met as verified by the Division.
(1959 Code, § 38A-25) (Ord. 80-15-167, 6-10-1980; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-11. SUBDIVISION NAME.
   The subdivision name approved by the Division and recorded shall constitute
the subdivision's official name. No other name shall be used for advertising or
sale purposes unless an approved and amended plat is recorded bearing the
revised name. The renaming of only a portion of a subdivision is not permitted.
No approved name shall be duplicated.
(1959 Code, § 38A-27) (Ord. 80-15-167, 6-10-1980; Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-1983;
Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-12. PUBLIC FACILITIES.
   (A)   All subdivisions shall be subject to rules, regulations and
restrictions set forth in the Frederick County Adequate Public Facilities
Ordinance (APFO),
Chapter 1-20. In addition, the Planning Commission may disapprove any
subdivision of land if it is found that any 1 of the following public
facilities are not adequately provided to the proposed subdivision.
   (B)   Road adequacy. The proposed subdivision must have access to 1 or more
paved collector or higher classification road(s) either directly, or via
continuous and adequate public roads, in the direction(s) determined by the
Planning Commission. The road(s) which provide the most direct access route to
the proposed subdivision for the closest emergency response service must also
be adequate. The Planning Commission may use maps, the opinions of county
staff, and site inspection to determine if the access routes to the proposed
subdivision are adequate. The Planning Commission will consider the Frederick
County Roads and Streets Design Manual and Division and county policies to
determine:
      (1)   The adequacy of sight distances, both vertical and horizontal;
      (2)   Whether the vertical road alignment meets the safety standards of
the County Design Manual; and
      (3)   Minimum roadway widths and surfaces, in accordance with the
following requirements:
         (a)   For minor subdivisions.
            1.   The width at all points along the access roads from the site
to the nearest collector road(s) must allow for 2 vehicle passability and
provide access for emergency response vehicles and school buses, such that 2
opposing vehicles can safely pass. A 16 foot travelway width shall be the
normal minimum standard required for 2 vehicle passability. Except as provided
under subsection (3) below, travelways falling between 14 feet and 16 feet at
any point may be reviewed by the Planning Commission (or the Director in
accordance with subsection 2. below) on a case-by-case basis to determine
whether 2 vehicles can pass safely and emergency vehicles and school buses have
access. Travelways less than 14 feet at any point will not be considered
adequate. Minor subdivision may occur on gravel, stabilized or paved surfaces.
In cases where the applicant proposes to widen the travelway, construction
methods and materials shall be as specified in the Design Manual. The applicant
must obtain all necessary easements, plan approvals, and permits prior to
commencement of construction.
            2.   The Director shall have the authority to determine that road
access for a minor subdivision is adequate if all of the following conditions
are met;
               (i)   Lot access is on a road that connects directly to a
collector or arterial road; and
               (ii)   The section of road between the lot access and the
collector or arterial road meets the minimum 16-foot road width requirements;
and
               (iii)   The section of road meeting subsections (i) and (ii)
above is the most direct access route for the closest emergency response
services and for the future lot owners; and
               (iv)   The vertical and horizontal sight distances and existing
grades do not pose safety concerns.
            3.   Except as provided in §
1-16-236(K)(2)(b)1., in the agricultural and resource conservation zoning
districts, travelway widths falling between 14 feet and 16 feet at any point
may be approved at staff level. If staff does not support approval of the
travelway, the applicant may request a review by the Planning Commission.
         (b)   For major subdivisions. Lots must directly access a publicly-
maintained road with a continuously paved surface that is at least 20 feet in
width. Except, however, 5 lots or less within a major subdivision (counting
proposed and previously recorded lots) will be permitted to have direct access
on existing gravel or stabilized surface roads with a minimum 16 foot
travelway, provided that the gravel or stabilized surface road is not an access
route for other development on the original parcel and provided that all other
requirements for adequate public facilities are met.
      (4)   The Division may determine that road access for a minor subdivision
is adequate if a bridge crossing is the only point along the road that falls
below the minimum width requirement, and where:
         (a)   There are adequate areas for vehicles to pull to the side of the
road to wait for oncoming traffic that is crossing the bridge; and
         (b)   There is adequate sight distance and/or signage leading to the
approach of the bridge to provide motorists with advance warning of the narrow
travelway.
      (5)   Road access requirements of this section shall not apply to
subdivision of land to create separate lots for each existing residential
structure (built as of November 18, 1992), but no further subdivision will be
permitted on the remainder unless access complies with the provisions of this
section.
      (6)   Subdivisions utilizing existing or proposed dead end streets or
cul-de-sacs shall adhere to the requirements under §
1-16-236 of this Code.
   (C)   Water and sewer facilities. The proposed subdivision shall be
disapproved unless the following provisions are made for the disposal of sewage
and the provision of water:
      (1)   Prior to plat approval the proposed subdivision must be classified
on the county water and sewer plan for the appropriate water and sewer
classifications which are necessary to provide for the method of sewage
disposal and water supply proposed for the subdivision;
      (2)   Prior to plat approval, each building lot has been approved for
individual and/or community sewerage and water facilities by the appropriate
approving authority; and
      (3)   Prior to plat approval, the requirements of §
1-16-106 have been satisfied.
(1959 Code, § 38A-28) (Ord. 76-1-61, 1-12-1976; Ord. 77-2-79, 1-31-1977; Ord.
80-4-156, 2-13-1980; Ord. 80-15-167, 6-10-1980; Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-1981;
Ord. 93-05-069, 2-2-1993; Ord. 94-11-106, 6-21-1994; Ord. 01-02-276, 2-20-2001;
Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
Cross reference:
   Grading and sediment control, see
Chapter 1-10
§ 1-16-13. CONFLICT WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   Whenever any provisions of this chapter conflict with any other provisions
of law, whether set forth in these regulations or contained in any restrictions
covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is more
restrictive or imposes the higher standards or requirements shall govern. Such
determination shall be made by the Planning Commission.
(1959 Code, § 38A-26) (Ord. 80-15-167, 6-10-1980; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-16-14 – 1-16-25. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: ADMINISTRATION (§§ 1-16-26 — 1-16-45)
Section
   
1-16-26   Administrative agency designated
   
1-16-27   Technical advisory committee meeting
   
1-16-28   Referral to other agencies
   
1-16-29   Appeals
   
1-16-30   Modifications
   
1-16-31   Amendments
   
1-16-32   Violations
§ 1-16-26. ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY DESIGNATED.
   At the direction of the County Planning Commission, it shall be the duty of
the Division to administer and enforce this chapter and to establish the
procedures for its proper implementation consistent with this chapter.
(1959 Code, § 38A-30) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-27. TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE MEETING.
   The developer shall prepare the required plan(s) before meeting with the
committee. The Technical Advisory Committee shall meet to review, discuss, make
recommendations and coordinate processing of the subdivision or development
proposal.
(1959 Code, § 38A-81) (Ord. 94-11-106, 6-21-1994; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-28. REFERRAL TO OTHER AGENCIES.
   The Division may refer the subdivision and development plans to any agency
it deems appropriate for their comments and/or recommendations; and, based on
these recommendations, the Planning Commission will determine the basis of
approval and/or disapproval of a proposed subdivision or development of land.
(1959 Code, § 38A-31) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-29. APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any action of the Planning Commission pursuant to
this chapter may appeal to the Frederick County Board of Appeals within 30 days
after the Planning Commission action. The decision of the Board of Appeals may
be appealed to the Circuit Court in accordance with applicable law. The
decision of the Circuit Court may be appealed to the Court of Special Appeals
in accordance with applicable law.
(1959 Code, § 38A-33) (Ord. 76-1-61, 1-12-1976; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-30. MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Where the Planning Commission finds that because of unusual
circumstances of shape and topography or other physical features or conditions
of the proposed subdivision, or because of the nature of adjacent developments,
extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with this chapter,
there may be granted a modification of this chapter when requested by the
subdivider or developer. However, no such modification shall be granted which
will have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive
Plan, the zoning regulations, this chapter or any other pertinent rules,
regulations or laws of the county. In granting modifications, the Planning
Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objections of the standards of the requirements so waived or
modified.
   (B)   All modification requests shall be made in writing at least 45 days
prior to a scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission and specifically state
the type and extent of the modification being sought.
   (C)   The Division staff shall have the authority to administratively
approve modifications with regards to entrance locations in the following
instances:
      (1)   Entrances on a state road that have State Highway Administration
(SHA) approval;
      (2)   Situations with new lots created around existing entrances with
adequate sight distance (on both collectors and minor arterials);
      (3)   Common-use entrances utilizing existing single entrances which do
not meet separation restrictions but have adequate sight distance (on both
collectors and minor arterials);
   (D)   If an applicant disagrees with the decision of staff, the applicant
may take the request to the Planning Commission. This request shall be filed
with staff along with the appropriate fees at least 45 days prior to the
Planning Commission agenda on which the request is scheduled.
   (E)   Any modification of this chapter for a particular subdivision or
development shall be noted on the final plat and appear in the records of the
Division and shall be transmitted to the subdivider or developer.
(1959 Code, § 38A-35) (Ord. 95-15-139, 8-1-1995; Ord. 00-20-262, 7-18-2000;
Ord. 05-27-388, 10-25-2005; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-16-31. AMENDMENTS.
   The county governing body may adopt amendments to the provisions of this
chapter if it is determined that any such amendment will better the public
interest and the general purpose of this chapter. Proposals for an amendment
may be initiated as provided in the charter. All amendments shall be received
by the Planning Commission and their recommendation shall be submitted to the
county governing body. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
prior to submitting its recommendations to the county governing body. Prior to
making a decision on the proposed amendments, the County Council shall hold a
public hearing. The date and place of all public hearings on the proposed
amendments shall be advertised in at least 1 daily newspaper of general
circulation in the county at least 14 days prior to the hearing.
(1959 Code, § 38A-37) (Ord. 07-08-448, § 3, 4-3-2007; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-
2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-32. VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located
within a subdivision, transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiate to sell
any land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of a
subdivision, before the plat has been approved by the Planning Commission and
recorded or filed in the office of the appropriate county clerk, shall forfeit
and pay a civil penalty of not less than $200 and not more than $1,000 in the
discretion of the court, for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold or
agreed or negotiated to be sold; and the description of the lot or parcel by
metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the
process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from the
penalties or from the remedies herein provided. The county may enjoin the
transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of
equity jurisdiction or may recover the penalty by civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   Subsection (A) above does not apply to a contract for sale, or
negotiation for sale of property zoned industrial, commercial, or both
industrial and commercial, if a plat is approved and recorded in accordance
with this article prior to the transfer of land.
(1959 Code, § 38A-34) (Ord. 90-23-621, 6-15-1990; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Sale or transfer of lots in unapproved subdivisions, see Md. Code Ann., Land
Use Article § 5-301 and § 9-1004
§§ 1-16-33 – 1-16-45. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: PLATS (§§ 1-16-46 — 1-16-103)
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
1-16-46   Fee schedule
Division 2. Sketch Plan
   
1-16-59   Approval procedure
   
1-16-60   Required information
Division 3. Preliminary Plan
   
1-16-71   Approval procedures
   
1-16-72   Required information
Division 4. Final Plat
   
1-16-86   Generally
   
1-16-87   Approval procedure
   
1-16-88   Required information
   
1-16-89   Public improvement plans
   
1-16-90   Agreements for public improvements
Division 5. Miscellaneous Plats
   
1-16-91   Outlot plats
   
1-16-92   Open space parcels
   
1-16-93   Road dedication and road amendment plats
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 1-16-46. FEE SCHEDULE.
   The county governing body shall have the authority to establish, by
resolution, fees for subdivision related services specified in this chapter,
but in no event shall the fee charged be more than the costs incurred by the
county.
(1959 Code, § 38A-36) (Ord. 79-10-136, 5-8-1979; Ord. 80-15-67, 6-10-1980; Ord.
87-21-403, 8-4-1987; Ord. 91-22-022, 8-20-1991; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-16-47 – 1-16-58. RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. SKETCH PLAN
§ 1-16-59. APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The subdivider may prepare a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision
conforming with the requirements set forth in this chapter and it shall be
submitted to the Division, using application forms provided, at least 60 days
prior to a scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   The Division will transmit the sketch plan to the appropriate
agencies.
   (C)   The plan will be scheduled for a Technical Advisory Committee meeting
for review by agency representatives and representatives of the developer. The
developer may waive the Technical Advisory Committee meeting.
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the Division to distribute plans and
information to other agencies, receive comments from those agencies and to
notify the developer as to the time, date and place of meetings and hearings
regarding the development. All such meetings shall be open to the public.
   (E)   The sketch plan will be checked by the Division as to its conformity
with all plans and ordinances in effect.
   (F)   At a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting, the Division
will present the recommendation and findings of other agencies and the
Division’s own recommendation on the sketch plan.
   (G)   The Planning Commission shall give its opinion regarding the sketch
plan and may grant non-binding approval of the lot layout shown on the sketch
plan for the purpose of percolation testing only.
   (H)   The Planning Commission will in general be reviewing the sketch plan
with regard to the following points:
      (1)   Interior street configuration;
      (2)   Entrance locations (both new streets and driveways);
      (3)   Traffic effect on existing and proposed roads;
      (4)   Type of water and sewage system;
      (5)   Feasibility of a subdivision in the area:
         (a)   Total number and size of lots;
         (b)   Effect of building in school district, school bus service;
         (c)   Approximate lot layout, parkland, reserved areas.
      (6)   New techniques in land development.
      (7)   Preservation of environmental features.
      (8)   Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan.
   (I)   The Commission will be reviewing at a minimum the general suitability
of design with regards to topography, drainage, erosion and vertical alignment
of streets, and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas.
   (J)   The review of the sketch plan does not infer any special status on the
plan, but is only to allow a subdivider to determine feasibility of the project
prior to incurring extensive costs for surveying and engineering.
   (K)   The subdivider may waive the right to Technical Advisory Committee and
Planning Commission review and may submit a sketch plan for review by Division
staff. Such a plan will be reviewed on a 30 day cycle and shall conform to all
other provisions of this chapter.
   (L)   Percolation testing and well drilling shall not be conducted on major
subdivision applications until the lot layout is approved by the Planning
Commission.
(1959 Code, § 38A-40(a)) (Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-1981; Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-
1983; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-60. REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   (A)   The sketch plans shall be submitted on paper and shall be clear and
legible. Illegible plats will be discarded and the subdivider notified.
   (B)   The following information shall be shown:
      (1)   Vicinity map indicating the location of the property with respect
to surrounding property and streets. The map shall show all property owned
according to tax map if only part of the property is being developed;
      (2)   In the event that a recorded subdivision adjoins the land to be
developed, the subdivision shall be indicated with dashed lines;
      (3)   The following title information shall be shown:
         (a)   Proposed name;
         (b)   Scale of plat;
         (c)   Date;
      (4)   The name and address of the owner and the owner’s representative
responsible for the preparation of the plan;
      (5)   A north arrow;
      (6)   Boundary of the proposed subdivision. This can be a deed plotting;
      (7)   Topography at 5 foot contour intervals. Contour lines shall be
indicated 100 feet beyond subdivision boundary line. Interpolated contours from
USGS quadrangle maps will be accepted and shall be indicated on the plan;
      (8)   The location, widths and names of all streets or alleys on or
adjoining the subdivision; those preliminary approved or recorded but
unimproved and all existing easements (to be indicated with dashed lines);
      (9)   The location of existing and proposed utilities on or within 200
feet of the tract;
      (10)   The layout of all proposed and existing lots with approximate
dimensions and minimum area. Lots shall be numbered for review reference;
      (11)   The layout of all proposed streets, including widths of rights-of-
way;
      (12)   The approximate location and area of all property proposed to be
reserved to public use or to be reserved for use of all property owners in the
subdivision and the location and purposes of any proposed easements;
      (13)   Zoning district classification, water and sewer classification of
Master Plan for the subject tract;
      (14)   In cases of condominium or multi- family projects (apartment,
townhouse, and the like) the following additional items:
         (a)   Approximate location of each building;
         (b)   Total number of units in each building;
         (c)   Number of parking spaces in each off-street parking area and
total thereof;
         (d)   Interior road or street access, whether public or private.
      (15)   The locations of all environmental features, including:
         (a)   Streams and their required setbacks/buffers;
         (b)   Wetlands and their required setbacks/buffers;
         (c)   FEMA floodplain and flooding soils and their required setbacks/
buffers;
         (d)   Wet soils;
         (e)   Existing forest; and
         (f)   Steep slopes.
      (16)   If the applicant is requesting approval of lot layout, then the
proposed septic areas shall be shown.
      (17)   The locations of existing or planned facilities shown in the
Comprehensive Plan that may be located on the subject property, such as roads,
trails, transit lines, and parks.
(1959 Code, § 38A-40(b)) (Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-1983; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-
2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-16-61 – 1-16-70. RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. PRELIMINARY PLAN
§ 1-16-71. APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plan of the proposed
subdivision conforming with the requirements set forth in this chapter and
submit such plat to the Division using the application forms provided.
   (B)   At least 90 days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Planning
Commission, the appropriate number of prints of the plan shall be filed with
the Division, along with the appropriate fee and other required submissions,
including, but not limited to, adequate public facilities ordinance studies,
forest resource ordinance plans, sight distance studies, and stormwater
management concepts.
   (C)   The division will transmit the preliminary plan to the appropriate
agencies.
   (D)   The plan will be scheduled for a Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)
meeting for review by agency representatives and representatives of the
applicant, and the review period may be reduced to 60 days if:
      (1)   The developer waives the right to a Technical Advisory Committee
(TAC) meeting and meets one of the following conditions:
         (a)   A sketch plan has been reviewed by the Planning Commission;
         (b)   There are not any required new public improvements; or
         (c)   The plan is a minor subdivision plan; or
      (2)   The Division staff determines, after the TAC meeting, that all
county and Maryland State agency comments have been substantially addressed.
   (E)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to place a public
notice sign within 10 feet of each property line which abuts a public road. If
the property does not abut a public road, a sign shall be placed in such a
manner so that it may be most readily seen by the public.
      (1)   The Division shall provide the required sign(s).
      (2)   The sign(s) shall be placed on the property at least 30 days prior
to the initial Planning Commission meeting at which the subdivision plan is to
be considered.
      (3)   The sign(s) shall be affixed to a rigid board and maintained at all
times by the applicant until the initial meeting is held.
      (4)   The applicant shall file a notarized affidavit certifying that the
required signage has been posted.
      (5)   If any person removes or tampers with a posted sign during the
posting period, that person, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (F)   It shall be the responsibility of the Division to distribute plans and
information to other agencies, receive comments from those agencies and to
notify the developer as to Technical Advisory Committee recommendations and the
time, date and place of meetings and hearings regarding the development. All
such meetings shall be open to the public.
   (G)   Each agency to which a plan is referred shall submit written
recommendations denoting "approval," "conditional approval" or "disapproval"
for stated reasons. If an agency recommendation is not made within the
applicable timelines prescribed by the chapter, the Planning Commission or its
authorized representatives may proceed to take action upon the plan without the
recommendation of that agency.
   (H)   The preliminary plan will be checked by the Division as to its
conformity with the Comprehensive Plan of the county; the requirements of the
zoning and subdivision regulations of the county, including the intent and
purpose of those regulations; and the recommendation of other federal, state
and county agencies.
   (I)   At the regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission, the
Division will present the recommendations and findings of other agencies and
the Division’s own recommendation of approval, conditional approval or
disapproval of the preliminary plan.
   (J)   The Commission will act either to: approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove the preliminary plan at a regular meeting. Approval is tentative
involving the general acceptability of the layout submitted and shall in no way
constitute approval of the final plat. It shall be effective for the period
prescribed by §
1-16-71(Q).
   (K)   Approval shall be noted by the Commission signing the necessary copies
of the preliminary plan determined by staff, one of which shall be returned to
the subdivider and one retained by the Commission.
   (L)   If the Commission disapproves the preliminary plan, it shall set forth
the reasons for disapproval in its records and provide the applicant with a
copy.
   (M)   Conditional approval of a preliminary plan shall state the conditions
or modifications necessary to satisfy the requirements of this chapter, and the
actual approval and signing of the preliminary plan shall not be made until
such conditions have been satisfied.
   (N)   The Planning Commission may continue a decision on a plan if there is
a lack of information or if substantial changes are necessary to be performed
in order to make the plan acceptable to the Commission.
   (O)   Any approved preliminary plan shall be exempt from any changes in this
chapter or other applicable law for the period prescribed by §
1-16-71(Q) and any extensions of the approval period in accordance with §
1-16-71(Q). Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter,
exemptions from changes in subdivision regulations or other applicable law
shall not be extended beyond 5 years.
   (P)   The subdivider and concerned county agencies shall receive written
notification as to approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the plan.
   (Q)   Preliminary plan approval may be granted for the lesser of:
      (1)   Five years from the date of Planning Commission approval; or
      (2)   The period of adequate public facilities ordinance approval for the
preliminary plan.
   (R)   The Planning Commission may, at their regular monthly meeting, grant
an extension of the preliminary approval upon written application of the
developer.
      (1)   In connection with such request, the Commission shall at a minimum
consider the following:
         (a)   Change of adjoining land use;
         (b)   Change in street or highway plan; and
         (c)   Changes in applicable regulations.
      (2)   An extension shall be granted only when the developer has started
construction of improvements which will be substantially affected by changes in
applicable laws and regulations. Additional extensions may be granted by the
Planning Commission. However, immunity from changes in applicable laws and
regulations shall not be extended beyond 5 years from the date of the original
preliminary plan approval.
      (3)   A request for extension of preliminary approval which requires
adequate public facilities ordinance testing for water, sewer or traffic shall
be filed at least 90 days prior to the end of the preliminary plan approval
period.
      (4)   A request for extension of preliminary approval which does not
require adequate public facilities ordinance testing for water, sewer or
traffic shall be filed at least 45 days prior to the end of the preliminary
plan approval period.
      (5)   The Division will endeavor to notify the subdivider 120 days prior
to the deadline date for recording that the plan will become void if
recordation does not take place. Failure of the Division to send this notice or
to send it in a timely fashion shall not excuse the subdivider from its
obligation to file any request for extension within the time frames described
above.
   (S)   A disapproved or voided preliminary plan has no status and any further
consideration or review submission shall be treated as a new application.
   (T)   An approved preliminary plan shall become void if all of the lots,
streets, parcels, etc. shown on the preliminary plan are not platted and
recorded in the land records in accordance with this chapter prior to the
expiration of the preliminary plan approval.
   (U)   A Preliminary plan upon which no action has been taken by the Planning
Commission shall become void 3 years after the date of application.
   (V)   Percolation testing and well drilling shall not be conducted prior to
the submittal of the preliminary plan application nor before the lot layout is
approved by the Planning Commission.
(1959 Code, § 38A-41(a)) (Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-1981; Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-
1983; Ord. 95-27-151, 12-5-1995; Ord. 95-15-139, 8-1-1995; Ord. 00-20-262, 7-
18-2000; Ord. 05-27-388, 10-25-2005; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-72. REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   (A)   The preliminary plan shall be submitted by the developer on paper and
shall be clear and legible. The scale shall be no smaller than 1 inch equals
100 feet (1 inch equals 200 feet for lots greater than 3 acres) or as required
by the Division. When more than 1 sheet is required, an index sheet of the same
size shall be submitted showing the entire subdivision drawn to scale. Each
sheet must have a surveyor's seal.
   (B)   The preliminary plan shall show the following information.
      (1)   A vicinity map indicating the location of the property with respect
to surrounding property and streets (scale shall be no smaller than 1 inch
equals 2,000 feet) and conforming to §
1-16-8(D) on the designation of the remainder. Tax map, block and parcel
number, tax ID number, and north arrow shall also be shown.
      (2)   The names of the owners, and the liber and folio deed references
for all adjoining property. If a recorded subdivision adjoins the land to be
developed, the subdivision name, lot number, block number and recording
reference date shall be indicated. (Lot lines shall be indicated with dashed
lines.)
      (3)   The following title information:
         (a)   Proposed name;
         (b)   Scale of plat (feet);
         (c)   Location by election district (both name and number), county and
state;
         (d)   Date.
      (4)   Name and address of the owner and surveyor, signature and seal of
surveyor.
      (5)   North arrow and a statement indicating the origin and method of
determination of the bearings or coordinate system.
      (6)   Surveyor's certification.
      (7)   All existing pertinent features either natural or manmade that may
influence the design of the subdivision, such as important trees or wooded
areas, steep slopes, power transmission towers, existing buildings and
structures and water courses. All streams, floodplains (soils and FEMA), and
wetlands shall be shown, as well as their required setbacks/buffers.
      (8)   Existing topography at 2 or 5 foot contour intervals. Contour lines
shall be indicated 100 feet beyond subdivision boundary. Elevations shall be
based on government bench marks when available within 2,000 feet of property or
by estimation from USGS quadrangle maps. Datum shall be stated in all cases and
a reference or bench mark described on plat together with elevation. Source and
date of contours shall be stated on plan, such as, field run topo or aerial
topo, and the like. Interpolation of contours from USGS quadrangle maps will
not be accepted. Certification of the topography shall be noted on the plan.
      (9)   The location, widths and names of all streets, common driveways, or
alleys on or adjoining the subdivision; those preliminarily approved or
recorded but unimproved and all existing easements (to be indicated with dashed
lines).
      (10)   The location of existing and proposed utilities on or within 200
feet of the tract with approximate pipe sizes and direction of slope indicated.
(This shall include the indication of electric and telephone poles or towers
and the labeling of their respective numbers.)
      (11)   The layout of all proposed and existing lots with approximate
dimensions and minimum building restriction lines shall be indicated. All major
subdivisions must be tied to the Maryland Coordinate System when markers are
available within 2,000 feet of the property.
      (12)   The layout of all proposed streets, common driveways, and
pedestrian ways, including widths of rights-of-way and paved surfaces.
      (13)   The approximate location, dimensions and area of all property
proposed to be reserved or temporarily reserved for public use, or to be
reserved for use of all property owners in the subdivision, and the location,
dimensions and purposes of any proposed easements, including drainage
easements.
      (14)   Zoning district, and water and sewer classification under the
county water and sewer plan, governing the subject tract and adjoining
properties.
      (15)   Existing and proposed drainage systems, including the type of
structures, the floodplain and any deviations from standards.
      (16)   Locations of the 10,000 square foot septic area and proposed wells
are to be indicated in accordance with the specifications of the State
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene when individual sanitary facilities are
to be used. If community sewerage and/or water systems are to be used, show
proposed water and sewer mains and service lines.
      (17)   Total number of lots, area of lots, total area and type of rights-
of-way dedicated and total area of subdivision shall be indicated in table
form. To verify that minimum lot size requirements have been met, preliminary
plans for a panhandle lot shall contain a lot size chart showing gross area
minus panhandle area equals net area.
      (18)   In cases of condominium or multi- family projects (apartment,
townhouse, and the like), the following additional items shall be shown:
         (a)   Approximate location of each building, setbacks from all streets
(public or private), property lines and distance between buildings;
         (b)   Number and types of units in each building;
         (c)   Total number of units and subtotals of each type and square feet
of each;
         (d)   Number of parking spaces in each off-street parking area and
total thereof;
         (e)   Interior road or street access, whether public or private and
total area of each.
      (19)   Soil types.
         (a)   Soils type(s) information shall be provided and appropriate
boundaries shown on the plan. In the event that "wet soils" are located on or
within 100 feet of a proposed residential subdivision, a soils delineation
report shall be prepared by a licensed soil scientist or professional engineer
registered in the State of Maryland. The soils delineation report shall be
submitted for review prior to Planning Commission approval of the plan. The
Division may waive this requirement if the “wet soils” are located within open
space areas.
         (b)   If residential lots are proposed within “wet soils” then a
geotechnical report is required to be submitted by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Maryland. A note shall be placed on the plan that
all construction shall be in conformance with the geotechnical report.
(1959 Code, § 38A-41(b)) (Ord. 76-1-61, 1-12-1976; Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-1981;
Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-1983; Ord. 92-14-049, 7-7-1992; Ord. 95-15-139, 8-1-1995;
Ord. 96-17-169, 8-6-1996; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-
2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-16-73 – 1-16-85. RESERVED.
DIVISION 4. FINAL PLAT
§ 1-16-86. GENERALLY.
   The final plat is the culmination of the subdivision process and shall
include all information necessary to comply with these regulations. The final
plat is intended to become the official record of the division of land within a
development and no lot therein may be sold or transferred legally until a final
plat has been approved and recorded by the Division.
(1959 Code, § 38A-42) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-87. APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   After approval (including signature) of the preliminary plan, the
developer shall submit the final plat, which may consist of a section of the
preliminary plan.
   (B)   Submittal of the final plat shall be made to the Division. The
submittal shall be accompanied by the appropriate number of copies of the final
plat, application, fees and required improvement plans and shall be certified
by the Division as to the date of receipt.
   (C)   The final plat shall be reviewed against and must be in conformance
with the approved preliminary plan. If approval is not given, the reasons
therefor shall be given to the developer in writing by the Division.
   (D)   Final plats need not be brought before the Planning Commission at
their regular meeting, unless specifically requested by the Planning
Commission.
   (E)   The Chairperson or Secretary of the Planning Commission, or the
Chairperson's authorized representative, shall be empowered to approve and sign
the final plat upon confirmation from the Division that the plat meets all
requirements of this chapter and all conditions for approval of such plat have
been met.
   (F)   The authorized signature of the "Health Department approving
authority" shall likewise be affixed to the plat prior to signing by the
Chairperson or Secretary.
   (G)   Prior to signature on the final plat, all required improvement plans
must be approved in accordance with this chapter and other applicable
regulations.
   (H)   The Division shall record the final plat in the land records of the
county.
   (I)   The Division will furnish paper copies of the recorded final plat to
all applicable county and state agencies at the expense of the developer.
   (J)   An unrecorded final plat shall become void 3 years after the plat
submission date. A final plat shall become void if it is not
recorded prior to the expiration of the preliminary plan.
(1959 Code, § 38A-42(a)) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-
2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-88. REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   (A)   The final plat shall be submitted in a format approved by the Division
and shall conform to the plat requirements of the Maryland Code Annotated, as
amended. The size of the plat shall be 18 by 24 inches, including a ½ inch
margin on all sides. This shall be required for all types of plats processed to
be recorded by the Division.
   (B)   The final plat shall be in the following form and contain the
following information.
      (1)   The title block shall appear in the lower right hand corner of the
plat and shall include the following information:
         (a)   Name of the subdivision. The name approved by the Division and
recorded in the land records shall constitute the subdivision’s official and
only name. No other name may be used for advertising or sales purposes unless
an approved and amended plat is recorded bearing the revised name;
         (b)   Section and lot numbers;
         (c)   Scale and date of completion. The scale shall be no smaller than
1 inch equals 100 feet, unless otherwise approved by the Division;
         (d)   Location by election district, (both name and number), county
and state.
      (2)   Approval blocks in the form required by the Division shall be
provided in the lower left hand corner of the plat for signature by the
Commission Chairperson or Secretary and the Health Department approving
authority.
      (3)   Tabulation on final plat (above approval block) showing the
following:
         (a)   Total number of lots and/or parcels to be recorded;
         (b)   Total area of lots and/or parcels, including the reservation of
areas for public purposes;
         (c)   Total area of roadways to be dedicated and recorded;
         (d)   Total area of subdivision to be recorded.
      (4)   A heavy line indicating the boundary of the final plat with
distances of courses to hundredths of a foot and bearings to an accuracy of 1
second.
      (5)   Exact locations, widths, bearings and names of all streets, common
driveways, and pedestrian ways within the subdivision or of adjoining
subdivisions abutting on the outline of the subdivision.
      (6)   The bearings and the lengths of all arcs, radii, tangents, chords
and distances in tabular form.
      (7)   All easements, reservations or rights- of- way provided for public
service or utilities in the subdivision, and any limitations of such easements
shall be located by bearing and distance. All existing recorded easements, if
they are in excess of the standard 6 foot drainage and utility easement, shall
be indicated with recording references if known. All proposed common driveways
located on the subdivision site shall reference the lot user and lot number
information.
      (8)   All lot lines with dimensions in feet and hundredths and with
bearings to a minimum accuracy of 1 second.
      (9)   Minimum area of each lot in square feet if under 1 acre or in acres
if lot size is greater than 1 acre. To verify that minimum lot size
requirements have been met, the final plat for a panhandle lot shall contain a
lot size chart showing gross area minus panhandle area equals net area.
      (10)   Coordinates shown for the outside boundary of the plat.
      (11)   Lot numbers in numerical order throughout the entire subdivision.
In case there is a resubdivision of lots in any block, such resubdivided lots
shall have a number and letter to denote their origin and the original lot
lines shown dashed and original lot number dotted.
      (12)   Minimum rear and side building restriction lines, and the minimum
6 foot drainage and utility easement shall be noted. The front building
restriction line shall be shown graphically with dimensions for each lot. The
rear and/or side building restriction lines may be required to be shown
graphically on lots where the rear and side building restriction lines may be
difficult to determine at the building permit phase, as determined by the
Division. For undeveloped lots in commercial and industrial zoning districts,
the building restriction lines graphic may be waived and substituted with a
note stating "Building restriction lines shall be established at the time of
site plan review" and a reference to Article VI of the zoning ordinance.
      (13)   Vicinity map indicating the location of the property with respect
to surrounding property and streets. Scale to be no smaller than 1 inch equals
2,000 feet. Tax map, page and parcel number, and north arrow shall be shown.
      (14)   The names of property owners, and the liber and folio references
of all adjoining unsubdivided property. In the event that a recorded
subdivision adjoins the land to be developed, the subdivision name, lot number
and recording reference shall be indicated. (Lot lines shall be indicated with
dashed lines.)
      (15)   The plat shall contain a north arrowand a statement indicating the
origin and method of determination of the bearings or coordinate system. The
plat shall also include one of the following; (1) a reference to true north, as
determined by astronomic observation, (2) a reference to the Maryland
Coordinate System with the controlling stations and a combination factor
comprised of an elevation factor and a scale factor noted, (3) a reference to a
local coordinate system with the controlling stations listed, (4) a reference
to the record bearing of a well-established line found monumented on the
ground, as called for in a relevant deed or plat, or (5) if the above
alternatives in this paragraph are not practical, a dated magnetic bearing may
be used.
      (16)   Accurate outlines of any areas to be reserved for common use, by
residents of the subdivision or general public use, with the purposes indicated
thereon.
      (17)   A surveyor’s certificate stating how, when, and from whom the
present owner obtained the land proposed to be subdivided, that the plat as
shown is correct and that it complies with the Maryland Code Annotated. Such
wording as specified by the Division shall be utilized.
      (18)   A certification and dedication by the owner or owners of property
to the effect that the subdivision as shown on the final plat is made with the
owner's consent and that it is desired to record the same and shall be noted on
the final plat. Such wording as specified by the Division shall be utilized.
      (19)   When a development is being resubdivided, the owner’s
certification shall be noted on the plat. Such wording as specified by the
Division shall be utilized.
      (20)   The owner’s dedication and certification shall be notarized.
      (21)   Protective covenants governing the maintenance and ownership of
undedicated public spaces or reservations shall be recorded in the land records
and referenced on the plat.
      (22)   The final plat shall contain the name, address and phone number of
the property owner and surveyor preparing the plat.
      (23)   If a community water supply or community sewerage system is to
serve any new subdivision, the final (record) plat shall contain a statement
signed by the owner to the effect that plans for such facilities, including any
necessary point of discharge, have been approved by the appropriate federal,
state, or county authority, and that such facilities will be available to all
lots offered for sale.
      (24)   Location of 10,000 square feet of usable and continuous septic
area as determined by the Health Department and a proposed well, if applicable.
      (25)   The final plat shall show the location of monuments and markers so
as to comply with §
1-16-108 of this Code.
      (26)   The final plat shall bear the following notes if applicable:
         (a)   Standard Health Department notes.
            1.   The approval of this subdivision does not guarantee an
adequate or potable water well supply for these lots;
            2.   No buildings, easements, rights-of-way, wells or other
permanent or physical objects (man-made structures) are allowed in the septic
area;
            3.   For private wells and septics - This subdivision is approved
for interim individual water and sewerage systems and their use is in
accordance with the Frederick County water and sewerage plan. The applicant or
any future owner must discontinue use of the private systems and connect to the
community systems when they become available. The subdivision shown hereon is
approved as being in conformance with the Frederick County water and sewerage
plan.
            4.   Public sewer, private well - This subdivision is approved for
interim individual water systems and a community sewage system and their use is
in accordance with the Frederick County water and sewerage plan. The applicant
or any future owner must discontinue use of these individual water systems and
connect to the community system when the community system becomes available.
The subdivision shown hereon is approved as being in conformance with the
Frederick County water and sewerage plan.
            5.   Private septic, public water - This subdivision is approved
for interim individual sewage system and a community water system and their use
is in accordance with the Frederick County water and sewage plan. The applicant
or any future owner must discontinue use of these individual sewage systems and
connect to the community system when the community system becomes available.
The subdivision shown hereon is approved as being in conformance with the
Frederick County water and sewerage plan.
            6.   Abandoning an existing recorded septic system easement area -
The purpose of this plan is to abandon the existing sewage disposal area as
shown. This parcel may not be considered for development until such a time as
either the parcel can be served by a community sewage disposal system or
evaluation of the parcel demonstrates that the parcel meets the provisions set
forth in the Code of Maryland Regulations 26.04.02 and 26.04.03, in place at
the time the proposal is submitted. Furthermore, development must be consistent
with applicable state and county codes.
            7.   When lots are to be served by public water and/or sewer and
the facility is being constructed - Plans for a community (water or sewage)
system have been approved by the Maryland Department of the Environment or the
Frederick County Division of Utilities and Solid Waste Management and said
facilities will be available to all lots.
         (b)   Other notes required, if applicable:
            1.   Lot owners are responsible for maintenance of any common
driveway serving their lots. The county shall not be responsible for
maintenance of common driveways;
            2.   All residential buildings shall be in conformance with the
geotechnical report (if one was required at the time of preliminary plan).
            3.   If no floodplains, streams, or wetlands exist, a statement to
this effect shall be placed on the plat.
            4.   Notes documenting all Planning Commission approvals shall be
placed on the plat.
            5.   Any future development may require road layback/frontage
improvements along previously-dedicated rights-of-way.
      (27)   The final plat for commercial or industrial lots serviced by an
individual sewage disposal system must note the maximum allowable flow of
sewerage waste in gallons per day as computed by the County Health Department
based on percolation time and the size of the septic area.
      (28)   Platting of the remaining lands shall conform to §
1-16-8(D) of these regulations.
      (29)   Zoning of the property at the time of platting shall be noted on
the final plat, with the date of the note. Example: “This property is zoned
                as of (date).”
      (30)   All existing pertinent features either natural or manmade that may
influence the design of the future development of the lots, such as significant
trees or wooded areas, steep slopes, power transmission towers, existing
buildings and structures and water courses. All streams, floodplains (soils and
FEMA), and wetlands shall be shown, as well as their required setbacks/buffers.
      (31)   If residential lots are proposed within “wet soils” then a
geotechnical report is required to be submitted by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Maryland. A note shall be placed on the plat that
all construction shall be in conformance with the geotechnical report.
(1959 Code, § 38A-42(b)) (Ord. 76-1-61, 1-12-1976; Ord. 80-4-156, § 1, 2-13-
1980; Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-1981; Ord. 83-18-258, 6-14-1983; Ord. 85-36-368, 9-
10-1985; Ord. 92-14-049, 7-7-1992; Ord. 95-15-139, 8-1-1995; Ord. 96-17-169, 8-
6-1996; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Plat approval and disapproval generally, see Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article
§ 5-201
§ 1-16-89. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall file with the Division the necessary improvement
plans as determined by staff, prior to or concurrently with the submission of
the final plat.
   (B)   The subdivider shall prepare and submit all drawings required to
complete construction of streets, storm drains, water mains and sanitary
sewers, and all other public improvements, together with all necessary
appurtenances thereto in accordance with procedures and criteria contained in
the respective Design Manual.
   (C)   The subdivider shall prepare and submit complete project
specifications when they are other than or different from county standards. In
addition, the subdivider shall submit a tabulated estimate of all quantities
and costs, including contingent items related to constructing all required
public improvements.
   (D)   The subdivider shall furnish any design data and computations as
required. The design data and computations shall be in accordance with the form
and procedures established by the Division.
   (E)   Plans submitted under this section shall be prepared, signed and
sealed by registered individuals authorized to do so in accordance with the Md.
Code Ann., Business Occupations and Professions Article.
   (F)   Following approval, the subdivider shall provide the Division with
copies of the approved plans as required.
(1959 Code, § 38A-42(c)) (Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-1981; Ord. 94-11-106, 6-21-
1994; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-90. AGREEMENTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Upon written notification from the Division that the final plat has
been approved subject to meeting 1 of the 2 requirements below, and prior to
the Chairperson or Secretary of the Planning Commission signing such plat, the
subdivider shall furnish to the county or its authorized representative 1 of
the following guarantees of construction of all required public improvements:
      (1)   Completion and acceptance of public improvements in the area
covered by the final plat submission;
      (2)   An agreement to ensure construction of the public improvements.
   (B)   The agreement for public improvements shall meet the following
requirements.
      (1)   The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the county to
provide for the payment by the applicant of the cost of public improvements.
      (2)   The applicant may not enter into an agreement unless preliminary
subdivision approval has been granted and improvement plans have been approved.
      (3)   By the agreement, the applicant shall guarantee payment of all
costs that are to be paid by the applicant for improvement construction by
letter of credit or escrow account in the name of and on a form approved by the
county plus a contingency of 15% of the construction cost as approved by the
Division to assure completion of the proposed project and to fund the
administrative cost of the county upon default. An applicant may guarantee
payment of stormwater management and public road improvements by use of a
surety bond in the name of, on a form approved by, and in accordance with rules
approved by the county. Any unused funds shall be returned to the applicant at
the acceptance of the construction for the particular project. A release of
funds from time to time may be authorized by the county as requested by the
applicant to pay invoices for work completed in the installation of the public
improvements in the area covered by the final plat.
      (4)   A completion bond to the county furnished by the contractor shall
be required to guarantee the construction of the improvements only if the
county is a party to the construction contract.
      (5)   The applicant shall complete the improvements in accordance with
the agreement, or the county may withhold the issuance of all permits or use
and occupancy permits until the completion of at least major drainage
facilities and the base course of the streets serving the affected lots.
(1959 Code, § 38A-42) (Ord. 84-35-332, 12-11-1984; Ord. 92-14-049, 7-7-1992;
Ord. 98-16-218, 6-24-1998; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
DIVISION 5. MISCELLANEOUS PLATS
§ 1-16-91. OUTLOT PLATS.
   (A)   When platting a parcel of land which meets the definition of outlot
under this chapter within a subdivision which has been included on a
preliminary plan, but not designated as a buildable lot, the outlot shall be
platted through the final plat process. The plat shall contain all of the
information required for final plats, and shall include a note stating the
permitted use of the outlot and shall specify which entity will own and
maintain the outlot. Outlots shall not be used for any purpose other than the
use shown and approved on the preliminary plan and shall be used only in
accordance with these regulations.
   (B)   When platting a parcel of land to be used for an approved governmental
use or an essential service that is not part of a subdivision and has not been
included on a preliminary plan, the parcel shall be platted on an outlot plat.
The outlot plat shall contain all of the information required for final plats
and shall include a note stating the permitted use of the outlot and which
entity will own and maintain the outlot. Outlots shall not be used for any
purpose other than the use shown and approved on the outlot plat.
   (C)   In the agricultural zoning district, outlots approved in accordance
with this section shall not be counted toward the number of allowable lots that
may be subdivided off the original agricultural tract of land as defined in the
zoning ordinance.
   (D)   The platting of the remaining lands shall conform to §
1-16-8(D) of these regulations.
   (E)   The creation and use of outlots shall be in compliance with the zoning
ordinance.
   (F)   An unrecorded outlot plat shall become void 3 years after the
application date.
(Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-92. OPEN SPACE PARCELS.
   (A)   Open space parcels shall be approved by the Planning Commission
through the preliminary plan process. Following the approval of the preliminary
plan, open space parcels shall be platted through the final plat process.
   (B)   Amenities that serve the subdivision may be constructed on open space
parcels, subject to meeting all zoning requirements. Examples of acceptable
amenities within open space parcels include a clubhouse, swimming pool,
playground, gazebo, and similar uses.
   (C)   Open space parcels shall not revert to private ownership. Open space
parcels must be owned by a homeowners association or similar organization for
the benefit and use of all of the residents of the subdivision. The development
of open space parcels for a private use, whether it be for residential,
commercial, or industrial use is prohibited.
   (D)   Final plats that include open space parcels shall contain the
information required for all final plats and shall bear a note declaring the
name of the organization that will own and maintain the open space, the
permitted use of the open space in accordance with the approved preliminary
plan or site development plan, and a note stating that development of open
space parcels for residential, commercial, or industrial use is strictly
prohibited.
   (E)   An unrecorded open space plat shall become void 3 years after the
application date.
(Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-93. ROAD DEDICATION AND ROAD AMENDMENT PLATS.
   (A)   Road dedication. When platting a parcel of land which has been
included on a preliminary plan and designated as a private or public street,
the road right-of-way shall be platted through the final plat process
simultaneously with the platting of the lots that abut that portion of the
street. The plat shall comply with the requirements in §§
1-16-89 -
1-16-90 and Article IV of this chapter.
   (B)   Road amendment plats.  Whenever an existing street is to be altered so
as to change the existing road right-of-way or alignment, a road amendment plat
shall be filed with the Division for  review and approval. The size of the plat
shall be 18 by 24 inches, including a 3-1/2 inch margin for binding along the
left hand edge and ½ inch margin on all other sides, and shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   A reference to the open/close/alter petition approved by the
county, with approval date, ordinance number, and any conditions of approval
shall be noted, if applicable.
      (2)   Area tabulations documenting the changes to the right-of-way and
abutting properties.
      (3)   The title block shall appear in the lower right hand corner of the
plat and shall include the following information:
         (a)   Name of the project and name of the road(s).
         (b)   Scale and date of completion. The scale shall be no smaller than
1 inch equals 100 feet;
         (c)   Location by election district, (both name and number), county
and state.
      (4)   Approval blocks in the form required by the Division shall be
provided in the lower left hand corner of the plat for signature by the
Director.
      (5)   The approximate location, dimensions and area of all property
proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use, and the location,
dimensions and purposes of any proposed easements, including drainage
easements.
      (6)   The bearings and the lengths of all arcs, radii, tangents, chords
and distances.
      (7)   Vicinity map indicating the location of the property with respect
to surrounding property and streets. The scale shall be no smaller than 1 inch
equals 2,000 feet. The tax map, page and parcel number, and north arrow shall
be shown.
      (8)   The names of the owners of, and the liber and folio references for
all adjoining property. If a recorded subdivision adjoins the land to be
developed, the subdivision name, lot number(s) and recording reference(s) shall
be indicated. (Lot lines shall be indicated with dashed lines.)
      (9)   The plat shall contain a north arrow and a statement indicating the
origin and method of determination of the bearings or coordinate system. The
plat shall also include one of the following: (1) a reference to true north, as
determined by astronomic observation, (2) a reference to the Maryland
Coordinate System with the controlling stations and a combination factor
comprised of an elevation factor and a scale factor noted, (3) a reference to a
local coordinate system with the controlling stations listed, (4) a reference
to the record bearing of a well-established line found monumented on the
ground, as called for in a relevant deed or plat, or (5) if the above
alternatives in this paragraph are not practical, a dated magnetic bearing may
be used.
      (10)   Accurate outlines of any areas to be reserved for common use, with
the purposes indicated thereon.
      (11)   A surveyor's certificate stating how, when, and from whom the
present owner obtained the land proposed to be altered, that the plat as shown
is correct, and that it complies with the Maryland Code and these regulations.
Wording specified by the Division shall be utilized.
      (12)   A certification and dedication by the owner or owners of the
property to the effect that the right-of-way as shown on the plat is made with
their consent and that they desire to record the same shall be noted on the
final plat. Wording specified by the Division shall be utilized.
      (13)   The plat shall contain the name, address and phone number of the
property owner and surveyor preparing the plat.
   (C)   This section does not apply to actions that will result in the
creation of separate parcels of land. In such cases the public taking plat
process shall be followed.
(Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§§ 1-16-94 – 1-16-103. RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS (§§ 1-16-104 — 1-16-125)
Section
   
1-16-104   Generally
   
1-16-105   Gas, electric and telephone utilities
   
1-16-106   Water and sewer facilities
   
1-16-107   Stormwater management
   
1-16-108   Monuments and markers
   
1-16-109   Street, common driveway and sidewalk construction
   
1-16-110   Improvement plans
   
1-16-111   Parks
§ 1-16-104. GENERALLY.
   Minimum improvements required for all subdivisions shall be as set forth in
this chapter and all other applicable provisions of federal, state and local
law.
(1959 Code, § 38A-50) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-105. GAS, ELECTRIC AND TELEPHONE UTILITIES.
   Extensions of electric distribution lines necessary to furnish permanent
electric and telephone service to any residential, commercial or industrial
subdivision shall be made underground in accordance with Public Service
Commission rules and existing tariffs. Electric transmission and distribution
lines of 138 kilovolts or greater shall be exempt from the underground
requirement.
(1959 Code, § 38A-51) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-106. WATER AND SEWER FACILITIES.
   (A)   In general. A proposed final plat shall be disapproved unless the
facilities for conveying, pumping, storing, or treating water or sewage to
serve the proposed subdivision would be completed in time to serve the proposed
subdivision.
   (B)   Individual sewerage systems. In the case of a proposed subdivision
otherwise approved for individual sewerage systems, a presumption shall exist
that the sewerage facilities for the proposed subdivision will be completed in
time to serve the proposed subdivision if the health authority tests and
approves all lots in the proposed subdivision for individual sewerage systems.
   (C)   Individual water supply systems. In the case of a proposed subdivision
otherwise approved for individual water supply systems, a presumption shall
exist that the water facilities for the proposed subdivision will be completed
in time to serve the proposed subdivision if all lots in the proposed
subdivision have wells that yield water of sufficient quantity to comply with
all applicable laws and regulations.
   (D)   Community sewerage system. In the case of a proposed subdivision
otherwise approved for a community sewerage system, a presumption shall exist
that the sewer facilities for the proposed subdivision will be completed in
time to serve the proposed subdivision upon the occurrence of all of the
following events:
      (1)   The subdivider and the county make a written public works
agreement, public improvements agreement, or performance agreement that
provides for the construction and installation of sewer lines and facilities;
      (2)   All necessary off site land, easements and rights-of-way required
for the construction and installation of sewer facilities to serve the
subdivision have been conveyed to the county and recorded in the land records;
      (3)   All contracts funded by developers and/or the county for the
construction of public sewer lines or facilities to provide service to the
subdivision have been executed; and
      (4)   For residential subdivisions, the Division of Water and Sewer
Utilities("DWSU") determines that all off site sewerage lines and facilities
shall be operational within 90 days of final plat recordation.
      (5)   For non-residential subdivisions, the DWSU determines that all off
site sewerage lines and facilities will be operational within 180 days of final
plat recordation. A note must be added to final plats for these non-residential
subdivisions stating: "Prior to building permit issuance for any lot or parcel
in this subdivision, the Division of Water and Sewer Utilities must first
determine that sewerage lines and facilities are operational." For the purposes
of this subsection, the term "non-residential subdivisions" excludes mixed-use
lots that contain any residential component.
   (E)   Community water supply system. In the case of a proposed subdivision
otherwise approved for a community water supply system, a presumption shall
exist that the water facilities for the proposed subdivision will be completed
in time to serve the proposed subdivision upon the occurrence of all of the
following events:
      (1)   The subdivider and the county make a written public works
agreement, public improvements agreement, or performance agreement that
provides for the construction and installation of water lines and facilities;
      (2)   All necessary off site land, easements and rights-of-way required
for the construction and installation of water facilities to serve the
subdivision have been conveyed to the county and recorded in the land records;
      (3)   All contracts funded by developers and/or the county for the
construction of public water lines or facilities to provide service to the
subdivision have been executed; and
      (4)   For residential subdivisions, the DWSU determines that all off site
water lines and facilities shall be operational within 90 days of final plat
recordation.
      (5)   For non-residential subdivisions, the DWSU determines that all off
site water lines and facilities will be operational within 180 days of final
plat recordation. A note must be added to final plats stating: "Prior to
building permit issuance for any lot or parcel in this subdivision, the
Division of Water and Sewer Utilities must first determine that water lines and
facilities are operational." For the purposes of this section, non-residential
subdivisions exclude mixed-use lots that contain any residential component.
   (F)   Water and/or sewer easement extensions. Water and/or sewer easement
extensions to service adjoining properties within the service area shall be
extended to the boundary line as determined by the Division of Water and Sewer
Utilities.
(1959 Code, § 38A-52) (Ord. 8-4-156, 2-13-1980; Ord. 00-24-266, 7-27-2000; Ord.
10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-13, 9-6-2022)
§ 1-16-107. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   No final plat of subdivision shall be approved unless a plan for
stormwater management is submitted by the developer and approved by the
Division.
   (B)   A minor subdivision may be exempt from this provision if it meets the
exemption requirements of
Chapter 1-15.2.
   (C)   In the event that stormwater must be managed or contained on the site
of the subdivision under review, improvements that must be constructed shall be
constructed by the developer at the developer's expense.
   (D)   The required storm water management facilities shall be planned,
designed, improved and constructed in accordance with
Chapter 1-15.2.
(1959 Code, § 38A-53) (Ord. 80-4-156, 2-13-1980; Ord. 94-11-106, 6-21-1994;
Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-108. MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   (A)   The plat shall show the position by coordinates of not less than 4
monuments set in convenient places within the subdivision. These monuments
shall be made of hard durable stone or concrete and shall be planted at least 3
feet into the ground. Existing corner stones and monuments can be used to
satisfy this requirement.
   (B)   If the subdivision lies in an area where a recognized coordinate
system already is established and traverse points of the system can be found
and used, the coordinate values shall be marked in the same datum as those on
the points found and identified by datum on the plat. In this case no markers
are required, but the owner of land shall comply with all other requirements.
   (C)   Markers shall be placed at all points of curvature along the street
line, at all angle breaks and at all lot corners not already monumented.
Markers shall adhere to regulations set forth in COMAR 09.13.03.
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the developer, its heirs, successors
or assigns, to have these monuments and markers placed prior to the acceptance
of the streets by Frederick County; and to have the monuments and/or markers
placed at each lot corner prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
by Frederick County. Notation of compliance shall be placed in both the
surveyor's and owner's certification and dedication.
   (E)   The developer shall be responsible and pay all costs necessary to
replace any county grid monuments or control points disturbed by the
development activities. Replacement shall be done only by a registered surveyor
to accurately place such monuments. Such payment to restore any monuments is to
be secured by an agreement with the county.
(1959 Code, § 38A-54) (Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-1981; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010;
Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-109. STREET, COMMON DRIVEWAY AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   (1)   The subdivider shall provide for the complete construction of
street improvements, including drainage facilities as provided in §§
1-16-234 through
1-16-241 of this Code and in accordance with the specifications of the Design
Manual.
      (2)   Open-section construction, as specified in the Design Manual, may
be utilized when the lot frontage is at least 80 feet and the minimum lot size
is at least 15,000 square feet. Closed-section construction, as specified in
the Design Manual, shall be utilized where single-family attached, 2 family and
multifamily developments are proposed and where the lot frontage is less than
80 feet or the minimum lot size is less than 15,000 square feet. Closed-section
construction may also be required by the Planning Commission where it would be
desirable to continue closed-section construction that is existing or proposed
in adjoining developments.
      (3)   Sidewalks.
         (a)   When designated, the minimum sidewalk width shall be 4 feet. In
a typical subdivision, sidewalks have the following function:
            1.   Providing for maximum safety of children playing on their
block;
            2.   Protection of children walking to and from schools and
neighborhood parks;
            3.   Providing for adults to walk to and from neighborhood shopping
and transit stops (if any);
            4.   Providing for adults and children a safe pedestrian travelway
to community buildings and facilities;
            5.   Providing for interconnection between subdivisions and other
uses.
         (b)   Sidewalks shall ordinarily be provided along streets used for
pedestrian access to schools, parks, community facilities, shopping areas and
transit stops. Paved sidewalks shall also be provided within pedestrianways
giving midblock access to these types of generators. Wider sidewalks may be
considered next to higher density pedestrian generators, such as schools,
transit stops and churches. For all closed-section roads (with curbs),
sidewalks will be provided on both sides of the road. In open-sections, a
minimum of 1 sidewalk on 1 side of the road will be provided, except in R-
1 density.
         (c)   Depending on appurtenance placement, a meandering of the
sidewalk placement within the border area may be considered. In appropriate
circumstances, sidewalks may be outside the right-of-way, if such alignment is
more visually appealing or allows for the saving of trees or major plantings,
avoids rock outcroppings, and the like. However, this shall not be regarded as
a justification for locating long sections of walk near the street edge.
   (B)   The subdivider shall provide for the complete construction of
sidewalks in developments where 2 family and multifamily are proposed and in
developments where the median lot size for single-family developments is less
than 10,000 square feet. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all
internal streets and on one side of all streets that run along the boundary of
the development. The Planning Commission may also require sidewalks in the
following situations:
      (1)   Where median lot sizes are 10,000 square feet or greater, and the
character of the neighborhood is such that they are considered necessary;
      (2)   If it would be desirable to continue sidewalks that are existing in
adjoining developments; or
      (3)   To provide access to community facilities such as schools, shopping
areas, and recreation areas. All required sidewalks shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of the Design Manual and shall be maintained
by the adjoining lot owner, a homeowners’ association or similar organization.
   (C)   The developer shall be required to repair damage to county roads,
drainage facilities, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks as a result of grading and
construction activities in the subdivision.
   (D)   The developer of subdivisions utilizing (private) common driveways (as
in double panhandle lots) shall provide for the complete construction of the
common driveway in accordance with the plat and in accordance with the
following.
      (1)   No more than 5 proposed lots and the remainder may be served from a
common entrance or driveway. A remainder utilizing a common driveway cannot be
further subdivided unless another point of access is provided for any
additional lots off of the remainder and this restriction must be noted on the
plat.
      (2)   When a common driveway is to be utilized for 2 to 4 lots (including
lots of record and remainders) a minimum 12 foot travelway width shall be
provided. A travelway width of up to 16 feet may be required in accordance with
the County Fire Code.
      (3)   When 5 or more lots (generated from either a minor subdivision
proposal or a combination of proposed new lots, the remainder, and lots of
record) will utilize a common driveway, a 16 foot travelway width shall be
provided. When 6 or more new lots are proposed (excluding the remainder), a
common driveway is not permitted and a standard public road system must be
utilized.
      (4)   A common driveway must be constructed with the above-described
travelway widths, but may be reduced in width where only one lot is being
served and when permitted by the County Fire Code.
      (5)   The material of the common driveway (not including the apron) may
be stone or asphalt. (Material for the apron must meet the requirements of the
entrance permit.)
      (6)   Common driveways must be used in the following cases:
         (a)   Where adjoining panhandle portions are 300 feet or greater in
length;
         (b)   Where adjoining panhandles cross floodplains or Class IV or
larger streams; or
         (c)   Where use of a common driveway will eliminate or limit the
impact to a waterbody buffer in accordance with §
1-19-9.400 of the zoning ordinance;
In other cases, the use of a common driveway is at the discretion of the
subdivider.
      (7)   Where multiple single driveway aprons cannot be constructed and
meet entrance spacing requirements, a common driveway apron must be
constructed.
      (8)   When common driveways are to be used, they must be built before
final plat recordation, unless this requirement is waived by the Division, in
which case a guarantee must be posted.
      (9)   All common driveways must comply with the County Fire Code.
      (10)   Easement(s) granting the right of ingress and egress to all the
lots and parcels approved to utilize the common driveway which includes
maintenance provisions must be recorded in the land records and referenced on
the subdivision plat prior to plat recordation.
      (11)   For existing plats of record:
         (a)   The owner of a lot or a remainder parcel shown on the original
plat of record may request approval to access and use the common driveway of
the minor subdivision, if the following conditions are satisfied: Use by the
lot or remainder will not result in the total number of lots or parcels served
by the common driveway to exceed 6;
         (b)   The common driveway width complies with the requirements of this
subsection based upon the increased number of lots or parcels served;
         (c)   A correction plat is submitted by the owner of the lot or
remainder parcel sought to be served by the common driveway, which references
the original recorded minor subdivision plat, with notes including restriction
of further subdivision of a remainder; and
         (d)   All owners and those having an interest in every lot shown on
the original recorded plat (including lienholders) must execute the easement
required to be recorded pursuant to subsection 10 above, and the revised plat
prior to recordation.
(1959 Code, § 38A-55) (Ord. 76-1-61, 1-12-1976; Ord. 92-14-049, 7-7-1992; Ord.
94-11-106, 6-21-1994; Ord. 96-06-158, 3-12-1996; Ord. 97-02-180, 1-21-1997;
Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-18, 10-25-
2022)
§ 1-16-110. IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
   Improvement plans shall be provided for all subdivisions proposing public
improvements. The plans shall be submitted and approved by the Division prior
to plat recordation.
(1959 Code, § 38A-56) (Ord. 94-11-106, 6-21-1994; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-111. PARKS.
   (A)   The proposed subdivision shall not be approved unless the provisions
set forth below are met.
      (1)   Every subdivider/developer who develops a residential subdivision
shall dedicate a portion of such land as set forth in this section for the
purpose of providing land for neighborhood parks.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all residential
development districts with the exception of the R-1 zoning district and except
subdivisions containing 59 or less residential lots, dwelling units, apartments
or condominiums.
      (3)   The basis for determining the total number of dwelling units shall
be the number of units approved by the county on the property included on a
preliminary subdivision plan or a site plan filed with the Planning Commission.
   (B)   The area, location and physical characteristics of land required to be
dedicated pursuant to this section shall be as follows.
      (1)   Seven hundred and twenty-six square feet shall be dedicated for
each dwelling unit (1 acre per 60 dwelling units) shown on the preliminary
subdivision plan or site development plan. The Planning Commission may allow
less than the full 726 square feet, as provided for in (B)(2) below.
      (2)   Recreation land shall be located so as to be reasonably accessible
from all lots in the subdivision and in accordance with the following. Up to
50% of the land area to be dedicated may be steep slopes, streams, lakes or
floodplain. In all instances, 50% of the parkland requirements shall be
suitable for dry ground recreational use. Fifty percent of the dry ground
recreational area shall not exceed a grade of 5%. If no land meeting these
requirements exists in the subdivision, or, if the subdivider/developer chooses
to provide more than the required amount of land meeting the 5% slope criteria,
modifications can be made by the Planning Commission with the recommendation of
the Parks and Recreation Division.
      (3)   Where on-site detention and/or retention facilities are provided,
the detention/retention facilities may only count as part of the recreational
area requirement at the discretion of the Planning Commission, with the
recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
      (4)   Title to recreation lands and facilities shall be held by an
established homeowners association in which membership is mandatory and
automatic upon conveyance of title to any lot or unit in the subdivision. The
association shall be incorporated and the articles of incorporation shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval. Upon acceptance
by the Department of Assessments and Taxation of the State of Maryland,
appropriate notations shall be made on the plat as to date of approval and
acceptance. This requirement shall not apply if the county takes title to the
land pursuant to paragraph (5).
      (5)   At the discretion of the Planning Commission, and with the
recommendation of the Parks and Recreation Division, where public ownership is
deemed desirable, the required recreation land may be conveyed to the county.
(Ord. 86-1-378, 1-7-1986; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-16-112 – 1-16-125. RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: OTHER DIVISIONS OF PROPERTY (§§ 1-16-126 — 1-16-215)
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
1-16-126   Special requirements applicable to residential, commercial and
industrial subdivisions
Division 2. Planned Unit Development
   
1-16-141   When authorized
   
1-16-142   Modifications
Division 3. Cluster Developments
   
1-16-161   Residential cluster development
   
1-16-162   Agricultural cluster development
   
1-16-163   Additional regulations
Division 4. Condominiums
   
1-16-179   Generally
Division 5. Mobile Home Park Developments
   
1-16-191   Preliminary plan
   
1-16-192   Final plat
   
1-16-193   Hazardous conditions prohibited
   
1-16-194   Soil and ground surface
   
1-16-195   Streets
   
1-16-196   Walkways
   
1-16-197   Mobile home stands
   
1-16-198   Water and sewers
   
1-16-199   Utilities
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 1-16-126. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   In developments designed and used exclusively for rental occupancy
under single ownership, the maintenance of the local roads may be retained by
the owner; however, the construction of private roads shall meet county road
construction standards and specifications as indicated in the Design Manual.
   (B)   Commercial and industrial subdivision plats shall be submitted in the
same manner and contain the same information, style and format as required of
residential development. The standard cross section of the proposed roads and
right-of-way dedication in commercial and industrial subdivision shall be in
accordance with the Design Manual's nonresidential street design.
(1959 Code, §§ 38A-63, 38A-64) (Ord. 80-4-156, § 1, 2-13-1980; Ord. 83-18-285,
6-14-1983; Ord. 94-11-106, 6-21-1994; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-16-127 – 1-16-140. RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 1-16-141. WHEN AUTHORIZED.
   Planned Unit Development shall be permitted only as authorized by the zoning
ordinance.
(1959 Code, § 38A-60(a)) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-
2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Zoning, see
Chapter 1-19
§ 1-16-142. MODIFICATIONS.
   The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified by the
Planning Commission in the case of Planned Unit Developments which achieve
substantially the objectives of the regulations contained herein and which are
further protected by such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure
conformity to and the achievement of the County Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§§ 1-16-143 – 1-16-160. RESERVED.
DIVISION 3. CLUSTER DEVELOPMENTS
§ 1-16-161. RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The purpose of cluster development is to provide a method of
development that permits variation in lot sizes without an increase in the
overall density of population; that allows home buyers a choice of lot sizes
according to their needs; that preserves green space, tree cover, scenic
vistas, natural drainage ways, or preserves features of outstanding national
topography; in order to prevent soil erosion and provide green areas for rest
and recreation.
   (B)   In approving subdivision plats in any residential district, the
Planning Commission may permit modifications in lot area, lot width, yards
(building restriction areas) including zero lot lines, or other requirements.
Use regulations are governed by the zoning district in which the development is
located.
   (C)   Cluster development is not permitted unless public water and public
sewer are provided. However, if public water cannot be feasibly provided or is
not readily available and the developer can prove that individual water
supplies are feasible by providing a hydrogeologic study and drilling
sufficient test wells, then the Planning Commission may approve a cluster
development with public sewer and individual well with a minimum lot size of
12,000 square feet. In the event that cluster development is approved by the
Planning Commission using individual wells, no building permits shall be issued
for any lot until after a well has been drilled and approved by the Frederick
County Health Department under its regulations.
   (D)   The average dwelling unit density in a residential cluster shall be no
greater than the permitted density for the district in which the units are
located. For the purposes of this division, DENSITY means the maximum number of
dwelling units which could be built on net developable land area in the zoning
district. Net developable land is that land remaining after flooding soils
areas and rights-of-way for principal highways have been deducted from the
gross site area.
   (E)   Requirements.
      (1)   A concept plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission at
least 60 days prior to the Commission meeting at which the concept plan is to
be considered.
      (2)   The concept plan must show:
         (a)   The type of dwelling unit (such as single-family, townhouse,
garden apartment) and building restriction lines; and
         (b)   Street layout; and
         (c)   Green area system; and
         (d)   Vicinity map (scale: no smaller than 1 inch equals 2,000 feet);
and
         (e)   Topography with minimum 10 foot contours (USGS topographic maps
are permitted for the concept plan); and
         (f)   Number of acres in the entire tract; and
         (g)   Overall dwelling unit density.
      (3)   If the concept plan is approved by the Planning Commission, a
preliminary plan shall then be submitted following the standard preliminary
plan procedures specified in §
1-16-71 of this Code.
      (4)   If the preliminary plan is approved by the Planning Commission, the
developer shall submit a site development plan, in accordance with the zoning
ordinance (
Chapter 1-19). A site development plan is not required if the entire
residential cluster consists of single-family detached units.
      (5)   A final plat shall be submitted in accordance with this chapter for
approval, signatures and recordation. Final plats filed on residential cluster
development shall bear a statement indicating that the land lies within an
approved residential cluster development.
      (6)   Residential cluster development is subject to the following
additional conditions.
         (a)   Development of the land within the cluster is permitted only in
accordance with the approved final plat.
         (b)   Reduction of individual lot areas will be reserved as green
area. The county may accept the conveyance of the green areas or the green
areas shall be conveyed to a nonprofit homeowners association. The agreements
concerning the ownership and maintenance of open space land will be recorded
simultaneously with the final plat.
(1959 Code, § 38A-61) (Ord. 95-15-139, 8-1-1995; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010;
Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Zoning, see
Chapter 1-19
§ 1-16-162. AGRICULTURAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The purpose and intent of agricultural cluster development is to
encourage the conservation of farmland in the agricultural zoning district by
planning the residential development allowed in the zone to provide for the
best obtainable siting, access and location of lots on a tract, and to provide
for a well-planned development while minimizing the use of prime agricultural
land.
   (B)   Requirements.
      (1)   For the purposes of this subsection, CLUSTERING shall be defined as
directing the subdivision of lots on a single tract of land to meet the
purposes of this section or transferring the authorized subdivision lots from
adjacent tracts to one tract for development. The Planning Commission shall
make the final determination as to whether the agricultural cluster development
can be achieved in keeping with the purposes of this section.
      (2)   When transferring authorized subdivision lots from 1 or more
tracts, the minimum original tract area required for transfer shall be 25
acres. However, adjoining tracts of less than 25 acres under the same ownership
may receive the rights if the Planning Commission determines that this will
preserve prime farmland.
      (3)   Minimum lot size, width and yard areas shall be as specified in the
zoning ordinance requirements for the agricultural district. Lot sizes which
are part of the cluster should be kept to a minimum in order to limit the
impact on the future agricultural use of the remainder. Lot sizes shall average
no more than 1.5 acres and no lots shall exceed 2 acres. The Planning
Commission shall have the authority to grant modifications to these lot size
restrictions based on percolation and other Health Department requirements.
      (4)   Subdivision under this subsection shall be allowed as follows. A
minor subdivision of 3 lots will be permitted on an original agricultural tract
of 25 acres or less. On an original agricultural tract containing more than 25
acres, the Planning Commission may allow 1 additional lot for each additional
50 acres or part thereof above the first 25 acres subject to the requirements
of this section. The Planning Commission may preclude clustering rights where
subdivision under this section will not conserve farmland, such as where the
tract is primarily in wooded areas, floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes and
other areas not in pasture or crop use.
      (5)   All clusters of 6 or more lots shall be served by an internal
public street and shall not be stripped along an existing roadway.
   (C)   Procedures.
      (1)   Concept plan. For the subdivision of tracts eligible for
agricultural cluster lots, a concept plan shall be submitted to the staff a
minimum of 60 days prior to the meeting at which the concept plan is to be
considered by the Planning Commission, showing all standard and potential
cluster rights to determine the feasibility of subdivision rights for the
original tract(s) of land. The cluster plan shall show the following:
         (a)   The lot layout (scale no smaller than 1 inch equals 100 feet)
including building restriction lines and appropriate dimensions;
         (b)   Street layout;
         (c)   Vicinity map (scale no smaller than 1 inch equals 2,000 feet)
showing the tract(s) and total acreages included within the plan;
         (d)   Topography with minimum 10 foot contours (USGS topo.
interpretation is permitted for concept plan);
         (e)   Development rights table indicating acreages and development
rights, both standard and cluster, for each tract and the total;
         (f)   Soils data for the cluster area and the remaining farmland.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall have final approval authority for the
location and layout of the proposed clustering of lots. The Planning Commission
shall consider the following when reviewing concept plans.
         (a)   Soils. The cluster plan should minimize the use of the higher
quality soils (Class I, II and III as designated in the soils classification
study) and maximize the use of steeper sloped areas, areas of poorer soils and
areas which are otherwise less productive for agricultural uses.
         (b)   Surrounding land use and zoning. The cluster plan shall consider
the existing land uses and zoning in the vicinity. Generally, new lots which
are adjacent to existing development or residential zoning are preferred to
creating an isolated cluster of new houses.
      (3)   Concept plan approval shall become null and void at the end of 1
year from the date of approval unless a combined preliminary/final plat or a
preliminary plat has been submitted for approval for the agricultural cluster.
      (4)   If the concept plan is approved by the Planning Commission, the
developer may then proceed with platting of the cluster development in
accordance with this chapter and the approved concept plan. Final plats shall
show all remaining parcels combined into 1 remainder, provided that any
remaining parcel(s) separated by a public road shall be considered separate
parcels and each parcel shall retain 1 development right.
      (5)   The final plat shall bear a statement indicating that "the land
lies within an approved agricultural cluster development and no further
subdivision of the remaining land is permitted unless the property is re-zoned
or further subdivision is allowed by ordinance or regulation of Frederick
County, Maryland."
      (6)   Farm lots shall be counted against the number of allowable lots
that may be subdivided off the original agricultural tract.
      (7)   When filing a subdivision plat for less than the 3 lots allowed to
be subdivided off the original agricultural tract, the remaining parcel must be
designated "remainder" on the subdivision plat or the property will lose all
further subdivision rights allowed under this section.
(Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-163. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   In addition, the following shall be observed.
   (A)   Resubdivision shall not be permitted in cluster development so as to
reduce lot areas below those permitted in the originally recorded final plat.
   (B)   The development of land within the cluster is permitted only in
accordance with the approved site development plan on file at the Division.
   (C)   The agreements concerning the ownership and maintenance of open space
land shall be recorded simultaneously with the final plat.
(1959 Code, § 38A-61(e)) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§§ 1-16-164 – 1-16-178. RESERVED.
DIVISION 4. CONDOMINIUMS
§ 1-16-179. GENERALLY.
   (A)   In any district where a condominium development is to be established,
it shall be subject to the requirements of the Maryland Condominium Act (Md.
Code Ann., Real Property Article, Title 11). The requirements in this chapter
shall be construed and applied with reference to the overall nature and use of
the property without regard to the form of ownership.
   (B)   For a condominium development, the developer shall submit the
preliminary plan and site development plan as required in accordance with this
chapter and the zoning ordinance (
Chapter 1-19). The preliminary plan and site development plan must clearly
indicate the intent to create a condominium development under the Maryland
Condominium Act, and also include an adequate description of the number of
units and elements of common ownership.
   (C)   Where a developer desires to convert an existing or proposed
condominium development into a non-condominium subdivision, the conversion
shall meet the requirements and processes outlined under this chapter and the
zoning ordinance (
Chapter 1-19) and shall be subject to Planning Commission approval. Nothing in
this section authorizes the developer to construct, or the Planning Commission
to allow, additional dwelling units or more commercial or industrial floor
space than was approved in the previously approved preliminary plan or site
development plan.
   (D)   Where a developer desires to convert an existing structure into a
condominium form of ownership, the developer shall submit the necessary
preliminary plan and site development plan as outlined in subsection (B) above.
   (E)   The condominium declaration and bylaws shall be submitted to the
Division at the time of building permit application for review and approval by
appropriate county agencies.
   (F)   The condominium form of ownership shall not be utilized to create a
division of land into two or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of
land for the purpose of immediate or future transfer of ownership. When such a
division of land is proposed, the proposal shall be submitted, processed and
reviewed as a subdivision plan under this chapter.
   (G)   Amendments, annexations, and other permissible actions related to
condominiums shall comply with Md. Code Ann., Real Property Article, Title 11,
as amended.
   (H)   It is the responsibility of the developer to record condominium plats
and associated legal documents that meet the requirements of the Maryland
Condominium Act. Failure to accurately depict the condominium as it is shown on
the approved preliminary plan and site development plan will require the
developer and/or owner(s) to make corrections to the recorded plat and/or to
the approved preliminary plan and site development plan.
(1959 Code, § 38A-62) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-16-180 – 1-16-190. RESERVED.
DIVISION 5. MOBILE HOME PARK DEVELOPMENTS
§ 1-16-191. PRELIMINARY PLAN.
   For mobile home park developments, a preliminary plan shall be submitted in
accordance with §§
1-16-71 and
1-16-72 of this Code.
(1959 Code, § 38A-65(a)) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-16-192. FINAL PLAT.
   A final plat shall be submitted showing the final layout of the development
as approved by the Planning Commission. The final plat shall be submitted in
accordance with §§
1-16-86 and
1-16-87 of this Code. The final plat shall be recorded.
(1959 Code, § 38A-65(b)) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-16-193. HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   In mobile home park developments the condition of soil, ground water level,
drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health
or safety of the occupants.
(1959 Code, § 38A-65(c)) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-194. SOIL AND GROUND SURFACE.
   (A)   Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home development
shall be paved, or covered with stone screenings or other solid material, or
protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion
and of eliminating objectionable dust.
   (B)   The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home development shall
be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
(1959 Code, § 38A-65(d)) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-195. STREETS.
   (A)   All mobile home developments shall be provided with safe and
convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each
mobile home lot. Such access shall be provided by streets or driveways.
   (B)   Entrances to mobile home developments shall be designed to minimize
congestion and hazards and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets.
No parking shall be permitted on the entrance street for a distance of 150 feet
from its point of beginning.
   (C)   (1)   Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate
anticipated traffic and in any case shall meet the following minimum
requirements.
 
Street Type  ROW feet Paved Surface Width (feet) Curb and Gutter
Collector    42       36                         Yes
Local access 34       28                         Yes
Cul-de-sac   34       28                         Yes
 
      (2)   A cul-de-sac may have a 30 foot right-of-way with a 24 foot paved
surface if 2 off-street parking spaces per mobile home having frontage on the
cul-de-sac are provided.
   (D)   All developments shall be furnished with approved lighting units
spaced no more than 125 feet apart and equipped with luminaries placed at such
mounting heights as will provide for the safe movement of pedestrians and
vehicles at night.
   (E)   Street construction and design standards for mobile home park
developments shall be as follows.
      (1)   All streets shall be privately owned and maintained by the owner.
      (2)   All streets shall be paved to county paved surface standards.
      (3)   Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate
surface drainage, but shall be not more than 8%. Short runs, with a maximum
grade of 10%, may be permitted; provided, traffic safety is assured by
appropriate paving, adequate leveling areas and avoidance of small radii
curves.
      (4)   All streets shall be provided with a concrete or asphalt curb and
gutter.
      (5)   Streets shall intersect at approximately right angles. A distance
of at least 100 feet shall be maintained between center lines of offset
intersecting streets. Intersections of more than 2 streets at 1 point shall be
avoided.
(1959 Code, § 38A-65(f)) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-16-196. WALKWAYS.
   (A)   All developments shall be provided with safe, convenient, paved
pedestrian walkways of a 4 foot minimum width. Sudden changes in alignment and
gradient shall be avoided. Location of walkways are subject to Planning
Commission approval.
   (B)   All mobile home stands shall be connected to common walkways, to paved
driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved street. Such individual
walkways shall have a minimum width of 2 feet.
(1959 Code, § 38A-65(g)) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-16-197. MOBILE HOME STANDS.
   (A)   The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide
adequate support for the placement and tie-down of the mobile home, thereby
securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning.
The mobile home stand shall be constructed so as not to heave, shift or settle
unevenly under the weight of the mobile home due to frost action, inadequate
drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the structure.
   (B)   The mobile home stand shall be provided with anchors and tie-downs,
such as cast-in-place concrete “dead men,” eyelets imbedded in concrete
foundations or runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices
securing the stability of the mobile home.
   (C)   Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at least at each corner of the
mobile home stand, and each shall be able to sustain a minimum tensile strength
of 2,800 pounds.
(1959 Code, § 38A-65(h)) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-198. WATER AND SEWERS.
   (A)   An accessible, adequate, safe, potable and central water supply shall
be provided in each mobile home development.
   (B)   An adequate and safe central sewerage system shall be provided in all
mobile home developments for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system
shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with state and
county laws.
   (C)   Prior to final plat approval, a public works agreement or performance
agreement for community water and/or sewage facilities must be consummated with
the county in accordance with its rules and regulations.
   (D)   Septic systems are prohibited.
(1959 Code, § 38A-65(i), (j)) (Ord. 80-4-156, § 1, 2-13-1980; Ord. 10-23-558,
10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-199. UTILITIES.
   All utilities, including, but not limited to electric and telephone lines,
shall be placed underground in accordance with rules and procedures established
by the State Public Service Commission.
(1959 Code, § 38A-65(k)) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-16-200 – 1-16-215. RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS (§§ 1-16-216 — 1-16-242)
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
1-16-216   General requirements
   
1-16-217   Land requirements
   
1-16-218   Block shape
   
1-16-219   Lot size and shape
   
1-16-220   Floodplain developments
   
1-16-221   Preservation of natural cover
Division 2. Highways, Streets and Roads
   
1-16-234   Generally
   
1-16-235   Right-of-way and paved surface widths
   
1-16-236   Other street requirements
   
1-16-237   Grade
   
1-16-238   Alignment
   
1-16-239   Intersections
   
1-16-240   Lot access to streets
   
1-16-241   Acceptance
   
1-16-242   Cemetery access
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 1-16-216. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In designing a subdivision, the subdivider shall comply with the
legislative intent, principles and requirements of this chapter and all
applicable standards established in pursuance of this chapter.
   (B)   The Division and the Planning Commission in considering an application
for the subdivision of land shall be governed by the consideration and
standards contained herein.
   (C)   The subdivision layout shall be in accordance with the Comprehensive
Plan as adopted or amended by the county and shall be of such a character that
it protects the health, safety and general welfare of the county and its
residents.
(1959 Code, § 38A-70) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-217. LAND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The land use pattern of the Comprehensive Development Plan and the
district regulations of the zoning ordinance shall form the basic theme of the
design pattern of the proposed subdivision.
   (B)   The subdivision design shall take advantage of the uniqueness of the
site reflected by the topography, soils, the wooded areas, water bodies and the
relationship to adjoining subdivisions and land uses, both proposed and
existing.
(1959 Code, § 38A-71) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Zoning, see
Chapter 1-19
§ 1-16-218. BLOCK SHAPE.
   (A)   Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets shall be
such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the zoning
regulations and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic.
   (B)   The maximum block dimension shall be 1,800 feet. In the design of
blocks longer than 1,000 feet special construction shall be given to the
provision of pedestrian interior walkways near the center, or wherever most
useful to facilitate pedestrian circulation to a school, park, recreation area,
shopping center, bus stop or other significant neighborhood destination.
Walkways will only be approved if maintained by individual lot owners, a
homeowners’ association or similar organization.
   (C)   Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate 2 tiers
of lots of minimum depth, except where double frontage lots bordering a
controlled-access highway/street or floodplain are used.
(1959 Code, § 38A-73) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-219. LOT SIZE AND SHAPE.
   (A)   The size, width, depth, shape, orientation and yards of lots shall not
be less than specified in the zoning ordinance for the district within which
the lots are located and shall be appropriate for the type of development, the
use contemplated and future utilities.
   (B)   The relation of the depth of any single- family lot to its width at
the building restriction line shall not be greater than 5 to 1, unless
topography, septic areas or well locations dictate otherwise.
   (C)   Panhandle lots.
      (1)   Panhandle lots are permitted in minor subdivisions.
      (2)   Panhandle lots may be approved by modification of the Planning
Commission in major subdivisions only when it is determined by the Commission
that “excellence of design” will be achieved or that such lots are inaccessible
to the road due to odd shape and/or topographical constraints. In each case,
the Planning Commission will determine “excellence of design” based on the
spatial relationship of the panhandle lot to other lots and the public road.
Only physical design criteria such as odd shape and road inaccessibility,
topography, existing utilities, proposed and existing well and septic
constraints (Health Department criteria) and natural or man-made features shall
be used by the Planning Commission in granting modifications for panhandle lots
in major subdivisions.
      (3)   Not more than 2 panhandle lots of any ownership may have adjoining
entrances to a public right-of-way, except when common driveways are utilized,
and then the number of panhandle lots may not exceed 4.
      (4)   The stacking of panhandle lots to form more than 2 tiers of lots is
prohibited. However, provided that 1 of the following conditions is fulfilled,
the multiple tiering of lots is permitted:
         (a)   Subject to Division staff approval of the BRL, the creation of
up to 3 lots with appropriate BRL which prohibit the front-to-back stacking of
home sites; or
         (b)   A note being placed on the final plat which indicates that
houses will be constructed facing a common driveway so as to eliminate the
fronts of houses facing into the backs of other houses, and the BRLs for such
lots being oriented to a uniform front BRL parallel with a common driveway.
This use of a plat notation and BRLs to mitigate the effects of tiering may be
used on lots which are stacked up to 4 deep, including the remainder.
      (5)   Panhandle lots shall not be created which are unusable due to
topographic or other natural features, with the exception of subdivision for an
existing dwelling which has a usable driveway and for which a usable panhandle
strip cannot be designed.
      (6)   A panhandle lot shall be distinguished from a taper lot in this
way. A taper lot shall be defined as a lot in which the side lot lines
emanating from the street do not break in direction before the minimum lot
width is achieved. If the side lot lines break before these conditions are met,
then such a lot will be defined as a panhandle lot, and therefore, will be
subject to the design limitations presented in this chapter, except where side
lot line breaks are necessitated by proposed septic area and well locations.
      (7)   Panhandles shall not exceed 1,800 feet in length in the
agricultural, resource conservation, R-1 and R-3 zoning districts; 1,000 feet
in length in the R-5 and R-8 zoning districts; or 700 feet in length in the R-
12 and R-16 zoning districts. The length of panhandles in residential portions
of floating zones and in commercial and industrial zoning districts should not
exceed 700 feet and shall require Planning Commission approval. Panhandle
length may exceed the maximum length noted above for the subdivision of a
single lot around an existing dwelling constructed prior to July 17, 1992
provided that the dwelling is habitable, no additional lots or remainders will
be created with a panhandle that exceeds the maximum panhandle lengths, and the
panhandle incorporates the existing driveway serving the dwelling.
   (D)   Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to street lines,
unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan or
unless a variation from this rule will accommodate septic areas or wells as
determined by the Division.
   (E)   Lots which abut 2 streets, other than corner lots, will be permitted
only when necessary to avoid fronting lots on nonaccess streets and highways or
where their use will produce advantages in meeting special situations in
relation to topography, good site planning and proper land use.
   (F)   Lots shall not derive direct access from freeways or expressways. If
lots front on arterial streets or highways, driveway access to the lots shall
be derived from design standards shown under §
1-16-240 of this chapter.
   (G)   Minimum lot areas and widths shall comply with the applicable sections
of the zoning ordinance.
(1959 Code, § 38A-74) (Ord. 80-4-156, § 1, 2-18-1980; Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-
1981; Ord. 92-14-049, 7-7-1992; Ord. 95-15-139, 8-1-1995; Ord. 96-06-158, 3-12-
1996; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Zoning, see
Chapter 1-19
§ 1-16-220. FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Lots lying entirely within a floodplain may not be created as building
lots.
   (B)   Lots to be used for building development must contain an area outside
the floodplain sufficient for the placement of the proposed structures as well
as any required septic area and wells. Placement of structures shall adhere to
the requirements of
Chapter 1-19 of this Code.
   (C)   Floodplains shall be retained in their natural state and comply with §
1-19-9.110 of the zoning ordinance. If the county does not want to incorporate
the area into the county park system, the developer may reserve an easement
unto a legally constituted community association or homeowners association for
the right to use the area in any manner so long as it is not inconsistent with
the maintenance and preservation of the area as a historic or annual
floodplain, consistent with these regulations.
   (D)   In all areas not covered by subsection (C), the floodplain may be
included within the boundary of the lot if the area of the lot is expanded by
an amount sufficient to allow construction of a house, accessory structures,
well, septic system (if applicable) and drainage field (again, if applicable).
In the event that such land is platted as a part of a buildable lot, there
shall be placed on such platted lot a building restriction line which shall be
located by bearing and distance so as to provide at least 25 foot setback
between any building and the floodplain line and a greater setback, where
necessary, to provide positive drainage between the building and the
floodplain.
   (E)   Building materials and other debris shall not be discarded in
floodplains. No floodplain shall be graded or improved so as to increase the
area of impervious surface and increase the rate of water run-off. No other
work shall be done, except that required or authorized by the Division upon
advice of the Soil Conservation District or the Department of Natural Resources
pursuant to the following:
      (1)   Clearing, grading and vegetative stabilization where needed to
restore the natural state of the floodplain or enhance its channel alignment
and shaping so as to contain the 100 year storm flow;
      (2)   Establish erosion control measures such as energy dissipaters,
flumes, riprap, slope revertment and channel liners with appropriate easements
where needed for critical area protection.
   (F)   Floodplain limits shall be clearly defined and shown on preliminary
plans and final plats along with the floodplain setbacks and waterbody buffer
setbacks as established by
Chapter 1-19 of this Code. Notations shall be added to the plat that document
the floodplain and waterbody buffer requirements of this section and
Chapter 1-19.
   (G)   All necessary permits must be obtained by the developer prior to
commencing work within a floodplain.
(1959 Code, § 38A-75) (Ord. 80-4-156, § 1, 2-13-1980; Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-
1983; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-221. PRESERVATION OF NATURAL COVER.
   Land to be subdivided shall be designed and improved in reasonable
conformity to existing topography in order to minimize grading, cut and fill,
and to retain, insofar as possible, the natural contours, minimize storm water
run-off, and conserve the natural cover and soil. No top soil, sand or gravel
shall be removed from any lots shown on any subdivision plat, except in
accordance with the provisions of the applicable regulations, including
stormwater management (
Chapter 1-15.2) and sediment and erosion control (
Chapter 1-10).
(1959 Code, § 38A-76) (Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-16-222 – 1-16-233. RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. HIGHWAYS, STREETS AND ROADS
§ 1-16-234. GENERALLY.
   In designing highways, streets, roads, or common driveways, the subdivider
shall be guided by the following principles.
   (A)   Design to consider the context of the proposed land use, including the
existing and proposed land development patterns on adjacent parcels.
   (B)   Design for opportunities to create interconnections between adjoining
parcels.
   (C)   Provide for adequate vehicular and pedestrian access to all parcels.
   (D)   Design local residential street systems to minimize through traffic
movement and to discourage excessive speed.
   (E)   Provide reasonable direct access from local street systems to the
primary transportation system.
   (F)   Local transportation systems and land development patterns shall not
conflict with the efficiency of bordering arterial routes.
   (G)   Provide for safety, efficiency, and convenience of all users of the
transportation system.
   (H)   Pedestrian-vehicular conflict points shall be minimized.
   (I)   Design to preserve, enhance, or incorporate natural, community, and
historic resources.
   (J)   Be suitably located and designed/improved to accommodate prospective
traffic, emergency service vehicles, and road maintenance equipment.
   (K)   Sidewalk, street design, right-of-way and paving shall be in
accordance with these regulations and the County Design Manual.
(1959 Code, § 38A-72(a)) (Ord. 80-4-156, § 1, 2-13-1980; Ord. 92-14-049, 7-7-
1992; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-235. RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PAVED SURFACE WIDTHS.
   Streets serving subdivisions shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   New streets to be constructed as part of a subdivision or as other
improvements on the land shall require a minimum right-of-way and paved surface
width as stated in the Frederick County Design Manual. The functional
classification of the street shall be as designated on the Highway Plan. If the
proposed new street is not classified on the Highway Plan, then the Planning
Commission shall review the classification of the road as proposed by the
developer to determine if the construction will be adequate to meet the traffic
generated.
   (B)   Whenever a proposed subdivision includes or abuts streets designated
on the Highway Plan section of the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning Commission
shall require, by dedication to public use, adequate right-of-way for the
coordination of roads within the subdivision with other existing, planned or
platted roads. Such dedication to public use shall be to the full extent of the
right-of-way as required in the Highway Plan; except where the right-of-way to
be dedicated is greater than a collector street, then a reservation of land to
meet the right-of-way standards may be required. Before a reservation of land
may be required for future dedication or acquisition for public streets, a
survey plat for the location of the proposed streets must be approved and
recorded in accordance with the provisions of Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article,
Title 6, Subtitle 1, entitled "Street Reservation". When a right-of-way
reservation is required, the Planning Commission may withhold approval for up
to 12 months in order to comply with Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article Title 6,
Subtitle 1. However, if the developer incorporates the recommendation of the
Highway Plan as part of the subdivision plat submission, then the preceding
procedure specified in Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article, Title 6, Subtitle 1 for
reservation shall not be required.
   (C)   Where a proposed street involves state jurisdiction and is designated
on the Highway Plan section of the Comprehensive Plan or the State Highway Plan
and no definite alignment has been established, the Planning Commission may
withhold approval of a subdivision plat for not more than 180 days from the
application date to permit the state highway administration, if they so desire,
to establish an accurate road alignment.
   (D)   In subdivisions that have individual lot access or where egress and
ingress to that subdivision is by use of an existing street that does not meet
the minimum improvement requirements for a local street, said street shall be
improved by the subdivider to the standards of a local street for that portion
of the street which abuts the subdivision in accordance with the following:
      (1)   The improvement standards contained in the Frederick County Design
Manual;
      (2)   If the existing street is designated a collector street or higher
in classification, the subdivider shall improve the street to the standards of
a local street;
      (3)   Where topographic, transitional (from one property to another) or
ownership problems are anticipated to occur, it may not be desirable or
possible to meet all the improvement standards of the Design Manual. The
Division may approve modifications to the requirements of the Design Manual in
order to accomplish the intent and purpose of these regulations, with the
exception of modifications to the separation requirements which shall be
granted only by the Planning Commission;
      (4)   Appeal from the decision of the Division regarding modifications in
street improvement standards may be by any county agency or person to the
County Executive or designee.
   (E)   Coordination with the state highway administration will be required
where existing or proposed state highways are involved.
(1959 Code, § 38A-72(b)) (Ord. 76-1-61, 1-12-1976; Ord. 80-4-156, § 1, 2-13-
1980; Ord. 81-44-234, 12-22-1981; Ord. 83-18-285, 6-14-1983; Ord. 10-23-558,
10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-236. OTHER STREET REQUIREMENTS.
   Streets (whether new or existing) serving proposed subdivisions shall comply
with the following requirements.
   (A)   If a subdivision borders or contains a street designated on the Master
Highway Plan section of the Comprehensive Development Plan, the following shall
apply.
      (1)   Where approved by the Planning Commission, the street shall be made
a part of the subdivision street system.
      (2)   Where streets are required to traverse a proposed subdivision and
it is neither possible nor desirable to make them a part of the subdivision
street system or where the right-of-way required to be dedicated is greater
than a collector street or highway, the Planning Commission may allow the
transfer of dwelling units or lots, which were lost through the right-of-way
dedication, to another part of the same property.
      (3)   Where, in the case of freeways, expressways and major or minor
arterials, a portion of the right-of-way is designated as reserved, the
building restriction lines shall then be measured from the outer edge of the
reserved area.
   (B)   The street system layout shall be continuous in alignment and grade
with existing streets, planned or platted, with which they are to connect.
   (C)   Rights-of-way for proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary
lines of the proposed subdivision so that a connection can be made to all
adjacent properties unless such extension is not feasible because of topography
or other physical conditions, or unless, in the determination of the Planning
Commission, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination
with existing streets or the most advantageous development of adjacent tracts.
In any event, no subdivision shall be designed so as to create or perpetuate
the landlocking of adjacent undeveloped land.
   (D)   [Repealed]
   (E)   Wherever there exists adjoining the tract to be subdivided a dedicated
or platted and recorded half-width or partial highway, street or road, the
remaining width may be required to be platted except where essential to the
reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other requirements
and standards contained herein, and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance
for dedication of the remaining part of the highway, street or road can be
secured.
   (F)   Land dedicated or reserved for street widening shall not be counted in
satisfying the minimum yard or minimum lot area requirements of the zoning
ordinance, but land dedicated or reserved for state and county street widening
may be counted in computing the overall gross density under the zoning
ordinance.
   (G)   Where lots in the proposed subdivision are large enough to permit
resubdivision and/or a portion of the tract is left unsubdivided, then
appropriate rights-of-way shall be provided to permit future subdivision
activity. The above will not apply where recorded restrictions are placed on
resubdivision of the reserved parcel.
   (H)   Street and subdivision names shall be approved by the Division. Such
names shall not duplicate those used elsewhere in the county and must be
approved before the submission of any final plats. In order to change an
existing recorded street name, the above procedure will apply.
   (I)   Street system layout shall provide for the acceptable disposal of
storm water and provision shall be made by the developer to handle storm water
to comply with provisions elsewhere in this chapter and in the Design Manual.
   (J)   The street system layout shall be so designed insofar as practicable
to preserve natural features such as trees, water bodies, hilltops and other
natural features.
   (K)   Subdivisions on cul-de-sac or dead end streets shall be permitted only
if approved by the Planning Commission (or county staff) in accordance with
this division, the Design Manual, and the following provisions, as applicable:
      (1)   For proposed development on new or existing cul-de-sac or dead end
street(s), except existing dead end streets described in subsection (2) below,
the following requirements apply:
         (a)   Applicant must demonstrate the existence of site specific
circumstances that make the design and development of a through street
practically infeasible.
         (b)   In the AG and R-1 zoning district, cul-de-sac or dead end street
(s) shall not exceed 1,800 feet in length and shall not serve more than 30
lots, dwelling units, or parcels. The Planning Commission may approve
development of a greater number of lots and/or on a longer cul-de-sac or dead
end street if the Planning Commission considers the individual property
characteristics and the goals and principles of §
1-16-234 as set forth below in §
1-16-236(K)(1)(c).
         (c)   In the R-3, R-8, R-12, R-16, VC, MX, LI, GI, GC, MXD, ORI, and
PUD zones, the length of cul-de-sac or dead end street(s) may vary based on the
density in the development section or land bay, property shape and size,
topography, environmental constraints, lot size, unit types, and proposed land
use. The density and length of cul-de-sac or dead end street(s) shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved on a case by case basis. The
Planning Commission shall consider the goals and principles of §
1-16-234 when considering the length and density of streets under this
subsection.
      (2)   For proposed development on existing county-maintained dead end
streets that were not designed as such, but have become dead end streets due to
street or bridge abandonment, construction of highways that bisect the street,
or other natural or man-made causes, the following requirements apply:
         (a)   If the dead end street will not serve more than 30 lots or
dwelling units, no maximum street length restrictions apply and the requirement
for Planning Commission approval under §
1-16-236(K) may be waived if all other requirements of this chapter are met.
         (b)   The Planning Commission may approve a proposed subdivision that
increases the number of lots, dwelling units, or parcels serviced by the dead
end street to more than 30 on a case-by-case basis, if the following
requirements are met:
            1.   The travelway must be at least 16 feet wide, allow for two
vehicle passability, and provide access for emergency response vehicles and
school buses.
            2.   An appropriate turn around at the end of the street shall be
in existence or constructed by the applicant. In the event the end of the
street has not been dedicated to public use and is not owned by the applicant,
an alternative location for a turnaround may be approved.
         (c)   In order to grant the modification described in subsection (2)
(b) above, the Planning Commission shall consider the following factors:
            1.   Environmental or topographical barriers that could limit
accessibility, including falling trees, utility poles, flooding, weather
events, or vehicular accidents, and the number of dwelling units on the dead
end street that could be blocked from access by such a barrier;
            2.   The subdivision potential for other property that could
potentially add more users to the dead end street; and
            3.   The distance between the subdivision and the intersection of
the dead end street with a through street; and
            4.   Other relevant factors, including the recommendations outlined
in the Design Manual.
   (L)    Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided with a paved turnaround at the
closed end in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and the
Design Manual.
   (M)   Where a major subdivision plat includes only part of the tract owned
by the developer, a sketch plat layout of proposed streets and roads, if
applicable, for the entire tract shall be submitted.
   (N)   Unobstructed easements at least 10 feet in width may be required to
facilitate pedestrian walkways to commercial facilities, community recreational
areas, schools or other nearby streets where existing access is inadequate.
   (O)   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical
the inclusion of utilities or drainage facilities within the street rights-of-
way, perpetual unobstructed easements for such utilities shall be provided
across property outside the street right-of-way of at least 6 feet in width.
Location is to be determined by the Division.
(1959 Code, § 38A-72(c)) (Ord. 80-4-156, § 1, 2-13-1980; Ord. 94-11-106, 6-21-
1994; Ord. 09-24-528, 7-16-2009; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 12-25-620, 9-
27-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-237. GRADE.
   (A)   Grades of streets and common driveways shall conform as closely as
possible to the original topography and shall be designed to produce usable
lots.
   (B)   Grades of streets and common driveways shall be designed so as to
locate as many building sites as possible at or above the elevation of the
abutting street, rather than below it.
   (C)   Grades of streets shall adhere to the design standards in the Design
Manual and shall not in general exceed those standards.
(1959 Code, § 38A-72(d)) (Ord. 92-14-049, 7-7-1992; Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-238. ALIGNMENT.
   The horizontal and vertical alignment for streets shall conform to the
Design Manual.
(1959 Code, § 38A-72(e)) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-239. INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Multiple intersections involving junctions of more than 2 streets
shall be avoided.
   (B)   Intersections shall be constructed as specified in the Design Manual.
   (C)   Minimum curb radii and paving radii at street intersections shall
adhere to the Design Manual.
(1959 Code, § 38A-72(f)) (Ord. 76-1-61, 1-12-1976; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-240. LOT ACCESS TO STREETS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall have the right to approve or disapprove
any point of ingress and egress to any lot, tract, parcel or development from
any street or highway.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require the subdivider to provide ingress
and egress to a particular lot or tract through the remainder of the property
or other properties over which the owner has control.
   (C)   In approving ingress or egress from any state highway, the Commission
can only approve those access points that are not in conflict with safety
standards of the state highway administration or with the right-of-way or
through highway line of a limited or denied access highway.
   (D)   (1)   Where a proposed commercial, industrial or residential
subdivision involves frontage on an expressway, freeway, major arterial or a
minor arterial highway or street, the street layout shall provide vehicular
access to such subdivision by 1 of the following means:
         (a)   A parallel street;
         (b)   A series of culs-de-sac;
         (c)   An access driveway;
         (d)   A reserve strip;
         (e)   Common driveways.
      (2)   The specific requirements for each of the above methods shall be as
specified in the Design Manual. If any of the aforementioned arrangements are
used, the statement “vehicular egress and ingress denied” shall be shown along
the limits of the road frontage on the final subdivision plat to prevent
residential, commercial or industrial driveways from having direct access to
freeways, expressways, major arterial and minor arterial highways and streets.
(1959 Code, § 38A-72(g)) (Ord. 76-1-61, 1-12-1976; Ord. 92-14-049, 7-7-1992;
Ord. 10-23-558, 10-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-241. ACCEPTANCE.
   The approval of a final subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute
or imply the acceptance by the county of any street shown on such plat.
Acceptance of streets into the county highway system occurs only after all
public improvements have been completed, in accordance with the requirements of
the county, as expressed in the Design Manual. Common driveways will not be
accepted into the county highway system.
(1959 Code, § 38A-72) (Ord. 76-1-61, 1-12-1976; Ord. 92-14-049, 7-7-1992; Ord.
14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-16-242. CEMETERY ACCESS.
   For any burial site located on land subject to a subdivision plat, an
appropriate easement shall be provided for ingress and egress to the burial
site by a person who is related by blood or marriage, or who has a cultural
affiliation with the persons interred in a burial site, or who has an interest
in a burial site that the office of the state’s attorney for the county where
the burial site is located recognizes is in the public interest after
consultation with a Local Burial Sites Advisory Board or, if such a Board does
not exist, the Maryland Historical Trust.
(Ord. 95-15-139, 8-1-1995; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
CHAPTER 1-17: TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-17-1 — 1-17-20)
Section
   
1-17-1   Definitions
   
1-17-2   Parking of trailers outside of trailer parks
   
1-17-3   Additions to trailer coaches; removal of wheels from same
   
1-17-4   Enforcement
   
1-17-5   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of county to regulate trailers and trailer parks, see Md. Code
Ann., Local Government Article § 13-203
§ 1-17-1. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The duly constituted County Health Department, or its
accredited representative.
   NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL BARRIER. Any river, pond, canal, railroad, levee,
embankment, fence or hedge.
   PARK. A trailer coach park.
   TRAILER COACH. Any portable structure or vehicle constructed and designed so
as to permit occupancy thereof for dwelling or sleeping purposes.
   TRAILER COACH PARK. Any plot of ground upon which 2 or more trailer coaches
occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether
or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
   TRAILER COACH SPACE. A plot of ground within a trailer coach park designed
for the accommodation of 1 trailer coach.
   ZONING. Such term shall mean to be zoned for use as a trailer coach park.
(1959 Code, § 39-1) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-2. PARKING OF TRAILERS OUTSIDE OF TRAILER PARKS.
   No person shall maintain or use any trailer coach which is occupied for
dwelling or sleeping purposes on any place within the county for a period of
more than 3 days in any month, except in a duly licensed trailer coach park.
(1959 Code, § 39-2) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-3. ADDITIONS TO TRAILER COACHES; REMOVAL OF WHEELS FROM SAME.
   No additions shall be built to any trailer coach. Wheels shall not be
removed from trailers, except for repairs, and then only long enough for such
repairs.
(1959 Code, § 39-3) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-4. ENFORCEMENT.
   The health authority shall enforce all the provisions of this chapter. For
the purpose of securing such enforcement, the health authority shall have the
right and is hereby empowered to enter upon any premises on which any
automobile trailer coach is located or about to be located and inspect the same
and all accommodations connecting therewith at any reasonable time. The health
authority is further empowered to issue orders granting, renewing and revoking
such permits and licenses as are provided for in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(1959 Code, § 39-4) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-5. PENALTY.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, the offender shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$25 for each offense. Every day such violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense and be punishable as such. In default of payment of such fine,
the offender shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days.
(1959 Code, § 39-22) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-17-6 – 1-17-20. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: TRAILER PARKS (§§ 1-17-21 — 1-17-70)
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
1-17-21   Register
   
1-17-22   Trailer park plan
   
1-17-23   Location
   
1-17-24   Water supply
   
1-17-25   Sanitation facilities
   
1-17-26   Laundry facilities
   
1-17-27   Sewage disposal
   
1-17-28   Garbage and rubbish disposal
   
1-17-29   Fire protection
Division 2. License
   
1-17-46   Required
   
1-17-47   Application
   
1-17-48   Fees
   
1-17-49   Investigations; issuance
   
1-17-50   Transfers
   
1-17-51   Posting
   
1-17-52   Revocation
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 1-17-21. REGISTER.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the licensee in any trailer coach park to keep
a register containing a record of all trailer coach owners and occupants
located within the park. The register shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of each occupant;
      (2)   The make, model and year of all automobiles and trailer coaches;
      (3)   The license number and owner of each trailer coach and automobile
by which it is towed;
      (4)   The state issuing such licenses;
      (5)   The date of arrival and departure of each trailer coach.
   (B)   The trailer coach park shall keep the register available for
inspection, at all times, by law enforcement officers, public officials and
other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information
contained in the register. The register records shall not be destroyed for a
period of 3 years following the date of registration.
(1959 Code, § 39-5) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-22. TRAILER PARK PLAN.
   Each trailer coach park shall conform to the following requirements.
   (A)   The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to
insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
   (B)   Trailer coach spaces shall be provided consisting of a minimum of
1,000 square feet for each space, which shall be at least 25 feet wide and
clearly defined. Trailer coaches shall be so harbored on each space that there
shall be at least 15 foot clearance between trailer coaches. No trailer coach
shall be located closer than 20 feet from any property line bounding the park.
   (C)   All trailer coach spaces shall abut upon a driveway of not less than
20 feet in width which shall have unobstructed access to a public street, alley
or highway. All driveways shall be hard surfaced, well marked in the daytime
and lighted at night with 25 watt lamps at intervals of 100 feet, located
approximately 15 feet from the ground.
   (D)   Walkways not less than 2 feet wide shall be provided from the trailer
coach spaces to the service buildings. The walkways shall be hard surfaced,
well marked in the daytime and lighted at night with 25 watt lamps at intervals
of 100 feet, located approximately 15 feet from the ground.
   (E)   Each park shall provide service buildings to house toilet facilities,
bathing facilities, laundry facilities and other sanitary facilities as
hereinafter more particularly prescribed and comply in all respects with state
and county requirements.
   (F)   An electrical outlet supplying at least 119 volts shall be provided
for each trailer coach space.
(1959 Code, § 39-14) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-23. LOCATION.
   Trailer coach parks must be zoned for trailer coach park use. Each boundary
of the park must be at least 200 feet from any permanent residential building
located outside the park, unless separated therefrom by a natural or artificial
barrier or unless a majority of the property owners according to area within
such 200 feet consent in writing to the establishment of the park.
(1959 Code, § 39-15) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-24. WATER SUPPLY.
   An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be
supplied in each trailer coach park to meet the requirements of the state and
county. The water supply shall be obtained from faucets only. No common
drinking cups shall be permitted. Cold water supply faucets shall be located on
each trailer coach space. An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at
all times in the service buildings for bathing, washing and laundry facilities.
(1959 Code, § 39-16) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-25. SANITATION FACILITIES.
   Each trailer coach park shall be provided with toilets, baths or showers,
slop sinks and other sanitation facilities which shall conform to the following
requirements.
   (A)   Toilet facilities for men and women shall be either in separate
buildings at least 20 feet apart or shall be separated, if in the same
building, by a sound proof wall.
   (B)   Toilet facilities for women shall consist of not less than 1 flush
toilet for every 10 trailer coach spaces, 1 shower or bathtub for every 10
trailer coach spaces and 1 lavatory for every 20 trailer coach spaces.
   (C)   Toilet facilities for men shall consist of not less than 1 flush
toilet for every 15 trailer coach spaces, 1 shower or bathtub for every 10
trailer coach spaces, 1 lavatory for every 20 trailer coach spaces and 1 urinal
for every 15 trailer coach spaces. Each toilet, shower and bathtub shall be a
private compartment.
   (D)   Service buildings housing toilet facilities shall be permanent
structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating
buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation systems. They
shall be located not closer than 10 feet nor farther than 200 feet from any
trailer coach space.
   (E)   Each service building shall contain 2 slop sinks; one to be placed in
the men’s toilet and one in the women’s toilet.
   (F)   The service buildings shall be well lighted at all times of the day or
night, shall be well ventilated with screened openings, shall be constructed of
such moisture-proof material, including painted woodwork, as shall permit
repeated cleaning and washing and shall be maintained at a temperature of at
least 68°F during the period from October 15 to May 1. The floors of the
service building shall be of water- impervious material and shall slope to a
floor drain connected with the sewerage system.
   (G)   All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained
in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any conditions that will menace
the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance.
(1959 Code, § 39-17) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-26. LAUNDRY FACILITIES.
   Laundry facilities shall be provided in trailer coach parks in the ratio of
1 double laundry tub and ironing board for every 10 trailer coach spaces. An
electric outlet supplying current sufficient to operate an iron shall be
located conveniently near the ironing board. Drying spaces shall be provided
sufficient to accommodate the laundry of the trailer coach occupants. The
service building housing the laundry facilities shall be a permanent structure
complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating buildings,
electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation systems.
(1959 Code, § 39-18) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-27. SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   Waste from showers, bathtubs, toilets, slop sinks and laundries shall be
discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances
or into a private plant or septic tank system which meets the requirements of
state and county regulations. All kitchen sinks, washbasins, baths or shower
tubs in any trailer coach harbored in any park must empty into a sanitary sink
drain located on the trailer coach space.
(1959 Code, § 39-19) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-28. GARBAGE AND RUBBISH DISPOSAL.
   A tightly covered metal garbage can shall be provided for each trailer coach
space. The cans shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times and shall be
provided with tight metal covers. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and
disposed of as frequently as may be necessary.
(1959 Code, § 39-20) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-29. FIRE PROTECTION.
   Every trailer coach park shall be equipped at all times with 1 fire
extinguisher in good working order for every 10 trailer coach spaces, located
not farther than 200 feet from each trailer coach space. No open fires shall be
permitted at any place which would endanger life or property. No fires shall be
left unattended at any time.
(1959 Code, § 39-21) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-17-30 – 1-17-45. RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
§ 1-17-46. REQUIRED.
   No person shall maintain or operate, within the county, any trailer coach
park, unless such person shall first obtain a license from the Board of Health.
(1959 Code, § 36-6, 36-7) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-47. APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications for a trailer coach park license shall be filed with the
Board of Health. Applications and all accompanying plans and specifications
shall be filed in triplicate.
   (B)   Applications shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The location and legal description of the trailer coach park;
      (3)   A complete plan of the park showing compliance with sewage
disposal;
      (4)   Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed or to be constructed within the trailer coach park;
      (5)   Such further information as may be requested by the Board of Health
to enable it to determine if the proposed park will comply with legal
requirements.
(1959 Code, § 39-7) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-48. FEES.
   (A)   The annual license fee for each trailer coach park shall be $25 for
each block of 10 trailer coach spaces or fraction thereof; provided, that the
maximum license fee for 1 trailer coach park shall not be more than $100.
   (B)   In addition to the annual license fee required by subsection (A),
there shall be a quarterly fee of $6 for each trailer coach occupying space
therein.
   (C)   The fee for the transfer of a license shall be $5.
(1959 Code, § 39-9) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-49. INVESTIGATIONS; ISSUANCE.
   The Board of Health and the County Sheriff shall investigate the applicant
for a trailer coach park license and inspect the proposed plans and
specifications. If the applicant is found to be of good moral character and the
proposed trailer coach park will be in compliance with all provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable ordinances or statutes, the Board of Health
shall approve the application and, upon completion of the park according to the
plans, issue the license.
(1959 Code, § 39-10) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-50. TRANSFERS.
   Upon application for a transfer of a trailer coach park license, the Board
of Health shall issue a transfer, if the Sheriff shall report that the
transferee is of good moral character.
(1959 Code, § 39-12) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-51. POSTING.
   The trailer coach park license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in
the office or on the premises of the trailer coach park at all times.
(1959 Code, § 39-11) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-52. REVOCATION.
   The Board of Health may revoke any license to maintain and operate a trailer
coach park when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent
jurisdiction. The license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to
conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in
full compliance with law.
(1959 Code, § 39-13) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-17-53 – 1-17-70. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: TAX ON AUTOMOBILE TRAILER COURTS (§§ 1-17-71 — 1-17-77)
Section
   
1-17-71   Definitions
   
1-17-72   Tax imposed
   
1-17-73   Reports and remittances
   
1-17-74   Liability of persons collecting tax
   
1-17-75   Determination of amount due by county
   
1-17-76   Forms, rules, regulations, etc.
   
1-17-77   Penalty for violations
§ 1-17-71. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   AUTOMOBILE TRAILER. Any vehicle or structure designed and constructed in
such manner as permits occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for 1 or more
persons, or the conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade or
use as a selling or advertising device for any business, profession, occupation
or trade and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a
conveyance on highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other
motive power, excepting a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.
   TRAILER COURT. Any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp, site,
lot, parcel or tract of land designated, maintained or intended for the purpose
of supplying a location or accommodations for any automobile trailer or
automobile trailers and upon which any automobile trailer or automobile
trailers are parked and as to which charges are made for the use of the trailer
camp. The term does not include automobile trailer sales lots on which charges
are made for the use of the trailer camp. The term  does not include automobile
trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for the purpose of
inspection and sale.
(1959 Code, § 39-23) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-72. TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   Every person licensed to operate and conduct an automobile trailer
court in the county under existing laws or regulations pertaining thereto shall
collect from any person or persons paying charges for the rental, lease or use
of any space, facilities or accommodations or for the providing of any services
by such automobile trailer court a tax thereon computed at 0% of such charges.
   (B)   On those trailers owned or leased by the trailer court owner or
operator for the purpose of rental, the tax shall be based upon the amount
charged as rent, except if such trailers shall be fixed upon permanent
foundation then those trailers shall be assessed as real property.
(1959 Code, § 39-24) (Ord. 12-16-611, 6-19-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-73. REPORTS AND REMITTANCES.
   The tax levied in this article shall be accumulated and paid monthly to the
Treasurer of the county. On or before the fifteenth day of each month of each
year, every trailer camp operator shall file with the County Treasurer a report
showing the amount of tax due for each month preceding the filing of such
report and shall pay to the Treasurer the total tax for each month as shown
thereon.
(1959 Code, § 39-25) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-74. LIABILITY OF PERSONS COLLECTING TAX.
   Any person or officer required to collect and remit the tax imposed by this
article shall be personally liable for the tax collected or required to be
collected under this article, and he shall have the same right in respect to
the collecting of the tax or in respect to the nonpayment of the tax as if the
tax was part of the rental price of the property or services charged.
(1959 Code, § 39-26) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-75. DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT DUE BY COUNTY.
   If any person required to collect and remit the tax imposed by this article
fails to file a statement and a remittance or if the county has reasonable
cause to believe that an erroneous statement has been filed, the county may
proceed to determine the amount due the county and in connection therewith
shall make such investigations and shall take testimony and other evidence as
may be necessary; provided, however, that notice and opportunity to be heard be
given by the county.
(1959 Code, § 39-27) (Ord. 77-21-98, 12-19-1977; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-76. FORMS, RULES, REGULATIONS, ETC.
   The county governing body and the County Treasurer shall be authorized to
develop such rules and regulations, forms and devices for the proper accounting
and collection of such tax.
(1959 Code, § 29-28) (Ord. 77-21-98, 12-19-1977; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-17-77. PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   When tax due the county is not paid in full by the fifteenth day of
the following month, a penalty of 1% per month on the unpaid balance shall be
imposed and collected by the Treasurer of the county.
   (B)   Any person liable for the tax imposed by this article who:
      (1)   Willfully fails to pay the tax imposed by this article;
      (2)   Willfully fails to collect and remit the tax imposed;
      (3)   Willfully fails to file any report filed as required by this
article; or
      (4)   Willfully makes any false statements or misleading omission in any
report filed is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both; such
fine or imprisonment shall be in the discretion of the court.
(1959 Code, § 39-29) (Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
CHAPTER 1-18: WATERS, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL (§§ 1-18-1 — 1-18-6)
Section
   
1-18-1   Division of Utilities and Solid Waste Management
   
1-18-2   Director
   
1-18-3   Advisory committee
   
1-18-4   Responsibilities and powers of county
   
1-18-5   Percolation test excavations
   
1-18-6   Civil infractions
§ 1-18-1. DIVISION OF UTILITIES AND SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT.
   There is hereby established the County Division of Utilities and Solid Waste
Management under the control of the County Executive.
(Ord. 78-6-104, 2-14-1978; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross references:
   Building, see
Chapter 1-6;
   Grading and sedimentation control, see
Ch. 1-10;
   Planning, see
Chapter 1-13;
   Plumbing, see
Chapter 1-14;
   Subdivisions, see
Chapter 1-16;
   Water and sewer facilities in subdivisions, see §
1-16-106
§ 1-18-2. DIRECTOR.
   The County Executive may appoint a Director of the Division of Utilities and
Solid Waste Management, subject to confirmation by the County Council, who
shall serve at the pleasure of the County Executive, and whose salary and
duties shall be established by the county, and any employees of the Division
shall be appointed in accordance with the county personnel rules. The principal
responsibilities of the Division shall include the construction, operation,
supervision of water and sewerage for the county, including water supply
facilities and projects, wastewater collection, treatment and disposal
facilities and projects, and such other functions and duties which are not
inconsistent herewith as may be assigned from time to time by the County
Executive. By ordinance, the county governing body may provide for further
details concerning the administration and operation of the Division of
Utilities and Solid Waste Management.
(Ord. 78-6-104, 2-14-1978; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-18-3. ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   The county governing body may create a County Division Advisory Committee,
by resolution or ordinance, consisting of 15 members or such other number as
may be determined, whose duties and functions shall be provided for in the
resolution or ordinance appointing the members.
(Ord. 78-6-104, 2-14-1978; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-18-4. RESPONSIBILITIES AND POWERS OF COUNTY.
   The county hereafter shall have all the authority, powers and
responsibilities heretofore exercised by the County Metropolitan Commission, as
provided by law. All assets and liabilities, real, personal, and mixed, of the
Metropolitan Commission are hereby transferred and conveyed and assumed by the
county. Any outstanding bonded indebtedness of the Metropolitan Commission is
hereby assumed by the county, and the county shall assume and comply with any
agreements, grants, obligations and contracts duly entered into by the
Metropolitan Commission, and the existing front foot benefit charges,
connection charges, service charges, and other levies shall remain in effect
until further action by the county.
(Ord. 78-6-104, 2-14-1978; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Powers which county assumed, see
Chapter 2-13
§ 1-18-5. PERCOLATION TEST EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   The words PERCOLATION TEST EXCAVATION shall mean any hole in the
ground which has been dug or otherwise created by human labor and skill or
machines, which has an opening of more than 6 inches at its narrowest point and
a depth of 3 feet or more at any point, created for the purpose of testing for
individual sewer systems.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit or allow any
percolation test excavation to remain on his land, or land of which he has
possession or control, for a period of over 15 days after percolation tests
have been completed, which may be extended by the Director of the Department of
Health for good cause shown. From and after such time, it shall be the duty of
such person to fill such excavation with earth or similar material, or to cover
the same. If covered, the entire excavation shall be covered so that there
remains no opening of more than 4 inches at any one point, such cover shall be
securely anchored in place and shall be strong enough to support a live weight
of 300 pounds.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Division as may be designated by the
County Executive to enforce this section. The results of a percolation test
shall not be given to anyone who has applied for percolation test results
unless the applicant certifies under penalties of perjury that all percolation
test excavations have been filled or covered in accordance with subsection (B).
   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $100
or imprisoned for not more than 6 months, or both fined and imprisoned. Each
day a violation exists shall be a separate offense.
(1959 Code, § 35-4) (Ord. 78-27-125, § 1, 11-30-1978; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-18-6. CIVIL INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   This section is authorized by § 2-2-29 of the Public Local Laws of
Frederick County, which states that the county governing body may provide: (1)
that any violation of a county ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or bylaw
shall be a civil offense known as a "civil infraction", and (2) for the
issuance of citations for civil infractions.
   (B)   Therefore, any violation of this
Chapter 1-18 or Chapter 2-13 of the above-referenced Public Local Laws, or of
any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder or thereunder, including but not
limited to the Frederick County Water and Sewer Regulations, is a civil
infraction for which a civil citation may be issued by the Director of the
Division of Utilities and Solid Waste Management ("Director") or the Director's
authorized agent, as provided in this section.
   (C)   If, after investigation, a civil infraction is believed to exist, the
Director or the Director's authorized agent shall deliver a citation or warning
to the responsible party(ies) for the civil infraction. If the Director or
authorized agent is unable to locate the responsible party, the Director or
authorized agent may post the citation or warning in a conspicuous place on the
property on which the civil infraction occurred and/or mail a copy of same to
the owner of the property or other responsible person, which shall be
sufficient for delivery of the warning or citation under this section.
   (D)   The citation or warning, as provided for in this section, shall be in
writing and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address, or other identifying information if the
address is not known, of the person charged or warned;
      (2)   The nature of the violation;
      (3)   The location of the violation;
      (4)   The date(s) of the violation;
      (5)   The amount or potential amount of the fine assessed;
      (6)   The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid, or
violation corrected, if applicable;
      (7)   The person's right to stand trial for the violation if applicable;
      (8)   A certification by the Director or authorized agent attesting to
the truth of the matters set forth.
   (E)   Whenever an alleged or possible civil infraction comes to the
attention of the Director or authorized agent, the following procedures shall
apply:
      (1)   The Director or authorized agent will investigate whether a
violation has occurred;
      (2)   If the Director finds that a violation has occurred, a warning will
be issued to the person(s) responsible in the form and manner as outlined in
this section, with reasonable time stated to abate or to prevent future
infractions;
      (3)   If the violation continues or is allowed to occur after the
reasonable time stated, the Director or authorized agent will issue a citation
to the person(s) responsible in the form and manner as outlined in this
section. Notwithstanding the provision of step (2) above, the Director or
authorized agent may issue a citation at step (2) without the prior issuance of
a warning.
   (F)   A fine of $200 shall be imposed upon any person responsible for each
civil infraction. Each day that a violation exists shall be considered a
separate civil infraction. All fines shall be payable to the Treasurer of
Frederick County, Maryland, and shall be delivered to the DUSWM offices.
   (G)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
civil infraction by filing with the Director a notice of intention to stand
trial. The notice shall be delivered to the Director at least 10 days before
the due date for payment of the fines as set forth in the citation. Upon
receipt of the notice of intention to stand trial, the Director or authorized
agent shall forward to the District Court of Frederick County, Maryland, a copy
of the citation and the notice of intention to stand trial. Upon receipt of the
citation, the District Court shall schedule the case for trial and notify the
defendant of the trial date. All fines, penalties, or forfeitures collected by
the District Court for any civil infraction shall be remitted to the Treasurer
of Frederick County, Maryland.
   (H)   If a person who receives a citation for a civil infraction fails to
pay the fine by the payment date set forth on the citation and fails to file a
notice of intention to stand trial at least 10 days prior to the payment date,
a formal notice of the civil infraction shall be sent to the person's last
known address. If the citation is not satisfied within 15 days from the date
specified on the notice, the person shall be liable for $400 for each civil
infraction. If the citation is not satisfied within 35 days of the date
specified on the formal notice, the Director may request adjudication of the
case through the District Court by following appropriate civil procedures.
   (I)   Adjudication of a civil infraction under this subsection is not a
criminal conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities
ordinarily imposed by a criminal conviction.
   (J)   In a proceeding before the District Court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Code, Local Government Article, Title 6. However, the County
Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute all civil infractions under this
section.
   (K)   If a person is found by the District Court to have committed a civil
infraction, that person shall be liable for the costs of the proceedings in the
District Court.
   (L)   Depending on the circumstances of each case and after consultation
with the County Attorney, the Director or authorized agent has the
discretionary authority to reduce or suspend all or a portion of the fine.
   (M)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit or prevent the
Director or authorized agent from seeking other appropriate legal remedies,
such as injunctions or criminal prosecution.
   (N)   Provisions of this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of,
those penalties specified in other sections of the Frederick County Code,
including the Public Local Laws of Frederick County.
(Bill No. 15-10, 10-6-2015)
CHAPTER 1-19: ZONING
ARTICLE I: TITLE AND INTENT (§§ 1-19-1.100 — 1-19-1.130)
Section
   
1-19-1.100   Title
   
1-19-1.110   Legislative authority and intent
   
1-19-1.120   Liberal construction
   
1-19-1.130   Jurisdiction
Cross references:
   Adequate public facilities,
Chapter 1-20
   Animals and fowl, see
Chapter 1-5;
   Buildings, see
Chapter 1-6;
   Grading, erosion and sediment control, see
Chapter 1-10;
   Planning and development, see
Chapter 1-13;
   Storm water management, see
Chapter 1-15.2;
   Subdivision regulation, see
Chapter 1-16;
   Trailers and trailer parks, see
Chapter 1-17 
Editor’s note:
   It should be noted that Ord. 94-12-107, approved and adopted July 12, 1994
was passed as a curative act in order to re-enact, ratify, confirm and validate
this chapter.
Statutory reference:
   Zoning ordinances authorized, see Md. Ann. Code, Land Use Article Title 4
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 1-19-1.100. TITLE.
   This chapter will be known and may be cited as the Frederick County Zoning
Ordinance. The zoning ordinance includes both the text of the regulations and
the Official Zoning Map herein adopted.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-10, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-1.110. LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY AND INTENT.
   (A)   This chapter is established in accordance with the provisions of Md.
Ann. Code, Land Use Article.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-11, 1-24-1977)
   (B)   This chapter is adopted with the intent that regulations shall be made
in accordance with the Comprehensive Development Plan and designed to control
congestion in the streets; to secure the public safety; to promote health and
the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to promote the
conservation of natural resources, including the preservation of productive
agricultural land; to prevent environmental pollution; to avoid undue
concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreation, parks and other public
requirements. Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration,
among other things, to the character of the district and its suitability for
particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the orderly development and the most appropriate use of land
throughout the jurisdiction.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-12, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-1.120. LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.
   The terms of this chapter will be liberally construed and applied to promote
its underlying purposes and policies as found in §
1-19-1.110 of this Code.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-15, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-1.130. JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all unincorporated lands
within the territorial limits of the county, excluding properties and
structures owned or used by the United States government and/or the state.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-13, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
ARTICLE II: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (§§ 1-19-2.100 — 1-19-2.230)
Section
Division 1. Administration
   
1-19-2.100   Zoning Administrator
   
1-19-2.110   Zoning certificate and building permit
   
1-19-2.120   Repairs and maintenance
   
1-19-2.130   Fees
   
1-19-2.140   Questions of interpretation and enforcement
   
1-19-2.150   Board of Appeals
   
1-19-2.160   Planning Commission
   
1-19-2.170   Architectural Review Committee
Division 2. Enforcement
   
1-19-2.200   Complaints
   
1-19-2.210   Civil zoning infractions
   
1-19-2.220   Penalty
   
1-19-2.230   Civil actions
DIVISION 1. ADMINISTRATION
§ 1-19-2.100. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   It is the duty of the Zoning Administrator to administer and to
enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with its administrative
provisions.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator or his duly authorized agents have the right
to enter and inspect any structure or land in order to verify that the
structure or land complies with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator or his official agent has the power to take
any lawful action to prevent or to abate a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-30, 1-24-1977; Ord. 80-31-183, 10-7-1980; Ord. 83-9-276, 4-
5-1983; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-2.110. ZONING CERTIFICATE AND BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   Approval of Zoning Administrator required; application to essential
services and accessory structures. It is unlawful to change the use, locate or
to begin the new use, erection, construction, reconstruction, extension,
conversion or structural alteration or development of any lot or structure
without first obtaining a zoning certificate and building permit. No zoning
certificate and building permit shall be issued unless it is approved by the
Zoning Administrator. This provision does not apply to essential services or
accessory structures of 150 square feet or less of floor area in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Submission and approval of site development plans prior to issuance.
Every multifamily, townhouse, institutional, commercial or industrial
development will submit and have approved site development plans, in accordance
with §§
1-19-2.160 and
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4 of this Code, prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate and
building permit.
   (C)   Restrictions on use, arrangement and construction. Zoning certificates
and building permits issued on the basis of approved site plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in
such applications and plans and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use,
arrangement or construction differing from that authorized is a violation of
this chapter.
   (D)   Application to certificates/permits approved prior to January 24,
1977. This chapter does not require a change in the plans, construction or
designated use of any structure or lot for which a zoning certificate and
building permit has been approved prior to January 24, 1977, provided such
approved activity continues in compliance with all terms of the previously
approved permits.
   (E)   Terms of certificates/permits. A zoning certificate and building
permit approval is void 1 year from date of issuance unless the use is
established under the terms of the zoning certificate and building permit.
   (F)   Transferability/assignability. A zoning certificate and building
permit is nonassignable and nontransferable.
   (G)   Revocation for noncompliance. A zoning certificate and building permit
is revocable upon noncompliance with any conditions or requirements imposed
under this chapter.
   (H)   Filing fees. A filing fee shall be charged in accordance with the fee
schedule provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-22-526, 7-14-2009; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-
2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-2.120. REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   No provision of this chapter shall prevent the enforcement of orders to
strengthen or restore to a safe condition any structure declared to be unsafe
by any official charged with protecting the public safety.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-42(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-2.130. FEES.
   (A)   The county governing body shall have the authority to establish fees
for zoning related services specified in this chapter, but in no event shall
the fee charged be more than the costs incurred by the county.
   Zoning Certificates
      (1)   All applicants for dwelling units; or unit.
      (2)   All applicants for principal commercial or industrial structures or
uses.
      (3)   All other permitted uses.
      (4)   All accessory structures or uses.
      (5)   All additions, conversions, and renovations.
   Ordinance Amendments
      (6)   Map amendments.
      (7)   Text amendments.
      (8)   Comprehensive rezoning/plan designation request.
   Planned Unit Developments
      (9)   Phase I plan.
      (10)   Phase II plan.
   Board of Appeals
      (11)   Administrative appeal.
      (12)   Variance.
      (13)   Special exception.
   Site Plans
      (14)   Site plans.
      (15)   Site plan reapproval.
      (16)   Sketch site plan.
   Miscellaneous Plans
      (17)   Agricultural cluster plan.
      (18)   Residential cluster plan.
   (B)   No fees shall be charged to any government agency.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-110, 1-24-1977; Ord. 87-22-454, 8-4-1987; Ord. 91-23-023,
8-20-1991; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-
591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-2.140. QUESTIONS OF INTERPRETATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   All questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to
the Zoning Administrator and then such questions shall be presented to the
Board of Appeals only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator,
and recourse from the decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be to the courts
as provided by law. In addition, certain provisions of this chapter are adopted
and enforced as an agreement with the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, and the Maryland Water Resources
Administration flood management grant program regulations. Should a dispute
arise concerning the interpretation of these provisions of the chapter, the
counsel of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Maryland Department of
Natural Resources, or the National Flood Insurance regulations shall prevail.
The Frederick County floodplain management regulations shall be amended as
required by federal regulations. Any amendments to flood hazard management
regulations are subject to the approval of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the Maryland Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-91(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 89-41-572, 6-6-1989; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Floodplain district regulations, see §
1-19-9.100
§ 1-19-2.150. BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   (1)   The County Council shall appoint a Board of Appeals. The Board
of Appeals shall consist of 5 members. The terms of office of the members of
the Board is 3 years.
      (2)   They are removable for cause, upon written charges, and after
public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms of any member
whose term becomes vacant. Members of the Board may receive such compensation
as the county deems appropriate.
   (B)   The County Council shall designate 1 alternate member for the Board of
Appeals, who may be empowered to sit on the Board in the absence of any member
of the Board; and when the alternate is absent, the County Council may
designate a temporary alternate.
   (C)   The Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at
such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman, or in the Chairman's
absence, the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, which
shall be immediately filed in the office of the Community Development Division,
and shall be a public record.
   (D)   The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of this chapter;
      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the chapter
upon which the Board is required to pass under this chapter;
      (3)   To authorize upon appeal in specific cases a variance from the
terms of this chapter, subject to the Board's administrative procedures;
      (4)   To hear and decide approval requests for activities within the FEMA
floodplain (under §
1-19-9.120) and activities within danger reach areas (under §
1-19-9.220);
      (5)   To hear and decide approval requests for nonconforming uses (under
§
1-19-4.230).
   (E)   Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
conducting of business.
   (F)   All members of the Board of Appeals, including the alternate member,
shall be residents of Frederick County.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-90(A)-(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 02-13-309, 6-14-2002; Ord. 02-
23-319, 11-12-2002; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord.
14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 23-26, 1-23-2024)
§ 1-19-2.160. PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall review site development plans when
required by §
1-19-5.310 (Use Table) or as otherwise required in this chapter.
   (B)   A Type I - Planning Commission approved site development plan shall
not be required for the reconstruction of an existing structure that has been
substantially or wholly destroyed by a catastrophic event, if the structure
will be reconstructed on the same footprint or foundation. The Zoning
Administrator will process any request for the reconstruction of these
structures; however, the Zoning Administrator may refer any request for
approval of a site development plan under this section to the Planning
Commission for approval. The reconstruction of the structure must comply with:
      (1)   All other provisions of this chapter to the extent practicable, as
determined by county staff; and
      (2)   All applicable state and local codes and regulations in existence
at the time of reconstruction.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-73(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-05-
509, 2-17-2009; Ord. 09-22-526, 7-14-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-2.170. ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established an Architectural Review
Committee.
   (B)   Members.
      (1)   The Architectural Review Committee shall consist of 5 members
appointed by the County Executive, subject to confirmation by the County
Council. The Committee members shall be appointed for staggered 5-year terms of
office. At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor
qualifies and is appointed. A member who is appointed after a term has begun
will serve only for the remainder of the term and until a successor qualifies
and is appointed.
      (2)   Members may not be related to, either by blood or marriage, or
associated with any person or corporation who is currently working on or is
invested in a critical digital infrastructure project in the county, or who has
had such relations or interests in a critical digital infrastructure project in
the county within a year prior to the member's date of appointment.
      (3)   Members should have a license, certificate, degree, training or
work experience in architecture, landscape architecture, experience in related
commercial/industrial construction and development, or other areas of
experience or interest as determined to be relevant by the appointing official.
   (C)   Functions. The Architectural Review Committee will meet as needed to
review site development plans for proposed critical digital infrastructure
facilities. The Committee will provide recommendations to the Planning
Commission regarding an application's compliance with §
1-19-8.402(B)(1)-(5). The Committee may also perform other related functions as
delegated from time to time by the county.
(Bill. No. 22-05, 3-15-2022)
DIVISION 2. ENFORCEMENT
§ 1-19-2.200. COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Any person may file a written complaint with the Zoning Administrator
alleging a violation of this chapter. Such complaint will state the factual
basis for the alleged violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator will investigate and find as a matter of fact
whether a violation of this chapter has occurred.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall keep public records in accordance with
the county's records retention policy of all complaints and findings of fact
disposing of alleged zoning violations.
   (D)   Violations of the FEMA floodplain regulations set forth in §§
1-19-9.100 through
1-19-9.130 shall also be subject to the following:
      (1)   The Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Maryland Department
of the Environment shall be notified immediately in writing of any property or
structure in violation of the floodplain section of this chapter.
      (2)   New or renewal National Flood Insurance shall be denied for any
structure remaining in violation or situated on property in violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 77-178, § 40-32(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 89-41-572, 6-6-1989; Ord. 07-29-469,
9-4-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-2.210. CIVIL ZONING INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Any violation of any of the provisions of this entire chapter, which
is
Chapter 1-19, entitled Zoning (also known as the zoning ordinance for Frederick
County, Maryland), is a civil zoning violation and shall be called a civil
zoning infraction. If, after investigation, a civil zoning infraction is
believed to exist, the Zoning Administrator or his authorized agent shall
deliver a citation to the property owner and other person or persons
responsible for the infraction. If the person is unable to be located
personally, the Zoning Administrator or his authorized agent may post the
citation in a conspicuous place on the property and mail a copy of same to the
person, which shall be sufficient for delivery under this section.
   (B)   The citation, as provided for in this section, shall be in writing and
shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the person charged;
      (2)   The nature of the violation;
      (3)   The location of the violation;
      (4)   The date(s) of the violation;
      (5)   The amount of the fine assessed;
      (6)   The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid (or
violation corrected, if applicable);
      (7)   The person's right to elect to stand trial for the violation; and
      (8)   A certification by the Zoning Administrator or his authorized agent
attesting to the truth of the matters set forth.
   (C)   A fine of $100 is hereby imposed upon any person responsible for a
civil zoning infraction for each violation. Each day such violation is
permitted to exist shall be considered a separate infraction. All fines shall
be made payable to the Treasurer of Frederick County, Maryland; and submitted
to the Community Development Division.
   (D)   A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the
offense by filing with the Zoning Administrator a notice of intention to stand
trial. The notice shall be given at least 5 days before the date of payment as
set forth in the citation. On receipt of the notice of intention to stand
trial, the Zoning Administrator shall forward to the district court for
Frederick County, Maryland, a copy of the citation and the notice of intention
to stand trial. On receipt of the citation, the district court shall schedule
the case for trial and notify the defendant of the trial date. All fines,
penalties, or forfeitures collected by the district court for zoning
infractions shall be remitted to the county, through the County Treasurer.
   (E)   If a person who receives a citation for an infraction fails to pay the
fine by the date of payment set forth on the citation and fails to file a
notice of intention to stand trial, a formal notice of the infraction shall be
sent to the person's last known address. If the citation is not satisfied
within 15 days from the date of the notice, the person is liable for a fine of
$200 for each infraction. If, after 35 days, the citation is not satisfied, the
Zoning Administrator may request adjudication of the case through the district
court. The district court shall schedule the case for trial and summon the
defendant to appear.
   (F)   Adjudication of an infraction under this subsection is not a criminal
conviction, nor does it impose any of the civil disabilities ordinarily imposed
by a criminal conviction.
   (G)   In a proceeding before the district court, the violation shall be
prosecuted in the same manner and to the same extent as set forth for municipal
infractions in Md. Ann. Code, Local Government Article, Title 6. However, the
County Attorney is hereby authorized to prosecute all civil zoning infractions
under this section.
   (H)   If a person is found by the district court to have committed a civil
zoning infraction, he shall be liable for the costs of the proceedings in the
district court.
   (I)   Depending on the circumstances of each case and after consultation
with the County Attorney, the Zoning Administrator has the discretionary
authority to reduce or suspend all or a portion of the fine payable through his
office.
   (J)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit or prevent the Zoning
Administrator, or anyone else, from seeking other legal remedies, such as
injunctions or criminal prosecution.
(Ord. 83-9-276, 4-5-1983; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-
2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-2.220. PENALTY.
   Any person who is convicted of failure to comply with this chapter is guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be fined no more than $500 and/or 10 days in jail
for each offense. Each day of such continuing violation may be found to be a
separate misdemeanor.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-32(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 83-9-276, 4-5-1983; Ord. 93-06-070,
3-2-1993; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-2.230. CIVIL ACTIONS.
   The county, the County Attorney, the Board of Appeals, the Planning
Commission or any property owner who would be specifically damaged by a
violation may take appropriate legal action to prevent or abate a violation of
this chapter, including seeking an injunction, mandamus, abatement or other
appropriate legal remedies.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-32(C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE III: REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES (§§ 1-19-3.100 — 1-19-3.300.4)
Section
Division 1. Zoning Amendments
   
1-19-3.100   Zoning text amendments
   
1-19-3.100.1   Purpose and intent
   
1-19-3.100.2   Application
   
1-19-3.100.3   Review and approval procedures
   
1-19-3.110   Zoning map amendments
   
1-19-3.110.1   Purpose and intent
   
1-19-3.110.2   Application
   
1-19-3.110.3   Review and approval procedures
   
1-19-3.110.4   Approval criteria
   
1-19-3.110.5   Conditions
   
1-19-3.110.6   Continuances and withdrawal of applications
   
1-19-3.110.7   Special provisions for comprehensive zoning or rezoning
   
1-19-3.110.8   Appeals
Division 2. Special Exceptions, Variances, Approvals, and Appeals
   
1-19-3.200   Purpose and intent
   
1-19-3.200.1   Application
   
1-19-3.200.2   General review and approval procedures
   
1-19-3.210   Special exceptions
   
1-19-3.220   Variances
   
1-19-3.230   Appeals
Division 3. Site Plan Review
   
1-19-3.300   Purpose and intent
   
1-19-3.300.1   Review and approval procedures
   
1-19-3.300.2   Concept plan
   
1-19-3.300.3   Site plan review application
   
1-19-3.300.4   Approval criteria
Division 4. Optional Methods of Development
   (Reserved)
DIVISION 1. ZONING AMENDMENTS
§ 1-19-3.100. ZONING TEXT AMENDMENTS.
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 98-23-225, adopted Nov. 10, 1998, amended
Chapter 1-19 by deleting provisions formerly codified as §§ 1-19-66 through 1-
19-77, which comprised part of former Div. 3 of Art. II, pertaining to
amendments to this zoning ordinance and which derived from the following:
 
Ord. No.  Date     Ord. No.  Date
77-1-78   1-24-77  86-3-380  3-18-86
79-8-134  5-1-79   88-13-490 5-3-86
81-3-193  1-27-81  89-3-534  1-3-89
85-41-373 10-22-85 92-20-055 8-14-92
 
In addition, Ord. No. 98-23-225 enacted §§ 1-19-60—1-19-64, being provisions of
a new Div. 3, and created a Div. 4, a new division consisting of new provisions
in §§ 1-19-70—1-19-75 and amended provisions in §§ 1-19-78 and 1-19-79.
(Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.100.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It may be periodically necessary for provisions of this chapter to be
established, amended, or repealed through a zoning text amendment. This section
establishes procedures for the zoning text amendment.
   (B)   A zoning text amendment shall be initiated as provided in the county
charter for the enactment of legislation.
(Ord. 98-23-225, 11-10-1999; Ord. 07-08-448, §5, 4-3-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-
14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.100.2. APPLICATION.
   The County Council may initiate a zoning text amendment with no particular
form required.
(Ord. 98-23-225, 11-10-1999; Ord. 07-08-448, §5, 4-3-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-
14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.100.3. REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Planning Commission.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall refer the initial proposed zoning
text amendment to the Planning Commission for a recommendation.
      (2)   The Planning Commission will hold a public hearing prior to making
its recommendation. A failure to make a recommendation within 62 days of the
first public hearing shall be deemed as providing no recommendation on the
request.
   (B)   County Council. The County Council shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed zoning text amendment.
   (C)   Any person shall have the right to submit oral and/or written
testimony at the public hearing.
   (D)   The county governing body may revise, amend, supplant or modify any
provision of the proposed zoning text amendment in whole or in part. No
additional referral to the Planning Commission is required.
   (E)   Public notice.
      (1)   Newspaper.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator shall cause notices of the public
hearings of the Planning Commission and the County Council to be published.
         (b)   Public notice of the time and place of the Frederick County
Planning Commission hearing, together with a summary of the proposed zoning
text amendment, shall be published in at least 1 newspaper of general
circulation in Frederick County at least 14 days prior to the hearing.
         (c)   Public hearing notice of the time and place of the County
Council hearing shall be in accordance with the procedures stated in the county
charter.
(Ord. 98-23-225, 11-10-1999; Ord. 99-01-228, 2-16-1999; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.110. ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
Editor's note:
   See the editor's note
1-19-3.100.
§ 1-19-3.110.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The zoning map may be amended by changing the zoning district boundaries or
by changing from one zoning district to another. A zoning map amendment may be
accomplished through an individual zoning map amendment, comprehensive zoning
or rezoning, or a floating zone reclassification. This section establishes
procedures for the zoning map amendment and floating zone reclassification.
(Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.110.2. APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for an individual zoning map amendment or floating zone
reclassification may be made by any property owner or his duly authorized
agent, a contract purchaser or any other person with at least a 50% proprietary
interest in the area covered by any individual zoning map amendment or floating
zone reclassification application. Each individual zoning map amendment or
floating zone reclassification application must cover a contiguous area.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the applications for individual
map amendments and floating zone reclassifications as filed and may:
      (1)   Reject the application, if:
         (a)   The information is incomplete; or
         (b)   The current zoning status of the property is being reviewed
under a comprehensive, community, or corridor plan update and comprehensive
rezoning process, unless a waiver is granted by the County Council; or
         (c)   The amendment has been filed for the whole or part of land which
was subject to a map amendment request for a zoning district designation which
was opposed, denied, or dismissed on the merits within 12 months from the date
of the signed decision.
      (2)   Accept the application where all the required information has been
provided and the appropriate fee paid.
   (C)   A zoning map amendment or floating zone reclassification application
shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator during normal office hours. The
application shall include the following:
      (1)   Completed application form;
      (2)   The required fee as set forth in §
1-19-2.130 of this chapter;
      (3)   Ownership verification: copy of deed or if contract purchaser,
submit copy of contract;
      (4)   A boundary plat prepared and sealed by a surveyor registered in the
State of Maryland, prepared in accordance with the minimum standards of
practice, showing metes and bounds (courses and distances);
      (5)   A list of names and addresses of all adjoining property owners,
whether or not separated by streets, railroads, or other rights-of-way. This
list must be obtained from the latest Frederick County property tax assessments
records;
      (6)   A vicinity map covering the area within at least 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of the land proposed to be reclassified, including the existing
zoning classification of all land shown on the map; and
      (7)   A written explanation justifying the amendment or floating zone
reclassification, setting forth in sufficient detail to advise county officials
required to review the application.
   (D)   The Zoning Administrator shall retain custody of all application
files, which will be available for public inspection during normal office
hours. Any person may obtain, at their expense, copies of any and all papers in
the file.
   (E)   The County Council may not consider an application for an individual
zoning map amendment or floating zone reclassification during the time
beginning on July 1, before the general election for County Council Members and
ending 1 day after the beginning of the County Council's term of office.
(Ord. 98-23-225, 11-10-1999; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-
2009; Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill 17-08, 6-13-
2017)
§ 1-19-3.110.3. REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Planning Commission.
      (1)    An application for an individual zoning map amendment or a
floating zone reclassification shall be reviewed by the Community Development
Division staff which shall prepare a report and recommendation to the Planning
Commission. After completion of this staff report the application shall be
presented to the Planning Commission for consideration.
      (2)   Within 90 days after acceptance of the application by the Zoning
Administrator, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
application for individual zoning map amendment or floating zone
reclassification. The Planning Commission shall forward its recommendation to
the County Council within 62 days of its first public hearing. A failure to
make a recommendation within 62 days of the first public hearing shall be
deemed as providing no recommendation on the request.
   (B)   County Council.
      (1)   The County Council shall hold a public hearing on the application
for an individual zoning map amendment or floating zone reclassification.
      (2)   Any person shall have the right to submit oral and/or written
testimony at the hearing.
      (3)   An application for individual zoning map amendment or floating zone
reclassification shall be deemed denied if the County Council has not approved
the application within 90 days of the conclusion of the public hearing.
   (C)   Public notice.
      (1)   Sign(s). The applicant shall place a sign on the property proposed
to be reclassified, within 10 feet of each property line that abuts a public
road. If the property does not abut a public road, a sign shall be placed in
such a manner so that it may be most readily seen by the public.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator shall provide the required sign(s).
         (b)   The sign(s) shall be placed on the property at least 30 days
prior to the public hearing of the Planning Commission or County Council on the
zoning map amendment.
         (c)   The sign(s) shall be affixed to a rigid board, protected from
the weather, and maintained at all times by the applicant.
         (d)   The applicant shall file an affidavit certifying that the sign
(s) has been posted and maintained for the required period of time.
         (e)   If any person removes or tampers with a posted sign(s) during
the above 30 day posting period, that person, upon conviction, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, as provided in §
1-19-2.220.
      (2)   Mail. The Zoning Administrator will make a good faith effort to
notify the owners of all properties adjoining a property for which an
application for zoning map amendment or floating zone reclassification
application has been accepted. Such notice shall be by first class mail at
least 14 days prior to such public hearing and contain the date, time, place
and nature of any public hearing to be held concerning the application. The
failure of the property owner to receive the mailing shall not invalidate the
approval of the zoning map amendment or floating zone reclassification.
         (a)   Adjoining property owners shall include the owners of properties
immediately contiguous to the applicant's property as well as those separated
by streets, railroads, or other rights-of-way as set forth in §
1-19-3.110.2(C)(5).
         (b)   Appearance by a property owner at the public hearing shall
constitute a waiver of any defect in this notice requirement.
      (3)   Newspaper. Notice of the time and place of the County Council
public hearing, together with a summary of the proposed zoning map amendment or
floating zone reclassification shall be published in at least 1 newspaper of
general circulation in Frederick County once each week for 2 successive weeks
with the first such publication of notice at least 14 days prior to the
hearing.
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to postpone a
public hearing if the applicant has not complied with the requirements for
posting of property as detailed in this section.
(Ord. 98-23-225, 11-10-1999; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-
2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-06, 3-15-2022)
§ 1-19-3.110.4. APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   (A)   Approval or disapproval of a request for an individual zoning map
amendment or floating zone reclassification shall be determined through review
of several criteria. The Planning Commission and County Council review will
include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Consistency with the comprehensive plan;
      (2)   Availability of current and planned public facilities;
      (3)   Adequacy of existing and planned future transportation systems;
      (4)   Compatibility with existing and proposed development;
      (5)   Population change, including availability and location of land
zoned to meet the ten-year need for residential development;
      (6)   The timing of development, planned future transportation systems
and planned public facilities;
      (7)   Sensitive environmental resources have been identified and impacts
to these resources are avoided or minimized to the maximum extent practicable;
and
      (8)   Historic resources have been identified and impacts to these
resources are avoided or minimized to the maximum extent practicable.
   (B)   In addition to the criteria above, approval or disapproval of a
request for an individual zoning map amendment shall be granted only where a
finding has been made that there was:
      (1)   A substantial change in the character of the neighborhood where the
property is located; or
      (2)   A mistake in the existing zoning classification.
(Ord. 98-23-225, 11-10-1999; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-
2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 20-07, 8-4-2020)
§ 1-19-3.110.5. CONDITIONS.
   The County Council may impose, upon the granting of a zoning map amendment
or floating zone reclassification, such additional restrictions, conditions, or
limitations as may be deemed appropriate to preserve, enhance, or protect the
general character and design of the lands and improvements being zoned or
rezoned or of the surrounding or adjacent lands and improvements. The county
may, upon the zoning or rezoning of any land, retain or reserve the power and
authority to approve or disapprove the design of structures, construction,
landscaping or other improvements, alterations and changes made or to be made
on the subject land or lands to assure conformity with the intent and purposes
of this chapter. Conditions imposed or requested may not include the
prohibition of any uses expressly permitted in the requested zoning district.
(Ord. 98-23-225, 11-10-1999; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-
2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.110.6. CONTINUANCES AND WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Withdrawal. By filing a written request with the Zoning Administrator
prior to any public hearing, the applicant may withdraw the application for
zoning map amendment or floating zone reclassification.
   (B)   A request by the applicant for continuance of a map amendment or
floating zone reclassification application hearing may be granted by the County
Council for good cause shown. The applicant shall be responsible for any costs
to the county caused by the continuance.
(Ord. 98-23-225, 11-10-1999; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-3.110.7. SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR COMPREHENSIVE ZONING OR REZONING .
   In the case of a comprehensive zoning or rezoning, the following review and
approval procedures shall apply.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and cause notice
of the hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county in accordance with §
1-19-3.110.3. The Planning Commission shall forward a recommendation to the
County Council within 62 days of the first public hearing.
   (B)   The County Council shall hold a public hearing and cause notice of the
hearing to be published in accordance with §
1-19-3.110.3. Any person shall have the right to submit oral and/or written
testimony at the hearing.
   (C)   The following additional public notice requirements shall apply for
all properties for which a change in zoning is requested by the property owner:
      (1)   Sign(s). The property owner shall place a sign on each property,
within 10 feet of each property line that abuts a public road. If
the property does not abut a public road, a sign shall be placed in such a
manner so that it may be most readily seen by the public.
         (a)   The sign(s) shall be placed on each property at least 30 days
prior to the Planning Commission public hearing and at least 30 days prior to
the County Council public hearing.
         (b)   The sign(s) shall be affixed to a rigid board, protected from
the weather, and maintained at all times by the property owner.
         (c)   If any person removes or tampers with a posted sign(s) during
the above 30 day posting period, that person, upon conviction, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, as provided in §
1-19-2.220.
      (2)   Mail. The Division of Planning and Permitting will make a good
faith effort to notify the owners of all properties adjoining a property
subject to rezoning. Such notice shall be sent by first class mail at least 14
days prior to the Planning Commission public hearing and at least 14 prior to
the County Council public hearing. The notice shall contain the date, time,
place, and nature of the public hearing. The failure of the property owner to
receive the mailing shall not invalidate the approval of the comprehensive
zoning or rezoning.
         (a)   Adjoining property owners shall include the owners of properties
immediately contiguous to the subject property as well as those separated by
streets, railroads, or other rights-of-way as set forth in §
1-19-3.110.2(C)(5).
         (b)   Appearance by a property owner at the public hearing shall
constitute a waiver of any defect in this notice requirement.
   (D)   The following additional public notice requirements shall apply for
all properties for which a change in zoning is requested by the County:
      (1)   Sign(s). The County shall place a sign on each property, within 10
feet of each property line that abuts a public road. If the property does not
abut a public road, a sign shall be placed in such a manner so that it may be
most readily seen by the public. However, if multiple, adjoining properties are
the subject of a comprehensive rezoning, the County may post such signs at
intervals it deems appropriate to be most readily seen by the public.
         (a)   The sign(s) shall be placed at least 30 days prior to the
Planning Commission public hearing and at least 30 days prior to the County
Council public hearing.
         (b)   The sign(s) shall be affixed to a rigid board, protected from
the weather, and maintained at all times by the County.
         (c)   If any person removes or tampers with a posted sign(s) during
the above 30-day posting period, that person, upon conviction, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, as provided in §
1-19-2.220.
      (2)   Mail. The Division of Planning and Permitting will make a good
faith effort to notify the owners of all properties subject to rezoning and
owners adjoining a property subject to rezoning. Such notice shall be sent by
first class mail at least 14 days prior to the Planning Commission public
hearing and at least 14 days prior to the County Council public hearing. The
notice shall contain the date, time, place, and nature of the public hearing.
The failure of the property owner to receive the mailing shall not invalidate
the approval of the comprehensive zoning or rezoning.
         (a)   Adjoining property owners shall include the owners of properties
immediately contiguous to the subject property as well as those separated by
streets, railroads, or other rights-of-way as set forth in §
1-19-3.110.2(C)(5).
         (b)   Appearance by a property owner at the public hearing shall
constitute a waiver of any defect in this notice requirement.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-101(K), 1-24-1977; Ord. 98-23-225, 11-10-1999; Ord. 08-26-
502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill
No. 16-11, 8-30-16; Bill No. 22-06, 3-15-2022)
§ 1-19-3.110.8. APPEALS.
   The county may appeal to the circuit court of the county and thence to the
Court of Special Appeals of Maryland, or, upon certiorari, to the Court of
Appeals of Maryland, any decision concerning zoning made by the Board of
Appeals, and the county may file an answer and be a party to any zoning appeal
filed in the circuit court of the county concerning a decision made by the
county and may appeal any decision of the circuit court of the county to the
Court of Special Appeals of Maryland, or, upon certiorari, to the Court of
Appeals of Maryland.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-101(M), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-
531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 2. SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS, VARIANCES, APPROVALS, AND APPEALS
§ 1-19-3.200. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This section establishes general procedures for the Board of Appeals to hear
and decide applications for special exceptions, variances, approvals, and
appeals, as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.200.1. APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a special exception, variance, approval, or appeal
shall be made on forms approved by the Community Development Division.
   (B)   The application for a special exception, variance, approval, or appeal
and the information required in subsection (C) below shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator a minimum of 45 days prior to the regularly scheduled
monthly meeting of the Board of Appeals.
   (C)   Required information for a special exception, variance, or approval
shall include:
      (1)   Plot plan or accurate drawing of the property showing the distances
of all existing and proposed structures from all property lines, driveways and
parking areas;
      (2)   Name and address of each person owning property adjacent to the
subject property;
      (3)   Plans, architectural drawings, photographs, elevations,
specifications or other detailed information fully depicting the exterior
appearance of any existing structures on the property, including signs and the
proposed construction;
      (4)   In addition, for all applications for a special exception or
approval, a statement shall be provided explaining in detail how the use is to
be operated. The following information is required to be submitted:
         (a)   Hours of operation;
         (b)   Number of anticipated employees;
         (c)   Equipment involved; and
         (d)   Any special conditions or limitations which the applicant
proposes for adoption by the Board.
   (D)   The application for an appeal shall be filed in accordance with §
1-19-3.230 within 30 days after the date of the action or decision being
appealed. Required information for an appeal shall include a copy of any
written decision that is being appealed and all other information pertinent to
the appeal.
   (E)   Fee shall be paid at the time of filing of application in accordance
with the fee schedule established in this chapter.
(Ord. 77-1-78, §40-91(C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 79-19-145, 8-7-1979; Ord. 00-28-270,
9-7-2000; Ord. 02-21-317, 10-15-2002; Ord. 05-27-388, 10-25-2005; Ord. 08-26-
502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.200.2 GENERAL REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Board of Appeals.
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing before making a
decision on any appeal or other matter within its powers. Upon accepting an
application for an appeal or other matter, the Zoning Administrator shall
schedule the public hearing by the Board of Appeals. Appeals and applications
filed in proper form shall be numbered serially, docketed and placed upon the
calendar of the Board.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals shall make an on site inspection of the premises
involved in the application for a special exception, variance, approval, or
appeal.
   (C)   Public notice.
      (1)   Sign(s). For all special exception, variance, approval, and appeal
applications the applicant shall erect a sign within 10 feet of each property
line that abuts a public road. If the property does not abut a public road, a
sign shall be placed in such a manner so that it may be most readily seen by
the public. If the land lies within more than one block as shown on a plat
recorded in the county land records, then a sign shall be erected on the land
in each such block.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator shall provide the required sign(s).
         (b)   The sign(s) shall be placed on the property within 3 days after
acceptance of the application.
         (c)   The sign(s) shall be affixed to a rigid board, protected from
the weather, and maintained at all times by the applicant until a decision has
been made by the Board of Appeals.
         (d)   The applicant shall file an affidavit certifying that the sign
(s) has been posted and maintained for the required time period.
         (e)   If any person removes or tampers with a posted sign during the
above posting period, that person, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, as provided in §
1-19-2.220.
      (2)   Mail. All adjoining property owners, whether separated by streets,
railroads, or other rights-of-way, shall be notified by the Zoning
Administrator by mail, of the time, date, place, and nature of the public
hearing.
      (3)   Newspaper. The Zoning Administrator shall cause to be published
once a notice of the public hearing. This notice shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county not less than 15 days prior to
the date set for the hearing.
(Ord. 77-1-78, §40-91(C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 79-19-145, 8-7-1979; Ord. 00-28-270,
9-7-2000; Ord. 02-21-317, 10-15-2002; Ord. 05-27-388, 10-25-2005; Ord. 08-26-
502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.210. SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   An application for a special exception may be made only by persons
with a financial, contractual or proprietary interest in the property for which
a special exception is requested.
   (B)   A grant of a special exception is basically a matter of development
policy, rather than an appeal based on administrative error or on hardship in a
particular case. The Board of Appeals should consider the relation of the
proposed use to the existing and future development patterns. A special
exception shall be granted when the Board finds that:
      (1)   The proposed use is consistent with the purpose and intent of the
Comprehensive Development Plan and of this chapter; and
      (2)   The nature and intensity of the operations involved in or conducted
in connection with it and the size of the site in relation to it are such that
the proposed use will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly
development of the neighborhood in which it is located; and
      (3)   Operations in connection with the special exception at the proposed
location shall not have an adverse effect such as noise, fumes, vibration or
other characteristics on neighboring properties above and beyond those
inherently associated with the special exception at any other location within
the zoning district; and
      (4)   Parking areas will comply with the off street parking regulations
of this chapter and will be screened from adjoining residential uses, and the
entrance and exit drives shall be laid out so as to achieve maximum safety.
      (5)   The road system providing access to the proposed use is adequate to
serve the site for the intended use.
   (C)   In addition to the general requirements listed above, uses requiring a
special exception shall be subject to the specific requirements for each use
outlined in §§
1-19-8.320 through
1-19-8.355 of this Code.
   (D)   A special exception approval may be granted in accordance with the
general and specific requirements enumerated in this section. The Board of
Appeals may, in addition to other requirements imposed under this chapter and
is hereby authorized to add to the specific requirements any additional
conditions that it may deem necessary to protect adjacent properties, the
general neighborhood, and its residents or workers. Violation of such
additional conditions, when made a part of the terms under which the special
exception permit is granted, is a violation of this chapter and may be grounds
for termination of the special exception.
   (E)   The Board of Appeals shall not grant a special exception unless and
until:
      (1)   A written application for a special exception is submitted
indicating the section of this chapter under which the special exception is
sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested; and
      (2)   A public hearing has been held; and the Board had made a finding of
fact that the special exception requested meets the general and specific
requirements outlined in this section.
   (F)   The grant of special exception may include approval of customary
incidental accessory uses as reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator.
   (G)   No use or activity permitted as a special exception shall be enlarged
or extended beyond the limits authorized in the grant of special exception. All
enlargements, extensions, and changes in use shall require grants of special
exception, as in the case of an original petition.
   (H)   If a grant of special exception is denied, no new petition for the
denied use on the same property shall be accepted by the Board of Appeals for 1
year after the date of denial of the petition.
   (I)   A decision of the Board of Appeals granting a special exception will
be void 5 years from date of approval by the Board of Appeals unless the use is
established, a building permit is issued, construction has begun, or final site
development plan approval has been received in accordance with the terms of the
decision. Upon written request submitted to the Zoning Administrator no later
than 1 month prior to the expiration date and for good cause shown by the
applicant, a 1 time extension may be granted by the Zoning Administrator for a
period not to exceed 6 months.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-91(B), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 00-28-270,
9-7-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 09-27-531,
11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.220. VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals may authorize a variance in height, lot area and
yard regulations.
   (B)   An application for a variance shall be filed with the Board of Appeals
only after refusal of zoning approval or an adverse determination has been
issued by the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   The Board of Appeals shall not grant a variance unless and until a
public hearing is held and all of the following criteria are met:
      (1)   First, the Board of Appeals shall find that special conditions and
circumstances exist which are unique to the land or structure involved and
which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district.
      (2)   Upon making this finding the Board of Appeals shall also find that
the following criteria are met:
         (a)   That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from
the actions of the applicant; and
         (b)   The literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter
would result in unreasonable hardship and deprive the applicant of rights
commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under terms of this
chapter; and
         (c)   That granting the variance will not confer on the applicant any
special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands or structures
in the same district; and
         (d)   That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
   (D)   In granting the variance, the Board of Appeals may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter.
Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the variance is granted, is a violation of this chapter.
   (E)   Under no circumstances shall the Board of Appeals grant a variance to
allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the zone
involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of
this chapter in said zone.
   (F)   Except as specified in §
1-19-4.220(C), the Board of Appeals shall not grant a variance to a
nonconforming structure for the portion of structure determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be nonconforming.
   (G)   A decision of the Board of Appeals granting a variance will be void 2
years from date of approval by the Board of Appeals unless the use is
established, a building permit is issued, construction has begun, or final site
development plan approval has been received in accordance with the terms of the
decision. Upon written request submitted to the Zoning Administrator no later
than 1 month prior to the expiration date and for good cause shown by the
applicant, a 1 time extension may be granted by the Zoning Administrator for a
period not to exceed 6 months.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-91(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-
531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 21-01, passed 3-2-2021)
§ 1-19-3.230. APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved
or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the jurisdiction affected by
any decisions of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within
30 days after the date of the action or decision being appealed, by filing with
the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Appeals a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   (B)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board
of Appeals after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
of Appeals or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
   (C)   The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any
party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
   (D)   In exercising the above-mentioned powers such Board may, in conformity
with Md. Ann. Code, Land Use Article, as amended, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as
ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from
whom the appeal is taken.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-90(E)-(H), 1-24-1977; Ord. 05-27-388, 10-25-2005; Ord. 08-
26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 3. SITE PLAN REVIEW
§ 1-19-3.300. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The county has determined that certain uses require site development
plan review and approval by the Planning Commission (see §
1-19-2.160).
   (B)   Site plan review is intended to promote safe and efficient development
that maximizes compatibility and connections with existing or anticipated
surrounding land uses and the natural environment through careful consideration
of site development, transportation and parking, public utilities, natural
features, and common areas, as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 09-22-526, 7-14-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.300.1 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   A use subject to site development plan approval as required in §
1-19-5.310 (Use Table) or subject to the site plan review process as otherwise
required in this chapter shall be reviewed through 1 of 3 procedures to ensure
that the proposed development complies with the requirements of this chapter.
The 3 procedures are:
      (1)   Type I - Planning Commission. The purpose of the Type I - Planning
Commission process is to provide for development review involving standards for
design or review of uses permitted by this chapter which may be complex in
nature requiring interpretation of County Comprehensive Plan policies or the
requirements of the Frederick County Code. The Type I application shall be
circulated for multi-agency review prior to Planning Commission review. Type I
- Planning Commission review and approval is required for all of the following:
         (a)   Applications for site development plan approval where review and
approval is not provided for through the Type II - Limited or Type III -
Administrative site plan review processes.
         (b)   Modifications to a Planning Commission approved site development
plan involving an increase in building height or number of floors;
modifications to landscaping or screening that reduce the number of plantings
or opacity required in the initial Type I - Planning Commission approval;
requests for reduction in open space square footage; change in the type or
square footage of an amenity; and modifications that increase the number of
required parking and loading spaces.
      (2)   Type II - Limited. The purpose of the Type II - Limited process is
to provide for development review and approval by Planning Commission
authorized representatives based on standards specified in the zoning
ordinance. The Type II - Limited application shall be processed at staff level
and circulated for multi-agency review. Type II - Limited applications shall be
restricted to modifications provided through the Type III - Administrative
process or any one or more of the following minor modifications to Planning
Commission approved site development plans provided that the modification does
not require Planning Commission review of adequate public facilities, forest
resource ordinance, or stormwater management requirements:
         (a)   Minor modifications to utility location;
         (b)   Minor modifications to parking and loading design required by
physical site constraints that has no detrimental impact upon or that improves
bicycle, pedestrian and traffic safety or circulation;
         (c)   Building footprint modifications;
         (d)   Minor landscaping modifications that do not constitute a
material alteration of the Planning Commission approved site development plan
and that do not require a Type I Planning Commission approval as provided in §
1-19-3.300.1(A)(1);
         (e)   Minor modifications to pedestrian pathway location, open space
or amenity design to improve access, safety, or efficiency, that do not require
Type I Planning Commission approval as provided in §
1-19-3.300.1(A)(1).
      (3)   Type III - Administrative. The purpose of the Type III -
Administrative process is to provide for development review and approval by
Planning Commission authorized representatives based on standards specified in
the zoning ordinance. The Type III application shall be processed as a staff
level single agency review and shall be restricted to any one or more of the
following minor modifications, provided that the modification does not require
adequate public facilities, forest resource ordinance, or stormwater management
review:
         (a)    A change in use approved by the Zoning Administrator;
         (b)    Building footprint modifications of not more than 200 square
feet provided that there is no increase in overall building footprint square
footage;
         (c)   Change of permitted and approved signs;
         (d)   Minor landscaping modifications involving substitution of
species that do not require Type I Planning Commission approval as provided in
§
1-19-3.300.1(A)(1); or
         (e)   Other minor modifications as established by the Zoning
Administrator.
   (B)   An applicant may request a Type I - Planning Commission review at any
time during a Type II - Limited or Type III - Administrative review process.
   (C)   Planning Commission authorized representatives may require a Type I -
Planning Commission or Type II - Limited review for a site development plan
application permitted through the Type II - Limited or Type III -
Administrative review process, where it is determined that the proposed
modification may have an adverse impact on surrounding properties, public
facilities, or is inconsistent with the initial Type I - Planning Commission
approval.
   (D)   Each application involving site development plan approval, together
with the required fee (§
1-19-2.130) and other required plan submissions, including, but not limited to
adequate public facilities ordinance studies, forest resource ordinance plans,
sight-distance studies, stormwater management concepts and the information
described below, shall be submitted to the Community Development Division. The
Community Development Division shall not accept an application if it is
determined that the information submitted is incomplete.
   After the Community Development Division deems that the application is
complete, the site development plan will be scheduled for a Technical Advisory
Committee (TAC) meeting for review by agency representatives and
representatives of the applicant. The applicant may not file for a zoning
certificate and building permit with the Department of Permits and Inspections
before receiving site plan approval. Applications for site plan review shall be
void if approval has not been received within 3 years, beginning on the date
the application was accepted. A void application shall have no further status
and must be resubmitted.
      (1)   For all Type I - Planning Commission site plan review applications,
the applicant shall place a sign within 10 feet of each property line that
abuts a public road. If the property does not abut a public road, a sign shall
be placed in such a manner so that it may be most readily seen by the public.
         (a)   The Community Development Division shall provide the required
sign(s).
         (b)   The sign(s) shall be placed on the property at least 30 days
prior to the initial Planning Commission meeting at which the Type I - Planning
Commission site development plan is to be considered.
         (c)   The sign(s) shall be affixed to a rigid board, protected from
the weather, and maintained at all times by the applicant until the initial
Planning Commission meeting is held.
         (d)   The applicant shall file an affidavit certifying that the sign
(s) has been posted and maintained for the required time period.
      (2)   If any person removes or tampers with a posted sign during the
above 30 day posting period, that person, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, as provided in §
1-19-2.220.
   (E)   The Planning Commission may attach conditions to the approval of a
site development plan in order to ensure that the proposal will conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Approval of a site development plan submitted under the provisions of
this division shall expire 3 years after the date of the decision by the
Planning Commission or its authorized representatives unless construction has
begun as defined by "start of construction" in §
1-19-11.100. The length of site plan approval may not exceed the length of the
approval under the Adequate Public Facilities Ordinance (APFO) if APFO approval
is required.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-73(B), (C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 85-
11-343, 3-26-1985; Ord. 87-22-454, 8-4-1987; Ord. 94-06-101, 5-31-1994; Ord.
96-17-169, 8-6-1996; Ord. 00-21-263, § 1, 7-18-2000; Ord. 02-21-317, 10-15-
2002; Ord. 05-27-388, 10-25-2005; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-22-526,
7-14-2009; Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.300.2 CONCEPT PLAN.
   (A)   Where specified within the Zoning Ordinance, concept approval shall be
required as the first step in the development approval process (§
1-19-7.500(D)).
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator, the concept
plan shall include the following elements:
      (1)   An application in a form acceptable to the Community Development
Division;
      (2)   A map drawn at 1 inch equals 100 feet or greater scale showing
property lines, all existing natural and man-made features, and a vicinity map;
      (3)   A map identifying the type and location of all proposed uses
including:
         (a)   The generalized location, footprint, and exterior elevation of
all proposed buildings including height, number of stories, number of attached
units, and the location of doors and windows;
         (b)   All proposed parking locations and generalized information
regarding the use of an alternate parking plan including shared, joint,
community, or other means;
         (c)   The generalized location of all roadways, sidewalks, and other
public or private facilities adjacent to and necessary for development of the
site;
      (4)   Existing structures on all lots facing and adjacent to the proposed
development including the height, setbacks;
      (5)   Photographs of the subject parcel and all facing and adjacent lots
and structures used to determine height and setbacks.
(Ord. 07-27-467, 6-19-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-
2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.300.3 SITE PLAN REVIEW APPLICATION.
   An application submitted for site plan review shall include the following
information:
   (A)   A map of the subject property at a convenient scale;
   (B)   A vicinity map at a scale of 1 inch equals 2,000 feet or more to the
inch, indicating the location of the property with respect to surrounding
property and streets. The map will show all streets and highways within 2,000
feet of the applicant's property;
   (C)   A topographic map of the property, at a minimum of 5 foot contour
intervals, unless otherwise specified, showing the existing and proposed
regrading surface of the land and the location of natural features, such as
streams, rock outcrops, and wooded areas;
   (D)   In accordance with the Community Development Division checklist
requirements a site development plan showing all existing and proposed
improvements including but not limited to: proposed use; location and height of
all buildings; location of existing and proposed rights-of-way; location and
dimensions of all parking areas, drive aisles, and truck loading areas with
access and egress drives thereto; location of sidewalks, pedestrian crossings,
and existing or planned transit stops; location and type of any outdoor
storage; location and type of any recreation facilities; proposed grading,
landscaping, and screening plans; description of proposed method to provide
buffer areas and landscaping where required; location, design and height of
outdoor lighting facilities; building elevation for the purpose of depicting
the location, size, and type of all signs; and the location, size and type of
all proposed storm water management facilities;
   (E)   A computation of the total areas of the lot, including the building
floor area, building floor area for each type of proposed use, the roads and
parking, green area, landscaped and screened areas, recreation areas as
required, and total lot coverage;
   (F)   Commercial or industrial uses will designate:
      (1)   The specific uses proposed and the number of employees for which
buildings are designed;
      (2)   The type of power to be used for any manufacturing processes;
      (3)   Type of wastes or by-products to be produced by any process and
proposed method of disposal of such wastes or by-products; and
      (4)   Such other information as may be required by the Planning
Commission or its authorized representatives to determine compliance with the
requirements with this chapter and the impact of a particular use on adjoining
properties;
   (G)   (1)   Soil type(s) information shall be provided and appropriate
boundaries shown. In the event "wet soils" are located on or within 100 feet of
any proposed residential site plan, a soils delineation report shall be
prepared by a soils scientist or professional engineer registered in the State
of Maryland. The Planning Commission may waive this requirement if the "wet
soils" are located within open space areas. The soils report shall be submitted
for review by SCD prior to approval of the site plan by the Planning Commission
or its authorized representatives unless a soils report was completed earlier
within the development review process.
      (2)   If residential structure(s) with basements are proposed within "wet
soils" a geotechnical report is required to be submitted by a professional
engineer registered in the State of Maryland. A note shall be placed on the
site plan that all construction shall be in accordance with the findings of the
geotechnical report.
      (3)   Site plans may be prepared and submitted by an applicant. The
submitted information, if found deficient or in error, may be required to be
resubmitted over the certification of an engineer, architect, landscape
architect, land surveyor or other certified professional. Site plans will be
prepared to a scale of not smaller than 1 inch equals 100 feet, unless approved
by the Community Development Division; the sheet or sheets shall be no less
than 18 inches by 20 inches nor more than 24 inches by 36 inches, including a
1-1/2 inch margin for binding along the left edge. A site plan may be prepared
on one or more sheets, in which case, match lines and an index sheet shall be
provided.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-73(B), (C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 85-
11-343, 3-26-1985; Ord. 87-22-454, 8-4-1987; Ord. 94-06-101, 5-31-1994; Ord.
96-17-169, 8-6-1996; Ord. 00-21-263, § 1, 7-18-2000; Ord. 02-21-317, 10-15-
2002; Ord. 05-27-388, 10-25-2005; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-22-526,
passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-3.300.4 APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   Site development plan approval shall be granted when the Planning Commission
or its authorized representatives find that the application for development has
met the following criteria based upon the standards and provisions of this
chapter:
   (A)   Site development. Existing and anticipated surrounding land uses have
been adequately considered in the design of the development and negative
impacts have been minimized through such means as building placement or scale,
landscaping, or screening, and an evaluation of lighting. Anticipated
surrounding uses shall be determined based upon existing zoning and land use
designations.
   (B)   Transportation and parking. The transportation system and parking
areas are adequate to serve the proposed use in addition to existing uses by
providing safe and efficient circulation, and design consideration that
maximizes connections with surrounding land uses and accommodates public
transit facilities. Evaluation factors include: on-street parking impacts, off-
street parking and loading design, access location and design, vehicular,
bicycle, and pedestrian circulation and safety, and existing or planned transit
facilities.
   (C)   Public utilities. Where the proposed development will be served by
publicly owned community water and sewer, the facilities shall be adequate to
serve the proposed development. Where proposed development will be served by
facilities other than publicly owned community water and sewer, the facilities
shall meet the requirements of and receive approval from the Maryland
Department of the Environment/the Frederick County Health Department.
   (D)   Natural features. Natural features of the site have been evaluated and
to the greatest extent practical maintained in a natural state and incorporated
into the design of the development. Evaluation factors include topography,
vegetation, sensitive resources, and natural hazards.
   (E)   Common areas. If the plan of development includes common areas and/or
facilities, the Planning Commission as a condition of approval may review the
ownership, use, and maintenance of such lands or property to ensure the
preservation of such areas, property, and facilities for their intended
purposes.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-73(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-22-
526, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 4. OPTIONAL METHODS OF DEVELOPMENT
(RESERVED)
ARTICLE IV: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS (§§ 1-19-4.100 — 1-19-
4.630)
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
1-19-4.100   Compliance required
   
1-19-4.110   Exemption of essential services
Division 2. Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
   
1-19-4.200   Generally
   
1-19-4.210   Nonconforming lots
   
1-19-4.220   Nonconforming structures
   
1-19-4.230   Nonconforming uses
Division 3. Accessory Structures
   
1-19-4.300   Definition
   
1-19-4.300.1   Location
   
1-19-4.300.2   [Reserved]
Division 4. Transitional Provisions for Subdivision Plats and Percolation
   
1-19-4.400   Transitional provisions for subdivision plats and percolation
Division 5. General Lot Requirements
   
1-19-4.500   Separate lot requirements
   
1-19-4.510   Subdivision of a lot
   
1-19-4.520   Lot frontage requirements
   
1-19-4.530   Areas of lot which do not satisfy lot area requirements
   
1-19-4.540   Minimum lot area when individual water and sewage facilities are
used
Division 6. General Yard Requirements
   
1-19-4.600   Measurement of front yard depths
   
1-19-4.610   Visibility at intersections
   
1-19-4.620   Corner and through lots
   
1-19-4.630   Court requirements
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 1-19-4.100. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No building, structure, or land shall hereinafter be used or occupied, and
no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be altered, erected,
constructed, or reconstructed, unless in conformity with all the regulations
herein specified for the district in which it is located.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-41, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
Editor's note:
   Ord. 89-41-572, adopted June 6, 1989, deleted § 19-102, relative to
floodplain development control, as derived from Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-48, adopted
Jan. 24, 1977, and Ord. 82-19-263, adopted Sept. 7, 1982.
§ 1-19-4.110. EXEMPTION OF ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
   (A)   As authorized in Chapter 2-13 of the Code of Public Local Laws of
Frederick County, the county may establish, extend and maintain water,
sewerage, drainage and solid waste systems in the county. As specifically
provided in §
2-13-3(D)(5)(III), in exercising these powers the county shall not be subject
to the provisions of any planning regulations or zoning ordinances enacted
under the provisions of Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
   (B)   Government utilities shall be permitted in any district, it being the
intention to exempt such facilities from the application of this chapter;
except, that the plans of any overhead electric transmission line of 69
kilovolts or greater, of any cross country telephone trunk line, including
microwave, transmission pipe line proposed to be created or installed in any
district, shall be submitted to the Planning Commission in adequate time for
its review and recommendation. A nongovernmental utility that is proposed
either on a site area measuring 1,500 square feet or less, or that includes a
structure that measures 500 square feet or less and is 10 feet in height, is
also exempt from the application of this chapter.
   (C)   A proposed public building or facility owned by, or located on
property owned by, the county will be submitted to the Frederick County
Planning Commission (FCPC) for nonbinding review and comment. The FCPC will
hold a public meeting on the proposed public building or facility, after
nonbinding review and comment by the Community Development Division in
accordance with §§
1-19-3.300.1(D)(1) and 1-19-3.300.3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-49(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 00-28-270, 9-7-2000; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 09-22-526, passed 7-14-2009; Ord.
14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 2. NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
§ 1-19-4.200. GENERALLY.
   (A)   Within the zoning districts established by this chapter or amendments
that may later be adopted there exist lots, structures, uses of land, and/or
structures, which were lawful before January 24, 1977 or before this chapter
was amended, but which would not conform to regulations and restrictions under
the terms of this chapter or future amendments thereto, and which could not be
built or used under existing regulations.
   (B)   The purpose of nonconforming lot, structure, and use provisions are to
allow such nonconformities to continue to exist subject to the regulations
contained in this division while not increasing the nonconformity. It is not
the policy of the county to pursue elimination of these nonconformities.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-42, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531,
11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-4.210. NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   A nonconforming lot is a lot which was legally subdivided and recorded
in the county land records prior to adoption, or amendment, of this chapter and
which after adoption or amendment of this chapter does not comply with the
dimensional requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   In any district where permitted a single-family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected in any nonconforming lot and in any
commercial or industrial district a principal permitted use and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any nonconforming lot, provided all of
the following conditions are met in both cases.
      (1)   The lot is located in a district in which the proposed use is
permitted.
      (2)   This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for street frontage, area, or width that are applicable in the
district. The yard dimensions of the lot shall conform to the regulations for
the district in which such lot is located.
      (3)   If said lot lacks street frontage, it must be proven that said lot
has an unrestricted right of access.
   (C)   Any lot reduced in area or yard setback to a nonconforming lot by
reason of a re-alignment or dedication of any existing federal, state or county
highway or by reason of a condemnation proceeding is a nonconforming lot of
record and any lawful structure on the lot before such reduction in lot size is
a nonconforming structure and may continue. However, this provision does not
apply to the creation of new streets, roads or courts in a proposed
subdivision.
   (D)   A nonconforming lot due to lack of road frontage may be subdivided
providing the new lot has road frontage that conforms with §
1-19-4.520 and the remainder has an unrestricted right of access and does not
have less road frontage than before subdivision.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-42(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 77-10-77, 8-22-1977; Ord. 79-19-145,
8-7-1979; Ord. 80-31-183, 10-7-1980; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-4.220. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   A nonconforming structure is a structure lawfully existing January 24,
1977 or on the effective date of an amendment of this chapter that could not be
built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot
coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its
location on the lot. A nonconforming structure may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   The conforming portion of a nonconforming structure may be expanded
or modified provided that the expansion or modification does not increase the
portion of the structure determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
nonconforming.
      (2)   The nonconforming portion of a nonconforming structure may be
modified in accordance with the requirements of this chapter provided that the
modification reduces the portion of the structure determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be nonconforming, or if the modification meets the conditions
set forth in subsection (C) below.
      (3)   Such structure once destroyed by any means will not be
reconstructed unless:
         (a)   It is in conformity with this chapter; or
         (b)   The Board of Appeals grants a variance;
      (4)   Such structure once moved, will thereafter conform to the
regulations for the district to which it is moved.
      (5)   This movement does not include minor shifting or settling of the
structure from natural or accidental causes.
   (B)   Except as specified below in subsection (C), the Board of Appeals
shall not grant a variance to a nonconforming structure for the portion of
structure determined by the Zoning Administrator to be nonconforming.
   (C)   The Board of Appeals may grant a variance to expand a nonconforming
portion of an existing nonconforming structure only if the proposed expansion
does not:
      (1)   Increase the original footprint of the nonconforming portion of the
structure;
      (2)   Extend farther into the required setback(s) than the existing
nonconforming portion(s) of the nonconforming structure; or
      (3)   Include the construction of a nonconforming porch, enclosure of an
existing nonconforming porch, or the addition of stories on top of a
nonconforming porch.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af9691cbec4604828c677875c7c627f7b6eb5f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4475.png]
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-42(B), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-
531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 21-01, passed 3-2-2021)
§ 1-19-4.230. NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   A nonconforming use is a use which legally exists on January 24, 1977
or at the time of amendment of this chapter but that does not comply with the
regulations of the district in which it is located. Nonconforming uses are
incompatible with permitted uses in the same district and will not be modified
or enlarged, except with the approval of the Board of Appeals.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals may grant an approval to change a nonconforming
use to another nonconforming use where a specific finding is made that:
      (1)   No structural alterations are made;
      (2)   The proposed use is more appropriate to the district; and
      (3)   A nonconforming use will not be changed to a use considered less
appropriate to the district;
   (C)   The Board of Appeals may grant an approval to expand a nonconforming
use. Expansion is limited to the lot that exists on January 24, 1977.
Additional acreage or dwelling units will not be added to expand a
nonconforming use.
   (D)   The Board of Appeals may impose conditions within the scope of this
chapter on the granting of an approval within this section.
   (E)   A nonconforming use which has ceased for one year or more shall be
void and have no further status.
   (F)   The casual, temporary or illegal use of land does not establish the
existence of a nonconforming use.
   (G)   Existing mobile home parks.
      (1)   A mobile home park which existed on January 24, 1977 may continue
in existence under the rules and regulations then in effect.
      (2)   A mobile home located in an existing mobile home park on the
effective date of this section may be replaced by another mobile home no larger
than 840 square feet in size.
      (3)   No increase in the number of units or parcel size of any existing
mobile home park will be allowed except as provided in §
1-19-10.600.2, Mobile home parks.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-42(C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 05-30-391, passed 11-15-2005; Ord.
08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 3. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
§ 1-19-4.300. DEFINITION.
   Accessory structures include garages, tool sheds, storage buildings, barns,
signs, or other similar structures. An accessory structure having any part of a
wall in common with a dwelling is considered part of the main building. A
mobile home is not an accessory structure, except as a tenant house on a farm.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-47(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-
525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-4.300.1. LOCATION.
   (A)   No accessory building will be erected within the required front yard,
except as provided in §
1-19-8.250.1. No accessory structure will be erected within 6 feet of any lot
lines or within 6 feet of any building on the lot, except as provided in §
1-19-8.250.1.
   (B)   No accessory structure, wind energy system, solar array or associated
structure, will be erected within the required front yard setback, except as
provided in §
1-19-8.250.1.
   (C)   Accessory structures shall be located on the same parcel as the
principal permitted use or structure.
   (D)   Accessory structures on residential properties see also §
1-19-8.240.
(Ord. 77-1-78, §40-47(B), 1-24-1977; Ord. 06-24-420, 6-20-2006; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-4.300.2. [RESERVED.]
DIVISION 4. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PERCOLATION.
§ 1-19-4.400. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PERCOLATION.
   (A)   Any preliminary plat for subdivision which has been approved by the
Planning Commission as of January 24, 1977, but which has not received final
plat approval and been duly recorded among the plat records of the county shall
be considered valid and be subject to the provisions of the zoning regulations
in effect prior to January 24, 1977; provided that final plats covering all
lots shall be filed by January 24, 1978, except those lots located in
restricted soils which had duly filed percolation test application as of
January 18, 1977. These subdivisions and lots are listed by the Health
Department. Final plats for lots not affected by restricted soils shall be
recorded by June 30, 1978.
   (B)   Final plats covering all lots involving restricted soils and listed by
the Health Department shall be filed by August 30, 1978. These final plats for
all lots shall be recorded by December 16, 1978.
   (C)   Any plat which receives final approval and has been duly recorded in
accordance with the above after January 24, 1977 shall be subject to
requirements for lots of record as contained in §§
1-19-4.200 through
1-19-4.230 of this Code. Any preliminary plat not receiving final plat
approval, and which is not duly recorded as specified above, shall be subject
to the new zoning regulations.
(Ord. 77-1-78, 1-24-1977; Ord. 78-4-102, 1-17-1978; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 5. GENERAL LOT REQUIREMENTS
§ 1-19-4.500. SEPARATE LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter:
   (A)   Only 1 structure used for dwelling purposes is permitted on a single
lot;
   (B)   In commercial or industrial districts, only 1 principal structure and
customary accessory structures will be permitted on any single lot.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-43(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-4.510. SUBDIVISION OF A LOT.
   Subdivision of existing lots is not permitted where the proposed subdivision
would create any lots which do not comply with all requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-43(B), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-4.520. LOT FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every building or structure used in whole or part for dwelling
purposes and hereafter erected or moved will be located on a lot abutting for
at least 20 feet on a county or state road or street. However, panhandle lots
created by subdivision plat which are located side-by-side and utilize a common
driveway may abut for only 10 feet each on a county or state road. The 10 foot
width of each panhandle may only be allowed for the length of 2 or more
panhandles which are side-by-side. If a single panhandle is created, or that
portion of a panhandle which is not adjacent to another panhandle, the 20 foot
width shall be required.
   (B)   In a townhouse, garden apartment development, cluster subdivision,
MPDU project, Planned Unit Development, or a Mixed Use Development project with
a residential component, the lots may face on a common open space, or private
street, provided that the plan of such development is approved by the Planning
Commission.
   (C)   Every building, structure or use of land used in whole or in part for
commercial or industrial purposes will be located on a lot abutting for at
least 80 feet on a paved public road; provided, however, where a common
entrance is used, the minimum frontage of each lot shall be 50 feet.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-43(C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 96-06-158,
3-12-1996; Ord. 02-26-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 10-26-
561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-4.530. AREAS OF LOT WHICH DO NOT SATISFY LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS.
   Those areas of a lot which lie in an established or proposed street right-
of-way as indicated on the County Comprehensive Plan do not qualify as part of
the required minimum lot area. The area within the "handle" of a panhandle lot
does not qualify as part of the required minimum area.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-43(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 11-06-
572, 5-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-4.540. MINIMUM LOT AREA WHEN INDIVIDUAL WATER AND SEWAGE FACILITIES ARE
USED.
   Any lot to be served by an individual water supply and individual sewage
disposal system regardless of the zone in which it is located will have a
minimum area of 40,000 square feet and a minimum lot width of 100 feet. The
minimum lot areas will be increased to include any additional area deemed
necessary by the County Health Department. Where a public or an acceptable
community sanitary sewer system is accessible and used in conjunction with
individual wells, the minimum lot area and frontage requirements shall be
15,000 square feet and 80 feet, respectively.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-43(E), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-11-255, 6-8-1982; Ord. 84-6-302,
4-3-1984; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 6. GENERAL YARD REQUIREMENTS
§ 1-19-4.600. MEASUREMENT OF FRONT YARD DEPTHS.
   The minimum front yard depths, as specified in this chapter, will be
measured in the following manner.
   (A)   The depths will be measured from the proposed or established right-of-
way lines as determined by the Master Highway Plan, or as modified or
supplemented by an officially adopted state or county road widening or location
plan, an attested copy of which is filed with the County Planning Commission,
such plan will control.
   (B)   Where a state or county road is proposed for improvement, but no such
officially adopted plan is on file, the State Highway Administration or County
Highways Department may be allowed not over 180 days from the date of the
application for a zoning certificate and building permit within which to
establish a proposed right-of-way plan.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-44(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-4.610. VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   On a corner lot in any district, nothing will be erected, placed, or planted
in such a manner as to impede vision within 20 feet of the intersection of the
road right-of-way lines. This rule will not apply to trees existing as of
January 24, 1977.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-44(B), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-4.620. CORNER AND THROUGH LOTS.
   (A)   In the case of corner lots, a full front yard of the required depth
will be provided off both front lot lines, except as modified in §§
1-19-6.120 through
1-19-6.170 of this Code.
   (B)   In the case of through lots, front yards will be provided off all
front lot lines, except as permitted by §§
1-19-6.120 through
1-19-6.170 of this Code.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-44(C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-4.630. COURT REQUIREMENTS.
   When a court is provided, the minimum dimensions will be as follows.
   (A)   Minimum width. For residential buildings other than a single-family
dwelling, the minimum width shall be the sum of the heights of the opposite
building walls, but not less than 40 feet. For nonresidential buildings, two-
thirds the sum of opposite buildings walls, but not less than 30 feet.
   (B)   Minimum depth. One and one-half times the width.
(Ord. 77-1-77, § 40-44(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
ARTICLE V: ZONING MAP AND DISTRICTS (§§ 1-19-5.100 — 1-19-5.310)
Section
Division 1. Official Zoning Map
   
1-19-5.100   Adopted
   
1-19-5.110   Location
   
1-19-5.120   Interpretation
Division 2. Zoning Districts
   
1-19-5.200   Generally
   
1-19-5.210   Resource Conservation zoning district (RC)
   
1-19-5.220   Agricultural zoning district (A)
   
1-19-5.230   Residential zoning districts
   
1-19-5.240   Commercial zoning districts
   
1-19-5.250   Industrial zoning districts
   
1-19-5.260   Euclidean Institutional zoning district (Ie)
Division 3. Use Table
   
1-19-5.300   Generally
   
1-19-5.310   Use table
DIVISION 1. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
§ 1-19-5.100. ADOPTED.
   The zoning districts herein established are designated on the Official
County Zoning Map, which together with all explanatory matter hereon, is
adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-57(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-5.110. LOCATION.
   The Official County Zoning Map shall be located in the Department of
Planning and Development Review.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-57(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-5.120. INTERPRETATION.
   The location of zoning districts as determined from the Official Zoning Map
is subject to the following rules of interpretation.
   (A)   A district name or designation shown on the official map means that
the regulations pertaining to that district extend throughout the whole area
bounded by the district boundary lines.
   (B)   Where the precise location of a district boundary line is determined
by a designated number of feet as shown on the Official Zoning Map, that
distance will control.
   (C)   Where the precise location of a boundary line is shown as within or
along a street or alley, the boundary line is the center line of such street or
alley.
   (D)   Where a boundary line is shown and its location is not fixed by any of
the above rules, its precise location is determined by scaling from fixtures
shown on the map.
   (E)   Where physical features existing on the ground are at variance with
those shown on the official map, or in other circumstances not covered above,
the Board of Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries after receipt of
recommendation from the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-57(B), 1-24-1977; Ord. 79-18-144, 8-7-1978; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 2. ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 1-19-5.200. GENERALLY.
   The zoning districts in this division are hereby established for the county.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-50, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-5.210. RESOURCE CONSERVATION ZONING DISTRICT (RC).
   The purpose of the Resource Conservation Zoning District is to allow low
intensity uses and activities which are compatible with the goal of resource
conservation to be located within mountain and rural wooded areas. Areas within
this district include mountain areas, rural woodlands, and cultural, scenic,
and recreation resource areas. Environmentally sensitive areas within the
resource conservation zone, including FEMA floodplain, steep slopes, wetlands
and the habitats of threatened and endangered species, will be protected from
development.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-51, 1-24-1977; Ord. 95-02-126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-5.220. AGRICULTURAL ZONING DISTRICT (A).
   The purpose of the Agricultural District (A) is to preserve productive
agricultural land and the character and quality of the rural environment and to
prevent urbanization where roads and other public facilities are scaled to meet
only rural needs.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-52, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-5.230. RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   (1)   The purpose of the residential density districts is to promote
healthful and convenient distribution of population with sufficient densities
to maintain a high standard of physical design and community service.
Residential density districts will conform to the County Comprehensive Plan and
will be located within areas identified for residential development. The
districts, as a group, are intended to provide for a variety of dwelling types
and densities and to offer housing choices at various economic levels. It is
further the intent to establish various densities of residential developments
in order to efficiently and effectively provide for necessary public services
and facilities. The following residential density districts and maximum
densities are hereby established.
 
Residential District Residential Density Class Maximum Dwelling Units Per Acre
R-1                  Low                       1
R-3                  Low                       3
R-5                  Medium                    5
R-8                  Medium                    8
R-12                 High                      12
R-16                 High                      16
 
      (2)   An exception to the maximum density is allowed under the MPDU
program in accordance with
1-19-8.620.
   (B)   The location of the districts will be consistent with the standards,
criteria, and location as specified in the County Comprehensive Development
Plan.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-53, 1-24-1977; Ord. 02-26-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-5.240. COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The purpose of commercial districts is to provide sufficient and
convenient locations throughout the county for commercial uses, serving the
needs of local areas, the larger community, and regional users.
   (B)   The Village Center District (VC) is intended to reinforce and enhance
the historically mixed-use areas within rural communities and designated growth
areas. The district provides for the location of a variety of limited
commercial uses and a range of housing types while maintaining the
compatibility of new development with existing development through design
standards. A mix of uses is encouraged in the village center either within a
single structure or as separate uses located throughout the district.
   (C)   The General Commercial District (GC) is intended to provide general
retail commercial and business services. The general commercial district will
be located on roads with a minimum classification of collectors as designated
by the County Comprehensive Plan.
   (D)   The Mixed Use District (MX) is intended to provide for a mixture of
residential, commercial, and employment uses served by publicly owned community
water and sewer within growth areas for the purpose of redevelopment and in-
fill where identified by a County Comprehensive Plan land use designation of
Mixed Use.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-55, 1-24-1977; Ord. 07-27-467, 6-19-2007; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 11-28-594, 11-22-2011; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-5.250. INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The purpose of the industrial districts is to provide for the
development of varied industrial uses that would supply needed employment
opportunities for the county. Industrial development has inherent
characteristics that require special attention and protection. Due regard must
be given to industrial needs for adequate site locations with concentration on
terrain, availability of water and sewer systems, transportation, and
compatibility with surrounding development.
   (B)   The Limited Industrial District (LI) is intended to provide adequate
area for development of industrial uses whose operations have a relatively
minor nuisance value and provides a healthful operating environment secure from
the encroachment of residential uses and protected from adverse effects of
incompatible industries.
   (C)   The General Industrial District (GI) is intended to provide areas for
industries involving manufacturing or processing and for those industrial uses
which cannot meet the performance criteria of the Limited Industrial District.
   (D)   The Mineral Mining District (MM) is a floating zone established for
the purpose of providing for the development of needed mineral resources in
areas where such resources exist subject to adequate safeguard for the
conservation of the environment.
   (E)   The Office/Research Industrial District (ORI) is intended to provide
for the development of office, research and limited manufacturing uses in high
visibility locations along major highways. Development in this district shall
be characterized by an absence of nuisances in a clean and aesthetically
attractive setting. This district shall permit limited manufacturing,
fabrication or assembly operations which would, by nature of the product, or
magnitude of production, be compatible with research, professional or business
offices. Commercial uses shall be limited to those which are primarily oriented
towards servicing those businesses located within the Office/Research
Industrial District.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-56, 1-24-1977; Ord. 85-34-366, 8-8-1985; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-5.260. EUCLIDEAN INSTITUTIONAL ZONING DISTRICT (Ie).
   The Euclidean Institutional Zoning District is established to provide for
college or university, public school within the Agricultural Zoning District,
private school, private school in conjunction with a place of worship, or
residential treatment center in conjunction with a private school within the
Agricultural or Resource Conservation Zoning Districts, and a continuing care
retirement community (CCRC) within the Agricultural and R1 Zoning Districts, in
existence or with final site development plan approval on June 15, 2009. (See
also §
1-19-8.480.)
(Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 10-18-533, 5-4-2010; Ord. 10-31-566, 12-21-
2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 3. USE TABLE
§ 1-19-5.300. GENERALLY.
   (A)   The official schedule of district regulations follows in §§
1-19-5.310 and
1-19-6.100 of this Code.
   (B)   Additional supplementary district regulations are found in §§
1-19-7.100 through
1-19-7.620 of this Code.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-61, 1-24-1977)
   The specific district regulations are set out in §
1-19-5.300 of this Code and are in 2 tables.
   (C)   Table I is §
1-19-5.310 of this Code and sets out the permitted uses in each zoning district
and the type of required development review.
   (D)   Table II is §
1-19-6.100 of this Code and sets out the minimum lot area, frontage, yards and
the maximum building height allowed for permitted uses in each zoning district.
   (E)   Unlisted uses.
      (1)   A use not specifically listed in §
1-19-5.310 Use Table is presumed to be prohibited, except when:
         (a)   Permitted in any zoning district by state statute; or
         (b)   The Zoning Administrator upon request provides a written
determination that a proposed use is permitted due to its similarity to a
particular use permitted within the zoning district.
   (F)   A proposed public building or facility owned by, or located on
property owned by, the county will be submitted to the Frederick County
Planning Commission (FCPC) for nonbinding review and comment. The FCPC will
hold a public meeting on the proposed public building or facility, after
nonbinding review and comment by the Community Development Division in
accordance with §§
1-19-3.300.1(D)(1) and
1-19-3.300.3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-60, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525,
6-4-2009; Ord. 09-22-526, 7-14-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-5.310. USE TABLE.
   (A)   Permitted uses and required development review.
P   Principal permitted use subject to design regulations
PS   Principal permitted use subject to site development plan approval. See §§
1-19-2.160, and
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4
E   Principal permitted use as a special exception with site development plan
approval. See §§
1-19-8.320 and following
T   Permitted as temporary use as a special exception. See §
1-19-8.300
X   Permitted as temporary use only. See §
1-19-8.700
SW   Solid Waste Floating Zone
CDI-OZ Principal permitted use subject to site development plan approval in the
Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone
A blank indicates that the use is not permitted under any situation
     Zoning Districts
Uses RC A R1 R3 R5 R8 R12 R16 VC MX GC ORI LI GI
Natural Resources Uses
                                                           Zoning Districts
Uses                                                       RC    A     R1 R3 R5 R8 R12 R16 VC MX GC ORI LI   GI
Natural Resources Uses
Agricultural activities                                    P     P     P  P  P  P  P   P   P  P  P  P   P    P
Limited agricultural activity                                        E  E  E  E  E   E                 
Apiary                                                     P     P     P  P  P  P  P   P   P  P  P  P   P    P
Agricultural value added processing                        P     P                                 
                                                           ***   ***
Agritourism enterprise                                     P     P     P  P  P  P  P   P   P  P  P  P   P    P
Nursery retail                                             PS    PS                      PS    PS   PS
Nursery wholesale                                          P     P                       P     P    P
Farm distillery                                            P***  P***                              
Farm distillery tasting room                               PS*** PS***                             
Farm winery                                                P     P                                 
                                                           ***   ***
Farm winery tasting room                                   PS    PS                                
                                                           ***   ***
Limited farm alcoholic beverages tasting room              P***  P***                              
Farm brewery                                               P     P                                 
                                                           ***   ***
Farm brewery tasting room                                  PS    PS                                
                                                           ***   ***
Limited roadside stand                                     P     P     PS PS           PS P  PS         
                                                                                              S
Commercial roadside stand                                  PS    PS    PS PS           PS P  PS         
                                                                                              S
Forestry                                                   P     P     P  P  P  P  P   P       P     P    P
Sawmill                                                    E     E                                PS
Mineral extraction                                                                              PS
Mineral processing                                                                              PS
Spring water harvesting and storage                        E                                      
Intensive swine farm                                                                             
Residential Uses
Single-family detached                                     P     P     P  P  P  P  P   P   P  P            
Duplex dwelling                                                      P  P  P  P  P   P   P  P            
Two-family dwelling                                             P     P  P  P  P  P   P   P  P            
Townhouse                                                              PS PS PS PS  PS  PS P            
                                                                          *                   S
Multifamily dwellings                                                      PS PS  PS  PS P            
                                                                                              S
Multifamily group developments                                             PS PS  PS  PS P            
                                                                                              S
Mobile homes                                               P     P                                 
Caretaker residence in conjunction with a permitted use    PS    PS                  PS P  P     P    P
                                                                                              S
Accessory dwelling unit *****                              E     E     E  E  E  E  E   E   E  E            
Temporary Housing
Bed and breakfast                                          PS    PS    E  E  E  E  E   E   PS PS PS         
Motel, hotel                                                                       PS PS PS PS  PS    
Commercial Uses – Retail
Antique, artisan and craft shops                                                   PS PS PS    PS    
Apparel store                                                                      PS PS PS         
Appliance sales and service                                                        PS PS PS         
Auction house                                                                      PS   PS    PS   PS
Food stores                                                                        PS PS PS         
Boats, sales and service                                                               PS    PS   PS
Book and magazine                                                                  PS PS PS         
Camera                                                                             PS PS PS         
Cannabis dispensary                                                                PS PS PS         
Convenience stores                                                                 PS PS PS    PS   PS
Department store or variety store                                                  PS PS PS         
Farm equipment sales or service ****                            E                   PS   PS    PS   PS
Feed and grain mill                                             E                            PS   PS
Florist                                                                            PS PS PS         
Furniture repair                                                                   PS PS PS    PS   PS
Shopping center                                                                    PS   PS         
Gift/souvenir                                                                      PS PS PS         
Hardware/garden center                                                             PS PS PS         
Hobby shop                                                                         PS PS PS         
Horse tack and saddlery shop                                                       PS PS PS         
Household furnishing                                                               PS PS PS         
Jewelry                                                                            PS PS PS         
Lumber yard                                                                            PS    PS   PS
Mobile home sales                                                                      PS    PS   PS
Music and record shops                                                             PS PS PS         
Office equipment                                                                   PS PS PS         
Paint store                                                                        PS PS PS         
Pet store                                                                          PS PS PS         
Pet training/day care/grooming facility                                            PS PS PS         
Pharmacy                                                                           PS PS PS         
Radio and TV sales and service                                                     PS PS PS         
Shoe store                                                                         PS PS PS         
Sporting goods                                                                     PS PS PS         
Stone monument sales                                                               PS PS PS    PS   PS
Tobacco store                                                                      PS PS PS         
Toy store                                                                          PS PS PS         
Liquor store                                                                       PS PS PS         
Commercial Business and Personal Services
Advertising agency                                                                 PS PS PS         
Bank or savings and loan                                                           PS PS PS PS       
Bodywork                                                                           PS PS PS         
Broadcasting studio                                                                PS PS PS PS  PS   PS
Communication towers**                                     E     E                       PS PS  PS   PS
Barber and beauty shops                                                            PS PS PS         
Bus depot                                                                              PS    PS   PS
Carpentry, electrical, plumbing, welding, printing,                                PS PS PS    PS   PS
upholstering
Contractors, fencing, pool and siding                                                  PS    PS   PS
Commercial school or education program                                               PS PS PS  PS    
Dance or music studio                                                              PS PS PS         
Dry cleaning and laundromat ****                                                   PS PS PS         
Funeral home                                                                         PS PS         
Limited landscape contractor                                    PS                                
Landscape contractor                                            E                       PS    PS   PS
Limited landscape contractor parking and storage                PS                                
Medical clinic                                                                     PS PS PS PS  PS   PS
Office business                                                                    PS PS PS PS  PS   PS
Office professional                                                      E  E  E   E   PS PS PS PS       
Pawn shop                                                                              PS         
Photography studio ****                                                            PS PS PS    PS    
Restaurant                                                                         PS PS PS PS  PS    
Satellite simulcast betting facility                                                   PS    PS   PS
Country inn                                                E     E                                 
Facility for functions                                     E     E     E  E  E  E  E   E   E  E  E  E   E    E
Woodworking                                                     PS                  PS PS PS    PS   PS
Wholesaling and Processing
Agricultural products processing                           E     E                       PS    PS   PS
Bottling plant                                                                         PS    PS   PS
Contractors, equipment and material storage yard                                                PS
Carpet or rug cleaning ****                                                            PS    PS   PS
Contractors office and storage                                                              PS    
Petroleum products storage ****                                                             PS   PS
Laboratory research, experimental or testing                                           PS PS  PS   PS
Industrial laundry and dry cleaning ****                                                    PS   PS
Self-storage units                                                                     PS    PS   PS
Stone monument processing                                                              PS    PS   PS
Wholesaling and/or warehouse                                                           PS    PS   PS
Yard storage                                                                                    PS
Automobile and Related Services
Part sales and installation                                                        PS PS PS    PS    
Automobile filling and service station ****                                        PS PS PS    PS   PS
Carwash                                                                            PS   PS    PS    
Automobile repair or service shop ****                                             E  E  PS    PS   PS
Sales and service center ****                                                          PS    PS   PS
Salvage yard ****                                                                               PS
School bus parking                                         E     E                   E    PS    PS   PS
Truck stop and filling station service facility ****                                            PS
Recreational vehicle storage facility                           E                       PS    PS   PS
Motor freight terminal ****                                                                 PS   PS
Animal Care and Service
Animal hospital or veterinary clinic                            E                   E  PS PS         
Kennel                                                          E                   E    E          
Auction sales – animals                                       PS                      PS    PS   PS
Commercial Amusements
Bowling alley                                                                      PS PS PS         
Carnival, circus                                                X     X              X  X  X     X    X
Race tracks                                                                            PS    PS   PS
Motorcycle hill climb                                                                           T
Health club, fitness center, vocational training facility                          PS PS PS    PS    
Tennis club                                                            E  E  E  E   E     PS PS         
Golf course ****                                                     PS PS PS PS PS  PS                
Skating rink                                                                         P  PS         
                                                                                              S
Swimming pool, commercial                                                            P  PS         
                                                                                              S
Theater, drive-in or outdoor stage                                                     PS    PS   PS
Theater, indoor                                                                    PS PS PS    PS    
Zoo/botanical garden/arboretum                                                         PS         
Museums/gallery                                                                    PS PS PS         
Night club, tavern, lounge                                                             PS    PS    
Outdoor sports recreation facility                              PS                      PS    PS   PS
Rodeo                                                           E                                 
Indoor sports recreation facility                                                    PS PS    PS    
Industrial Uses
Cannabis growing facility                                                                PS  PS   PS
Cannabis processing facility                                                             PS  PS   PS
Limited manufacturing and assembly use                                                   PS  PS   PS
General manufacturing                                                                           PS
Critical digital infrastructure facility                                                    CDI- CDI-
                                                                                                        OZ   OZ
Critical digital infrastructure electric substation                                         CDI- CDI-
                                                                                                        OZ   OZ
Nongovernmental utility                                    E     E     E  E  E  E  E   E   E    PS    PS   PS
Nongovernmental electric substation                                                         E    E
Open Space and Institutional
Airports, public ****                                                                       PS   PS
Cemetery/memorial gardens                                       PS    PS                           
Fairground                                                                             PS    PS   PS
Shooting range/club - trap, skeet, rifle, archery          E     E                            PS   PS
Aircraft landing and storage areas, private                     E                            E    E
Aircraft landing and storage areas, private - commercial        E                            E    E
use
Tent campground                                            E     E                                 
Rustic retreat/camp/outdoor club                           E     E                                 
Private park                                               PS                                     
Institutional
Child care center/nursery school                                E     E  E  E  E  PS  PS  PS PS PS PS  E     
Civic community center                                          E     PS PS PS PS PS  PS  PS PS PS         
Civic service clubs                                             E     P        PS  PS  PS PS PS         
Comprehensive physical rehabilitation facility                                  PS  PS PS PS PS       
Group homes, small private                                 P     P     P  P  P  P  P   P   P  P            
Group home, large                                               PS    PS PS PS PS PS  PS  PS PS           
Hospital                                                                        PS  PS PS PS         
Assisted living facility                                             PS PS PS PS PS  PS  PS PS PS         
Nursing home                                                         PS PS PS PS PS  PS  PS PS           
Place of worship                                           E     PS    PS E  PS PS PS  PS  PS PS PS    PS    
Private school                                                  PS    PS PS PS PS PS  PS  PS PS T  T   T     
Community fire and rescue service                               PS    PS PS PS PS PS  PS  PS PS PS PS  PS   PS
Governmental and Nongovernmental Utilities
Arena or stadium                                                                       PS    PS   PS
College or university                                                PS PS PS PS PS  PS  PS PS PS         
Public school                                              -     PS    PS PS PS PS PS  PS  PS PS T  PS  T     
Nongovernmental utility                                    E     E     E  E  E  E  E   E   E    PS    PS   PS
Nongovernmental electric substation                                                         E    E
Solar facility, commercial                                      PS                           PS   PS
Solid Waste Operations
Borrow pit operations                                           PS                           PS   PS
Industrial waste landfill ****                                  E                                E
Rubble landfill                                                 SW                               SW
Recycling pickup and distribution centers                                                   PS   PS
RRF (Resource Recovery Facility - Separated Recyclables)        SW                           SW   SW
RRF (Resource Recovery Facility - Nonseparated Materials)                                       SW
Composting:                                                                                      
   Limited food waste composting: agricultural activity      P                                 
****
   Limited food waste composting: commercial activity **     PS                                
   Limited wood waste recycling facility                     E                                E
   Unlimited wood waste recycling facility                   SW                               SW
   Sludge amended yard waste                                 SW                           SW   SW
   Solid waste composting                                    SW                           SW   SW
   Sludge pit                                                E                                 
 
*   Townhouses will be permitted only within MPDU developments; however, in no
event shall the number of townhouses exceed 50% of the total number of units
within the MPDU project.
**   Communication towers not permitted in residential districts, PUD, or MXD
districts with a residential component
***   A zoning certificate is required to be obtained prior to the initiation
of the processing operation and/or prior to any building construction related
to farm winery, farm brewery, farm distillery, farm distillery tasting room,
farm winery tasting room, farm brewery tasting room, or limited farm alcoholic
beverages tasting room.
****   These uses are prohibited within wellhead protection areas; outside of
WHPA the location and containment of hazardous substance for these uses must
meet the requirements of §
1-6-50.
*****   A limited accessory dwelling unit may be approved as an accessory use
where the provisions in §
1-19-8.212 are met (see also §
1-19-8.240, and §
1-19-8.321)
   (B)   Permitted uses and required development review for limited zoning
districts.
      (1)   Euclidean Institutional Zoning District (Ie). The following uses
are permitted within the Euclidean Institutional Zoning District:
         (a)   College or university, public school, private school, private
school in conjunction with a place of worship, or residential treatment center
in conjunction with a private school, a continuing care retirement community
(CCRC), and agricultural activities as defined in §
1-19-11.100, subject to all other requirements of this chapter. The continued
or further application of this zoning district to land uses not meeting these
standards is not permitted. Caretaker residence in conjunction with a permitted
use is specifically allowed as an accessory use. (See also §
1-19-8.480.)
(Ord. 77-1-78, §40-61A, 1-24-1977; Ord. 79-5-131, 3-27-1979; Ord. 79-19-145, 8-
7-1979; Ord. 80-24-176, 8-26-1980; Ord. 80-25-177, 8-26-1980; Ord. 80-31-183,
10-7-1980; Ord. 81-2-192, 1-27-1981; Ord. 81-29-219, 9-29-1981; Ord. 82-19-263,
9-7-1982; Ord. 83-15-282, 6-7-1983; Ord. 83-23-290, 10-11-1983; Ord. 83-29-296,
12-20-1983; Ord. 84-5-301, 4-3-1984; Ord. 84-34-331, 12-24-1984; Ord. 85-6-338,
1-8-1985; Ord. 85-34-366, 8-8-1985; Ord. 85-45-377, 12-3-1985; Ord. 86-5-382,
4-22-1986; Ord. 86-16-393, 5-13-1986; Ord. 86-37-414, 8-26-1986; Ord. 86-49-
426, 9-23-86; Ord. 86-53-130, 10-28-1986; Ord. 88-12-489, 5-3-1988; Ord. 89-1-
532, 1-3-1989; Ord. 89-14-545, 3-7-1989; Ord. 89-51-582, 8-15-1989; Ord. 90-03-
601, 2-6-1990; Ord. 90-30-628, 6-19-1990; Ord. 90-44-642, 11-20-1990; Ord. 90-
46-644, 11-20-1990; Ord. 91-02-002, 3-22-1991; Ord. 91-13-013, 6-4-1991; Ord.
91-32-032, 11-19-1991; Ord. 92-22-057, 10-06-1992; Ord. 92-23-058, 10-6-1992;
Ord. 93-19-083, 9-13-1993; Ord. 93-28-092, 11-9-1993; Ord. 95-02-126, 3-2-1995;
Ord. 95-28-152, 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-26-178, 12-17-1996; Ord. 97-17-195, 12-2-
1997; Ord. 98-08-210, 4-21-1998; Ord. 99-02-229, 3-16-1999; Ord. 99-06-233, 5-
18-1999; Ord. 99-14-241, 11-23-1999; Ord. 00-04-246, 4-4-2000; Ord. 00-28-270,
9-7-2000; Ord. 01-03-277, 3-6-2001; Ord. 03-09-332, 6-3-2003; Ord. 05-25-386,
9-27-2005; Ord. 05-29-390, 10-25-2005; Ord. 06-42-438, 11-30-2006; Ord. 07-16-
456, 5-15-2007; Ord. 07-27-467, 6-19-2007; Ord. 07-31-471, 10-15-2007; Ord. 08-
07-483, 4-10-2008; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord.
09-22-526, 7-14-2009; Ord. 10-04-539, 3-11-2010; Ord. 10-18-533, 5-4-2010; Ord.
10-20-555, 8-24-2010; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 10-31-566, 12-21-2010;
Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-2011; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 11-28-594, 11-22-
2011; Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 12-23-618, 9-6-2012; Ord. 13-25-653, 10-
31-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-04, 5-2-2017; Bill No. 17-07,
5-16-2017; Bill No. 17-11, 7-18-2017; Bill No. 18-10, 5-1-2018; Bill No. 18-16,
8-21-2018; Bill No. 18-22, 10-16-2018; Bill No. 19-09, 8-20-2019; Bill No. 22-
05, 3-15-2022; Bill No. 22-12, 7-26-2022; Bill No. 22-24, 10-25-2022; Bill No.
23-14, 8-8-2023; Bill No. 23-15, 8-8-23; Bill No. 23-19, 10-17-2023; Bill No.
23-20, 11-21-2023; Bill No. 23-21, 11-21-2023; Bill No. 24-07, 6-18-2024; Bill
No. 24-10, 7-16-2024; Bill No. 25-09, 9-2-2025)
ARTICLE VI: DISTRICT REGULATIONS (§§ 1-19-6.100 — 1-19-6.500)
Section
Division 1. Design Requirements and Modifications
   
1-19-6.100   Design requirements for specific districts
   
1-19-6.110   Design modifications
   
1-19-6.120   Generally
   
1-19-6.130   Front yards
   
1-19-6.140   Side and rear yard modifications
   
1-19-6.150   Projection of architectural features
   
1-19-6.160   Height modification
   
1-19-6.170   Historic structural lot sizes
Division 2. Parking and Loading
   
1-19-6.200   Generally
   
1-19-6.210   Loading space requirements and dimensions
   
1-19-6.220   Parking space requirements and dimensions
   
1-19-6.230   Joint use parking
   
1-19-6.240   Shared parking
Division 3. Signs
   
1-19-6.300   Erection and maintenance
   
1-19-6.310   General regulations
   
1-19-6.320   Signs permitted and regulated in the zoning district
   
1-19-6.330   Temporary business signs
   
1-19-6.340   Electronic message signs
Division 4. Landscaping and Screening
   
1-19-6.400   Landscaping and screening
Division 5. Lighting
   
1-19-6.500   Lighting
DIVISION 1. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND MODIFICATIONS
§ 1-19-6.100. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC DISTRICTS.
Note 1.   Minimum lot areas measured in acres and square feet; minimum lot
width, yard areas and height measured in feet.
Note 2.   The minimum lot area and yard requirements do not apply to
agricultural activity involving no structures.
Note 3.   Design requirements for uses permitted by special exception are
established in §§
1-19-8.320 et seq.
Note 4.   Lot area, width and yard measurements may be modified in accordance
with §
1-19-8.620 through §
1-19-8.620.6 (to residential zones - R3, R5, R8, R12, R16, VC, and in
accordance with §
1-19-7.520 for the MX District).
Use            Minimum  Minimum            Front
Classification Lot Area Lot Area Lot Width Yard  Side Yard Rear Yard Height
                        per Unit
Resource Conservation District RC
Use             Minimum  Minimum            Front
Classification  Lot Area Lot Area Lot Width Yard   Side Yard Rear Yard Height
                         per Unit
Resource Conservation District RC
Natural         10 acres -        300       50     50        50        30'
resources
Residential*                                                      
Single family   10 acres 10 acres 300       50     50        50        30'
Mobile home     10 acres 10 acres 300       50     50        50        30'
Animal care and 10 acres -        300       50     50        50        30'
service
Open space uses 10 acres -        300       50     50        50        30'
Institutional   10 acres -        300       50     50        50        30'
Governmental
and public      10 acres -        300       50     50        50        30'
utility
Nongovernmental 10 acres -        300       50     50        50        30'
utility
Private park    100      -        300       50     50        50        30'
                acres
Agricultural District A
Natural         5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
resources
Residential     See §
Single family   1-19-7.300        100       40     10        30        30'
Mobile homes    See §            100       40     10        30        30'
Two family      1-19-7.300        150       40     15        30        30'
dwelling        2 acres  1 acre
Animal care and 5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
services
Open space uses 5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
Tent campground 10 acres -        300       40     50        50        30'
Institutional   40,000   -        200       40     50        50        30'
Governmental
and public      40,000   -        200       40     50        50        30'
utility
Nongovernmental 40,000   -        200       50     50        50        30'
utility
Commercial      5 acres  -        200       40     50        50        30'
amusements
Residential One District R1
Natural         5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
resources
Residential                                                       
Single family   40,000   40,000   100       40     10        30        30'
Duplex dwelling 1 acre   1 acre   100       40     10        30        30'
Two family      2 acre   1 acre   150       40     15        30        30'
dwelling
Commercial      5 acres  -        200       40     50        50        30'
amusement
Open space      No       -        200       40     50        50        30'
                minimum
Institutional   40,000   -        200       40     50        50        30'
Governmental
and public      40,000   -        200       40     50        50        30'
utility
Nongovernmental 40,000   -        200       50     50        50        30'
utility
Residential Three District R3
Natural         5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
resources
Residential                                                       
Single family   12,000   12,000   80        30     10        30        30'
Duplex dwelling 12,000   12,000   80        30     10        30        30'
Two family      24,000   12,000   100       30     10        30        30'
Commercial      5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
amusement
Open space uses No       -        200       40     50        50        30'
                minimum
Institutional   12,000   -        200       40     50        50        30'
Governmental
and public      12,000   -        200       40     50        50        30'
utility
Nongovernmental 12,000   -        200       50     50        50        30'
utility
Residential Five District R5
Natural         5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
resources
Residential                                                       
Single family   8,000    8,000    70        30     8         30        30'
Duplex dwelling 8,000    8,000    70        30     8         30        30'
Two family      16,000   8,000    80        30     8         30        30'
dwelling
Townhouse       See §§
dwelling        1-19-8.470 through
                1-19-8.470.7
Commercial      5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
amusement
Open space uses No       -        200       40     50        50        30'
                minimum
Institutional   8,000    -        200       40     50        50        30'
Governmental
and public      8,000    -        200       40     50        50        30'
utility
Nongovernmental 8,000    -        200       50     50        50        30'
utility
Residential Eight District R8
Natural         5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
resources
Residential                                                       
Single family   6,000    6,000    65        25     8         30        30'
Duplex dwelling 6,000    6,000    65        25     8         30        30'
Two family      12,000   6,000    100       25     10        30        30'
dwelling
Townhouse       See §§
dwelling        1-19-8.470 through
                1-19-8.470.7
Multifamily     None     5,000    150       40     30        50        40'
dwelling
Multifamily     None     5,000    150       40     30        50        40'
group
Temporary       12,000   -        80        30     10        25        30'
housing
Commercial      5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
amusement
Open space uses No       -        200       40     50        50        30'
                minimum
Institutional   6,000    -        200       40     50        50        30'
Governmental
and public      6,000    -        200       40     50        50        30'
utility
Nongovernmental 6,000    -        200       50     50        50        30'
utility
Residential Twelve District R12
Natural         5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
resources
Residential                                                       
Single family   6,000    6,000    65        25     8         30        30'
Duplex dwelling 6,000    6,000    65        25     8         30        30'
Two family      10,000   5,000    100       25     8         30        30'
                See §§
Townhouse       1-19-8.470 through
                1-19-8.470.7
Multifamily     None     3,600    150       40     *         *         100'
dwelling
Multifamily     None     3,600    150       40     *         *         100'
group
Commercial      5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
amusement
Open space uses None     -        200       40     50        50        30'
Institutional   6,000    -        200       40     50        50        30'
Governmental
and public      6,000    -        200       40     50        50        30'
utility
Nongovernmental 6,000    -        200       50     50        50        30'
utility
Residential Sixteen District R16
Natural         5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
resources
Residential                                                       
Single family   6,000    6,000    60        25     8         30        30'
Duplex family   6,000    6,000    60        25     8         30        30'
Two family      10,000   5,000    75        25     8         30        30'
dwelling
Townhouse       See §§
dwelling        1-19-8.470 through
                1-19-8.470.7
Multifamily     None     2,700    100       40     *         *         100'
dwelling
Multifamily     None     2,700    100       40     *         *         100'
group
Commercial      5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
amusement
Open space uses No       -        200       40     50        50        30'
                minimum
Institutional   6,000    -        200       40     50        50        30'
Governmental
and public      6,000    -        200       40     50        50        30'
utility
Nongovernmental 6,000    -        200       50     50        50        30'
utility
Village Center District VC
Natural         5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
resources
Residential                                                       
Single family   None     6,0003   65        ***    ***       ***       30'
Duplex dwelling None     6,0003   65        ***    ***       ***       30'
Two family      None     5,0003   75        ***    ***       ***       30'
Townhouse       See §§
dwelling        1-19-8.470 through                                     30'***
                1-19-8.470.7
Multifamily     None     3,6003   65        ***    15****    50        30'***
dwelling
Multifamily     None     3,6003   150       ***    30****    50        30'***
group
Temporary                                                         
housing
Hotel/motel     20,000   5003     100       ***    15****    40        30'***
Commercial                                                        
uses:
New structures  None     -        None      ***    10****    40        30'***
In existing     None     -        None      As Exists1***
structures
Shopping        See §
centers         1-19-8.460***
Automobile and
related         None     -        65        ***    10****    40        30'***
services
Animal care and None     -        65        ***    15****    40        30'***
services
Commercial      None     -        65        ***    10****    40        30'***
amusements
Open space uses No       -        -         -      -         -         -
                minimum
Institutional   None     -        200       40     50        50        30'
Governmental
and public      None     -        200       40     50        50        30'
utility
Nongovernmental None     -        200       50     50        50        30'
utility
General Commercial District GC
Natural         5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
resources
Temporary                                                         
housing
Hotel or motel  20,000   500      100       25     15        40        60'
Commercial use  12,000   -        100       25     8         25        60'
Shopping        See §                      25     *         *         60'
centers         1-19-8.460
Wholesaling and 20,000   -        100       25     *         25        60'
processing
Automobile and  12,000   -        100       25     8         25        60'
related service
Animal care and 12,000   -        100       25     8         25        60'
services
Commercial      12,000   -        100       25     8         25        60'
amusements
Open space uses No       -        -         -      -         -         -
                minimum
Institutional   12,000   -        200       40     40        40        30'
Governmental
and public      12,000   -        200       40     40        40        30'
utility
Nongovernmental 12,000   -        200       40     40        40        30'
utility
Self-storage    20,000   -        100       25     10        25        60'
units                                              *****     *****     *****
Mixed Use MX
Natural         5 acres  -        100       20     8         20        30'
resources
Residential                                                       
Single family   6,000    6,000    60        20     8         30        40'
Duplex dwelling 6,000    6,000    60        20     8         30        40'
Two family      10,000   5,000    75        20     8         30        40'
                See §§
Townhouse       1-19-8.470 through                                      
                1-19-8.470.7
Multifamily     None     2,700    100       20     *         *         60'
dwelling
Multifamily     None     2,700    100       20     *         *         60'
group
Temporary                                                         
housing
Hotel or motel  20,000   500      100       20     15        35        60'
Commercial uses 12,000   -        75        20     8         35        60'
Automobile and
related         12,000   -        75        20     8         35        60'
services
Open space uses No       -        -         -      -         -         -
                minimum
Animal care and 12,000   -        75        20     8         30        60'
service
Institutional   12,000   -        100       40     20        30        60'
Limited Industrial District LI
Natural         5 acres  -        300       40     50        50        30'
resources
Industrial      20,000   -        100       25     *         20        60'
Automobile      20,000   -        100       25     *         20        60'
services
Wholesaling/    20,000   -        100       25     **        20        60'
processing
Open space uses No       -        -         -      -         -         -
                minimum
Governmental
and public      20,000   -        200       40     40        40        30'
utility
Nongovernmental
utility,
nongovernmental 20,000   -        200       50     50        50        30'
electric
substation
Self-storage    20,000   -        100       25     10 ****   25 *****  60' ****
units
Solar facility, 20,000           200       50     50        50        30'
commercial      sq. ft.
Critical
digital         80,000           300       1004   1004      1004      75'
infrastructure                              ****** ******    ******
facility
Critical
digital
infrastructure  20,000           300       100    100       100       30
electric
substation
                                                                 
General Industrial District GI
All permitted   1 acre   -        150       25     15        40        60'
uses
Open space uses No       -        -         -      -         -         -
                minimum
Governmental
and public      1 acre   -        200       40     40        40        30'
utility
Nongovernmental
utility,
nongovernmental 1 acre   -        200       50     50        50        30'
electric
substation
Self-storage    20,000   -        100       25     10        25        60'
units                                              ****      *****     ****
Solar facility, 1 acre           200       50     50        50        30'
commercial
Critical
digital         80,000           300       1004   1004      1004      75'
infrastructure                              ****** ******    ******
facility
Critical
digital
infrastructure  20,000           300       100    100       100       30
electric
substation
                                                                 
Office/Research Industrial District ORI
Temporary                                                         
housing
Hotel or motel  40,000   500      100       502    252       402       60'
Other
commercial uses
and             40,000   -        100       502    252       402       60'
institutional
uses
Industrial and  80,000   -        200       502    252       402       60'
office
Governmental
and public      40,000   -        200       502    252       402       60'
utility
Open space uses None     -        -         -      -         -         -
 
*   Equal to the height of structure.
**   Minimum 10' green area no parking within area
***   For development within the Village Center Zoning District see also §§
1-19-7.500(B)(2) and (3)
****   Or as determined under §§
1-19-7.500(B)(3), whichever is greater
*****   Except as provided in §
1-19-8.450(B)(2) and §
1-19-8.450(D)(1).
******   Except as provided in §
1-19-8.402(B)(1)(e)
1   Any proposed addition would have to meet setbacks required for new
structures. Parking requirements of §§
1-19-6.200 through
1-19-6.240.
2   As shown or equal to height of structure, whichever is greater.
3   Development within the VC zoning district may not exceed the density as
specified within §§
1-19-7.500(B)(1).
4   Or twice the height of the structure, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-61.B, 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 85-34-366,
8-8-1985; Ord. 86-53-430, 10-28-1986; Ord. 93-23-087, 10-19-1983; Ord. 95-02-
126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 02-26-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 03-09-332, 6-3-2003; Ord. 07-
27-467, 6-19-2007; Ord. 07-31-471, 10-15-2007; Ord. 08-05-481, 2-5-2008; Ord.
08-19-495, 5-20-2008; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009;
Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 11-28-594, 11-22-2011; Ord. 12-23-618, 9-6-
2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-07, 5-16-2017; Bill No. 22-05, 3-
15-2022; Bill No. 22-24, 10-25- 2022; Bill No. 23-19, 10-17-2023; Bill No. 25-
05, 5-20-2025)
§ 1-19-6.110. DESIGN MODIFICATIONS.
§ 1-19-6.120. GENERALLY.
   The regulations specified in this chapter are subject to the following
modifications and interpretation.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-80, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.130. FRONT YARDS.
   (A)   Front yard modifications for existing building alignment. When
appropriate, the Zoning Administrator may increase or decrease the depth of the
required front yard for any principal residential structure so that such front
yard will approximate the average depth of the existing front yards of the
existing dwellings on adjoining lots on each side, or if there be no such
adjoining dwellings, shall approximate the average depth of the front yards of
the nearest dwellings on the same side of the street within 200 feet.
   (B)   Front yard modifications through lots. In the case of through lots,
front yards shall be provided on all frontages, except where one of the front
yards of a through lot abuts an expressway or freeway as determined by the
Master Highway Plan then the requirement for such front yard shall be 20 feet.
   (C)   Front yard modifications for corner lots. In the case of corner lots
with more than 2 frontages, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the front
yard requirements subject to §
1-19-4.610 of this Code and the following additional limitations.
      (1)   At least 2 front yards shall be provided having the full depth
required generally in the district.
      (2)   No other front yard on such lot shall have less than half the full
depth required generally in the district.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-81, 1-24-1977; Ord. 07-07-447, 3-20-2007; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.140. SIDE AND REAR YARD MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Side yard and rear yard width may be varied where the wall of a
building is not parallel with the side or rear lot line or is broken or
otherwise irregular. In such case the average width of the yard will be no less
than the generally required minimum width; provided, that such yard will not be
narrower at any point than one-half the normally required setback.
   (B)   When the side lines of a lot coverage so as to form a rear lot line of
less than 10 feet or a point in the rear, the rear lot line is that line
parallel to the front lot line and measuring 10 feet in length between the 2
side lot lines. The depth of the rear yard is measured from such 10 foot line
to the nearest part of the principal building.
   (C)   In the case of corner lots, there shall be no required rear yard.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-82, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.150. PROJECTION OF ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES.
   (A)   Bay windows, chimneys, stoops, balconies, eaves and leaders will not
project more than 4 feet into any required yard.
   (B)   Open/unenclosed porches or uncovered decks will not project more than
4 feet into any front or side yard and may project into the rear yard up to
one-half the distance of the rear yard requirement. Decks may not be
constructed in such a manner so that one deck is directly above another deck.
   (C)   Fences are exempt from yard requirements.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-83, 1-24-1977; Ord. 85-44-376, 12-3-1985; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.160. HEIGHT MODIFICATION.
   The building height limitations of this chapter do not apply to:
   (A)   Penthouses or roof structures for housing stairways, tanks, elevators,
ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the
building, fire or parapet walls, steeples, flag poles, and silos;
   (B)   Smoke stacks, masts, water tanks, monuments. Bulkheads, monitors and
scenery lofts, fire towers, hose towers, cooling towers, grain elevators, gas
holders or other structures where the manufacturing process requires a greater
height, radio or television towers and essential services. Any such structure
which exceeds the maximum height limit otherwise permitted in the district, the
distance from its front, side and rear lot lines shall be no less than the
maximum vertical height of such structures;
   (C)   Churches, schools, institutional buildings, public utility buildings
and structures provided that for each 3 feet by which the height of such
structure exceeds the maximum height generally permitted for structures in the
district, the required side and rear yards measurements will be increased by an
additional foot.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-84, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.170. HISTORIC STRUCTURAL LOT SIZES.
   Sites to be used for the preservation of historic structures may be less
than the minimum lot size for the district, provided:
   (A)   The site is eligible for or has been placed on the National Register
of Historic Places;
   (B)   It is owned and operated by a private not- for-profit corporation;
   (C)   The site will not be used for human habitation nor generate sewage
effluent unless said site is served by community sewerage facilities or
contains at least 40,000 square feet and said facilities meet the approval of
the Health Department;
   (D)   The owner of the site grant an easement in perpetuity to the county or
the Maryland Historic Trust, or other governmental body empowered to accept
such easement restricting further development of the site for nonhistoric
preservation purposes.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-85, 1-24-1978; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
DIVISION 2. PARKING AND LOADING
§ 1-19-6.200. GENERALLY.
   (A)   No structure will be erected, substantially altered, or its use
changed unless permanent off street parking and loading spaces have been
provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
unless amendments or modifications are authorized under §
1-19-6.210(D).
   (B)   Except as permitted by §
1-19-6.210(D), parking areas and loading spaces shall not be closer to the
right-of-way line than one-half the normally required setback for principal
structures.
   (C)   Parking and loading requirements per area will be determined by the
net floor area, meaning that which is utilized for the main use of the building
(s). Net floor area shall be determined by subtracting incidental service,
storage and mechanical areas from the gross floor area.
   (D)   Parking and loading requirements per seat will be determined by the
number of the individual seats. For purposes of bench type seating, 20 inches
will be equivalent of 1 seat.
   (E)   Parking requirements may be satisfied through provision of surface
parking areas, parking structures, or a combination thereof.
   (F)   Parking areas shall be maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of
litter and debris.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-45(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 97-06-184, 5-6-1997; Ord. 07-11-451,
4-17-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 10-01-536, 1-19-2010; Ord. 10-26-
561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.210. LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS AND DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   Dimensions, clearances and signage. There shall be 2 sizes of off-
street loading spaces designated: "small" and "large". Large loading spaces are
designed to accommodate uses that require high-volume delivery of goods in a
tractor-trailer. Each loading space shall be exclusive of driveways, aisles and
other circulation areas. All loading spaces shall have signs and markings
indicating that the space is reserved for loading or unloading.
      (1)   A small loading space shall have minimum dimensions of not less
than:
         (a)   Nine feet in width;
         (b)   Twenty feet in length; and
         (c)   Ten feet in height clearance.
      (2)   A large loading space shall have minimum dimensions of not less
than:
         (a)   Twelve feet in width;
         (b)   Fifty feet in length; and
         (c)   Fifteen feet in height clearance.
   (B)   Requirements. Off-street loading space(s) will be provided and
maintained on the same lot as the principal use(s) for delivery of goods in
accordance with the table below:
 
Use               Total Building
Classification    Net Floor Area    Minimum Loading Spaces Required
                  (in square feet)
Place of worship,                   If approved by staff, no separate loading
bank, childcare                     space is required. However, a temporary
center/nursery    0 - 1,000 sq.ft.  loading zone may be required to be
school, private                     delineated on the site plan and which may
school,                             be located within a parking area.
recreation &      Over 1,000 -      1 small (see requirements of §
community         5,000 sq.ft.      1-19-6.210(C))
building,
multiple-user                       1 large or 2 small (see requirements of §
retail, all                         1-19-6.210(C)) + 1 additional large for
office, and       Over 5,000 sq.ft. each additional 15,000 sq.ft. or part
miscellaneous                       thereof over 20,000 sq.ft.
commercial uses
not listed herein
Single-user       0 - 5,000 sq.ft.  1 large
retail, all                         1 large + 1 additional large for each
industrial and    Over 5,000 sq.ft. additional 10,000 sq.ft. or part thereof
all wholesale                       over 5,000 sq.ft.
 
   (C)   If an applicant for (1) multiple-user retail; (2) office; or (3)
miscellaneous commercial uses not listed in the table in subsection (B), does
not intend to provide any large loading spaces, the applicant must file a
request and demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that no
high-volume delivery of goods in a tractor-trailer is required for the proposed
use.
   (D)   Modification. An applicant may request that the Planning Commission
approve a modification to the requirements of §
1-19-6.200(B), §
1-19-6.210(A) or that the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission
authorized representative approve a modification to the requirements of §
1-19-6.210(B) of this section. The applicant's request shall include written
justification describing why fewer or smaller loading spaces are adequate for
the proposed use.
   (E)   Refuse and recycling. Exterior refuse and recycling dumpsters shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of the Division of Utilities and
Solid Waste Management.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-45(B), 1-24-1977; Ord. 07-11-451, 4-17-2007; Ord. 08-26-
502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 10-01-536, 1-19-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.220. PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS AND DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   For the purpose of this chapter, the parking space requirements in
the following table will apply. Parking shall be limited to the number of
spaces required based on an evaluation of each proposed use, hours of
operation, and joint or shared parking agreements. An increase or reduction in
the number of required parking spaces may be granted by the Planning Commission
where the applicant or Planning Commission authorized representative can
demonstrate need based on characteristics of the proposed use, hourly parking
demand studies published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), or
other documentation as approved by the Planning Commission.
      (2)   When an increase in the number of required parking spaces is
granted or for the purposes of overflow parking, the Planning Commission may
require the spaces to be constructed of pervious materials.
      (3)   When a reduction in the number of required parking spaces is
granted, the Planning Commission will determine the extent that an accessible
graded and seeded area shall be reserved for future parking.
      (4)   For uses not listed in the following table, parking requirements
shall be determined by the Planning Commission or their authorized
representatives. The requirements shall be based upon similarity to an existing
use listed within the table below, characteristics of the proposed use, or
hourly parking demand studies published by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE).
Type of Use Parking Spaces Required
Residential
Type of Use     Parking Spaces Required
Residential
Single family,
mobile home,    2 for each dwelling unit
duplex or two
family dwelling
Multi-family
dwelling,
townhouse,      1 space per unit, plus one-half space for each bedroom in the dwelling unit
multi-family
group
development
Temporary Housing
Bed and         2 spaces per the primary dwelling, plus 1 space for each guestroom (see §
breakfast       1-19-8.410 and §
                1-19-8.326)
Hotel, motel    1 per each sleeping room, plus 1 for each 2 employees
Commercial Uses - Retail
Retail store    1 for each 250 square feet of floor area excluding preparation and/or
                storage areas
Farm equipment
sales or        2 spaces per service bay, plus 1.5 spaces per each employee
service
Feed and grain  1 space per each 300 square feet of sales floor area, plus 1 space per
mill            employee
Shopping center
less than       5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area
100,000 square
feet
Shopping center
100,000 square  4.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area
feet or greater
All other types
of business or
commercial uses 1 for each 300 square feet of floor area
permitted in
any commercial
district
Commercial Business and Personal Services
Bank, financial
institution,    1 for each 150 square feet of floor area excluding storage area
and similar
uses
Commercial
school or       1 for each 3 students
education
program
Funeral home
and similar     1 for each 150 square feet of floor area devoted to viewing
type uses
Medical and     1 for every 200 square feet of floor area of examination, treating room
dental clinic   office and waiting room
and office
Office, public
or professional
administration, 1 for each 300 square feet of floor area
or service
building
Restaurant,
dining room,    1 space per each 50 square feet of floor area devoted to customer service,
tavern, night   but excluding food preparation and storage
club
Fast food       1 space per each 75 square feet of floor area devoted to customer service,
restaurant      but excluding food preparation and storage
Country inn     1 space per each guest room, plus 1 space per employee and 1 space per 50
                square feet of dining room
All other types
of business or
commercial uses 1 for each 300 square feet of floor area
permitted in
any commercial
district
Automobile and Related Services
Automobile
sales and       2 spaces per service bay, plus 1.5 space per each employee
service garage
Animal Care and Service
Animal
hospital,       1 space per 400 square feet of floor area excluding kennels, plus 1 space
veterinary      per examination room, plus 1 space per employee
clinic, kennel
Commercial Amusements
                3 for each alley or lane, plus 1 additional space for each 100 square feet
Bowling alley   of the area used for restaurant, cocktail lounge or similar use, but
                excluding food preparation area and storage
Health club,
fitness center,
vocational/     1 for each 5 persons capacity, plus 1 for each 4 seats or 1 for each 30
sports training square feet floor area used for seating purposes, whichever is greater
facility,
commercial
swimming pool
Golf course     4 spaces per each hole, plus 1 space per each 50 square feet of floor area
                devoted to customer service, plus 1 space per 2 employees
Skating rink    1 for each 200 square feet of floor area used for the activity
Theater,
outdoor or
indoor stage,   1 for each 4 seats
and similar
uses
Library, museum 1 for each 400 square feet of floor area
and gallery
Outdoor         1 space per driving range tee, plus 1 space per hole of miniature golf;
recreation      plus 2 spaces per hole of chip and putt; plus 1 space per employee
center
Industrial Uses and Solid Waste Operations
All industrial  1 for every 2 employees (on the largest shift for which the building is
use and solid   designed) plus 1 for each motor vehicle used in the business.
waste operation
Warehouse       1 space for each 1000 square feet of floor area
Open Space and Institutional
Shooting range  1 space per firing position, plus 1 space per 2 employees
Recreational
vehicle         1 space per campsite
campground,
tent campground
Institutional
Child care
center/ nursery 1.5 for each employee plus 1 for every 10 children approved for care
school and
similar uses
Place of
worship and
other places of
religious
assembly, civic 1 for each 5 seats
community
center, and
civic service
club
Group home, and 1 for each 4 beds
similar uses
Housing for the
elderly,        1 for each 3 units
assisted living
Hospital        1 for each bed, plus 1 space per each 3 employees
Governmental and Nongovernmental Utilities
Arena or        1 for each 4 seats
stadium
College or      1 for each 4 students
university
Elementary and  2 for each classroom and 1 for every 8 seats in auditoriums or assembly
junior high     halls
school
High school     1 for every 10 students and 1 for each teacher and employee
 
   (B)   Parking area dimensions. Parking areas shall conform to the following
dimension requirements:
      (1)    Parking space and aisle dimensions.
 
A             B           C           D                   E
Parking Angle Stall Width Stall Depth Aisle Width One-Way Aisle Width Two-Way
90°          9'          18'         22'                 24'
60°          9'          19'         *18'                22'
45°          9'          17'         *15'                22'
Parallel      8'          22'         N/A                 N/A
 
*Except where an increase is required based on local Fire Code access
requirements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af9691cbec4604828c677875c7c627f7b6eb5f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3786.jpg]
 
      (2)   An increase in stall and aisle width dimensions may be granted when
recommended by the Community Development Division Traffic Engineer and approved
by the Planning Commission or their authorized representative (as provided in
§§
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4), for the following:
         (a)   Safety or site circulation needs which shall be based on an
evaluation of land use turnover rates (ITE Traffic Engineering Handbook, 6th
Edition as amended), circulation efficiency, and parking availability.
      (3)   A decrease in stall and aisle width dimensions may be granted when
recommended by the Community Development Division Traffic Engineer and approved
by the Planning Commission or their authorized representative (as provided in
§§
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4), where narrower dimensions can be reasonably accommodated with no
adverse impact on safety or site circulation efficiency for the following:
         (a)   Compact development patterns based on land use characteristics
and typical vehicle size;
         (b)   Single-loaded and no-loaded parking aisles;
         (c)   Historic retrofit, adaptive reuse, and redevelopment projects.
   (C)   Parking area construction. Required parking areas shall be constructed
of a material with spaces clearly delineated in a manner approved by the
Planning Commission.
   (D)   Compact parking spaces. The Planning Commission may require up to 15%
of the required parking spaces to be constructed for compact 90° vehicle
parking. Compact parking spaces shall be signed or painted with the words
"compact". Compact parking space dimensions shall be 8' in width and 16' in
length. To provide for compact vehicle parking which functions most efficiently
where applied, the calculation of required compact parking spaces shall be
based on an evaluation of parking area design, proposed use, and expected
vehicle parking turnover rates as provided by the applicant.
   (E)   Handicapped accessibility. All parking areas shall include handicapped
accessible spaces in conformance with the Maryland Accessibility Code.
   (F)   Adjacent parking areas. Where a proposed parking area is adjacent to a
developed or undeveloped site within the same or similar zoning district, the
proposed parking area must be designed to connect to the existing or future
adjacent parking area. This requirement may be waived by the Planning
Commission where it is deemed to be impractical.
   (G)   Pedestrian access. Clearly delineated pedestrian crosswalks,
sidewalks, and walkways shall be provided to allow safe, convenient, and direct
access within the parking area, and from the parking area to building
entrances.
   (H)   Bicycle parking.
      (1)   For the purposes of this chapter, the bicycle parking requirements
in the following table will apply:
                              Required Bicycle Parking
Use Categories Specific Uses1 Class A                  Class B (Bicycle Racks)
                              (Locked Room or Lockers) 1 Rack = 2 bike parking
                                                       spaces
                                        Required Bicycle Parking
                                        Class A            Class B (Bicycle
Use Categories      Specific Uses1      (Locked Room or    Racks)
                                        Lockers)           1 Rack = 2 bike
                                                           parking spaces
                    Multifamily
                    dwelling,           Locked room or     1 rack for each 10
                    multifamily group   lockers with space units, minimum 2.
Residential2        development, or     for 4 bikes for    Not required if
                    townhouse w/        each 10 units      Class A parking is
                    o garage (8 or more                    provided
                    units)
                                                           1 rack for each 20
                   Motel, hotel        None               auto spaces, minimum
                                                           1, maximum 10
Commercial (5,000                                          1 rack for each 20
Square Feet GFA or  All                 None               auto spaces, minimum
Greater)                                                   1, maximum 10
                    Planned Industrial
                    / Commercial
Office / Research / Development, Office                    1 rack per 40,000 SF
Industrial (5,000   Research or         None               of GFA, minimum 1,
Square Feet GFA or  Industrial parks                       maximum 10.
Greater)            planned as a unit,
                    and MXD zoning
                    district
                    Commercial
                    amusements /                           1 rack for each 20
                    fairground / arena  None               auto spaces, minimum
                    or stadium / civic                     1, maximum 20
                    community center
                    Transit centers /   None               minimum 10
                    rail stations
                                                           1 rack for each 50
                    Park and ride       None               auto spaces, minimum
                                                           2
Open Space and      School - K-8        None               1 rack for each
Institutional /                                            classroom
Government /        School 9-12         None               1 rack for each 2
Commercial                                                 classrooms
Amusements          College             Per campus plan as approved by Planning
                                        Commission
                                                           1 rack for each
                    Hospital            None               50,000 SF of GFA,
                                                           minimum 1
                                                           1 rack for each
                    Place of worship    None               20,000 SF of GFA,
                                                           minimum 1
                                                           1 rack for each
                    Child care center   None               20,000 SF of GFA,
                                                           minimum 1
1: No bicycle parking required in Agricultural or Resource Conservation zoning
districts unless the specific use is noted in the above table and the proposed
site is within 1.2 miles of a designated growth area.
2: Where required, bicycle parking for residential uses may be provided as
class A (locked room/lockers) or class B (racks)
 
      (2)   A reduction in required bicycle parking may be granted by the
Planning Commission where the applicant can demonstrate need based on
neighborhood characteristics, characteristics of the proposed use, or other
documentation as approved by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   The design of bicycle parking shall conform to the Frederick County
Bicycle Parking Design Guide.
   Editor's note: Subsection (H) Bicycle parking shall apply to applications
for development receiving final site development plan approval after January
29, 2010.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-45(C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 89-51-582, 8-15-1989; Ord. 92-23-
058, 10-6-1992; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 10-
01-536, 1-19-2010; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 10-31-566, 12-21-2010; Ord.
11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.230. JOINT USE PARKING.
   Joint parking uses are permitted subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   The respective individual operations sharing the joint use of parking
areas will not be opened or used during the same principal operating hours.
   (B)   The parties and the land concerned with such joint use are to be
effectively bound by a written joint use agreement, the legal sufficiency of
which will be subject to the approval of the County Attorney.
   (C)   Each unit of joint parking space may supply a unit of required off-
street parking for each use bound by the written joint use agreement.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-45(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.240. SHARED PARKING.
   A partial reduction in the total number of required off-street parking
spaces may be granted where the applicant can demonstrate the sufficient
provision of shared parking facilities based on characteristics of uses, hourly
parking demand studies published by the Institute of Transportation Engineering
or other appropriate source, or other documentation as determined by the
Planning Commission or their authorized representatives. A shared parking plan
may utilize on-street parking, community/common parking, parking areas located
on the same parcel as the proposed use, adjacent to the proposed use, or two
parcels that are not adjacent, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   The shared parking facility shall be no farther than 500 feet from the
building or use to be served;
   (B)   A maximum of 50% of the required off-street parking may be located
off-site;
   (C)   Submission of a vicinity map reflecting the proposed shared parking
areas(s), parking spaces, hours of operation, pedestrian access between parking
area(s) and uses, as well as a detailed explanation of the proposed shared
parking plan;
   (D)   A safe, convenient pedestrian connection must exist or be constructed
between the buildings or uses and the parking area(s);
   (E)   The parties involved in the use of the shared parking plan shall
provide evidence of an agreement for such use and parking plan by a legal
instrument approved by the County Attorney.
(Ord. 07-27-467, 6-19-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
DIVISION 3. SIGNS
§ 1-19-6.300. ERECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   Signs will be erected and maintained only when in compliance with the
provisions of this and all other chapters relating to the erection, alteration,
or maintenance of signs or similar devices.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-46(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.310. GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations will apply to all permitted sign uses.
   (A)   No sign, other than an official traffic sign, will be located within
the right-of-way lines of any street, except as provided in subsection (G) and
subsection (I). A sign attached to a passenger shelter at a bus stop or transit
center information kiosk is exempt from this chapter.
   (B)   No free-standing sign will exceed 25 feet in height, except as
provided elsewhere in this section.
   (C)   No permit is required for the erection, alteration or maintenance of
any signs permitted in §
1-19-6.320, paragraphs (1) through (6), of this Code or for political signs as
set forth in subsection (H) below.
   (D)   A permit is required for the erection or alteration of signs permitted
in §
1-19-6.320, paragraphs (7) through (10) and as required in subsection (I) of
this section.
   (E)   Each sign will be removed when the circumstances leading to its
erection no longer apply.
   (F)   No sign will by reason of its intensity, color, location or movement
interfere with traffic lights, signals, or other controls or obscure the view
of a street or in any other manner impair public safety.
   (G)   Subdivision and community identification signs are permitted in the
right-of-way of monumented public streets, where median strips are used to
channel traffic, providing that the sign is approved by the Zoning
Administrator and he issues a revocable permit conditioned upon removal of the
sign at no cost to the county at such time as the county may require. In
addition, the following conditions shall be met.
      (1)   The sign shall be kept in good repair and in safe, neat, clean, and
attractive condition by the community residents or the community association.
      (2)   The sign must be placed 10 feet from the nose of the monument or
the end of the median strip and within the monument island.
      (3)   The sign must be designed so as not to obstruct full sight
distance.
   (H)   Political campaign signs identifying candidates seeking public
political office or political issues and other data pertinent thereto shall be
permitted as set forth: Each sign shall be located within the owner's property
boundaries and shall not be located within the public right-of-way.
   (I)   Temporary real estate directional sign placement will be permitted in
the county per the following guidelines.
      (1)   A temporary real estate directional sign may not exceed 3 square
feet in size.
      (2)   A temporary real estate directional sign may not exceed 3 feet in
height, measured from the ground to the top of the sign.
      (3)   A temporary real estate directional sign shall be supported on
metal or wooden stakes, supplied by the installer, and shall not be attached to
trees, utility poles, traffic-control signs, traffic signal poles, walls of
buildings, barns, sheds, fences, or other physical elements.
      (4)   A temporary real estate directional sign may be placed only between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. Saturday and 8:00 pm. Sunday. Hours may be extended to
include legal holidays which are observed on Monday or Friday.
      (5)   In the case of existing real estate, a maximum of 3 temporary real
estate directional signs per open house are permitted, without obtaining a
permit, but subject to the provisions of this section.
      (6)   A maximum of 4 off-site community temporary real estate directional
signs (not individual builders) are permitted upon the developer's obtaining a
sign permit from the county which sets forth the locations of the signs and
that placement will be in compliance with this section.
      (7)   Individual builders will be permitted to place up to 4 temporary
real estate directional signs within communities in which the building activity
is occurring.
      (8)   County staff is hereby authorized to remove any temporary real
estate directional sign found to be in violation of the provisions of this
section.
      (9)   A temporary real estate directional sign may be placed in the
county right-of-way, provided that it does not obstruct sight lines or pose any
safety hazard to the public.
   (J)   On-site signs determined by the Zoning Administrator to be directional
signs used for the purpose of on-site way-finding are not included in
calculating the maximum size sign permitted.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-46(B), 1-24-1977; Ord. 84-31-328, 11-27-1984; Ord. 90-21-
619, 5-15-1990; Ord. 92-26-061, 10-20-1992; Ord. 06-16-412, 5-16-2006; Ord. 08-
26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 13-25-653, 10-31-2013; Ord.
14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.320. SIGNS PERMITTED AND REGULATED IN THE ZONING DISTRICT.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following sign requirements will apply,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter. For uses not listed in the following
table or otherwise provided in this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine the permitted signage. The determination shall be based upon
similarity to an existing sign type within the table below or use within this
chapter.
          Maximum Size                     Setback From Property Conditions
          Permitted1            Zoning     Line3                 Required to
Sign Type                       District                         be Met
          Area sf = Height2 f  Permitted* Front Side Rear
          sq. feet  (feet)
                                                     Maximum Size                    Setback From    Conditions
                                                     Permitted1           Zoning     Property Line3  Required to be
Sign Type                                                                 District                   Met
                                                     Area sf  Height2 f  Permitted*
                                                     = sq.    (feet)                 Front Side Rear
                                                     feet
                                                                                                     One sign per
(1)  For Sale or Rent, directional                   (6 sf)   (4 f)       All        ½    ½   ½   street
                                                                          districts                  frontage (per
                                                                                                     lot)
                                                                          All                        One sign per
(2)  Subdivision opening announcement                (100 sf) (25 f)      districts  ½    ½   ½   street
                                                                                                     frontage
                                                                                                     One sign per
(3)  Contractors/ artisans job-site signs            (32 sf)  (12 f)      All        ½    ½   ½   street
                                                                          districts                  frontage of
                                                                                                     job site
                                                                          Where use
                                                                          is                         One sign per
(4)  Schools, place of worship, civic organizations  (32 sf)  (12 f)      permitted  ½    ½   ½   street
                                                                          by this                    frontage
                                                                          chapter
                                                                          Where use
(4)  Institutional, governmental, college,                                is                         One sign per
(a)  university campus                               10√F   (12 f)      permitted  ½    ½   ½   street
                                                                          by this                    frontage
                                                                          chapter
                                                                                                     One sign only.
                                                                          In                         Signs in R
                                                                          district                   Districts must
(5)  Home occupation                                 (2 sf)   (6 f)       where use  ½    ½4  ½   be attached to
                                                                          is                         principal or
                                                                          permitted                  accessory
                                                                                                     structure.
                                                                          Where use
(5)  Professional office as accessory use on                              is
(a)  residential properties                          (6 sf)   (6 f)       permitted  ½    ½   ½   One sign only.
                                                                          by this
                                                                          chapter
     Limited roadside stand, business identification
     for those natural resource uses permitted                            RC and A                   One sign per
(6)  subject to design regulations 'P' within the RC (32 sf)  (15 f)      districts  N.A.            street
     or A districts5 as provided in §                                                               frontage
     1-19-5.310
                                                                                                     May not
                                                                          All                        project more
                                                                          commercial                 than 30" from
(7)  Commercial and industrial owner identification  10√F   (25 f)      and        ½    ½   ½   face of
     and product, place of worship                                        industrial                 building
                                                                          districts                  unless used as
                                                                                                     a freestanding
                                                                                                     sign
                                                                                                     No more than
                                                                                                     one
                                                                                                     freestanding
                                                                                                     sign,
                                                                          All                        including
(8)  Shopping Center (includes all stores within)    30√F   (40 f)      commercial ½    ½   ½   shopping
                                                                          districts                  center
                                                                                                     identification
                                                                                                     sign per
                                                                                                     street
                                                                                                     frontage
                                                                                                     Only one
                                                                                                     freestanding
                                                                                                     sign for
                                                                                                     pricing
                                                                                                     information
                                                                          All                        when shopping
(8)  Fuel pricing                                    (24 sf)  (12 f)      commercial ½    ½   ½   center has
(a)                                                                       districts                  over 400 ft of
                                                                                                     total road
                                                                                                     frontage and
                                                                                                     may be no more
                                                                                                     than 150 ft
                                                                                                     from a wall of
                                                                                                     the station
                                                                                                     No more than
                                                                                                     one
                                                                                                     freestanding
                                                                                                     sign,
                                                                          All                        including
(9)  Industrial Park (includes all uses within)      30√F   (40 f)      industrial ½    ½   ½   industrial
                                                                          districts                  park
                                                                                                     identification
                                                                                                     sign per
                                                                                                     street
                                                                                                     frontage
                                                                                                     No more than 1
                                                                                                     billboard per
                                                                                                     lot, tract or
                                                                                                     parcel. Must
                                                                                                     be at least
                                                                                                     300 ft distant
                                                                                                     from any R
                                                                                                     District. May
(10) Billboard                                       (360 sf) (25 f)      GC, LI and S     S    S    not be closer
                                                                          GI                         than 200 ft to
                                                                                                     an existing
                                                                                                     dwelling on an
                                                                                                     adjoining
                                                                                                     property. May
                                                                                                     not be located
                                                                                                     within 100 ft
                                                                                                     of any street
                                                                                                     intersection
                                                                                                     No more than 2
                                                     (64 sf)                         15 ft setback   signs per
(11) Subdivision and Community Identification        per      (6 f) per   All        from right-of-  roadway
                                                     entrance entrance    districts  way             entrance to
                                                                                                     subdivision or
                                                                                                     community
     Business identification within the RC or A                           RC and/or                  One
(12) districts5                                      (25 sf)  (15 f)      A          ½    ½   ½   freestanding
                                                                          districts                  sign
                                                                          Where use
                                                                          is                         One sign per
(13) Golf course, cemetery/memorial garden           (25 sf)  (15 f)      permitted  ½    ½   ½   street
                                                                          by this                    frontage
                                                                          chapter
 
1   Combined total of all signs on a single property shall not exceed maximum
size permitted.
2   If not attached to building.
3   ½ means one-half the yard requirements for the district.
4   For panhandle lots the side setback shall be at least 25% of the panhandle
width.
5   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
*   Square footage of signs within the GC and industrial districts may be
increased by 25% if no free-standing or pylon-type signs are used (§
1-19-7.510, and §
1-19-7.600).
S   means equal to the yard setback requirements for the district.
F   measured in linear feet and is the larger of the measurement of (1) the
side of the building facing a public street (measurement S) or (2) the side of
the building on which is located the primary public access to the building
(measurement A). When measurement A is used to calculate sign size, the maximum
size of any sign located on a side of the building facing a public street
cannot be greater than the maximum sign size that would be permitted if
measurement S was used. Where the building faces multiple public streets, F
shall equal the total of measurement A and measurement S.
(1959 Code, § 1-19-183) (Ord. 77-1-78, 1-24-1977; Ord. 77-10-87, 8-22-1977;
Ord. 84-31-328, 11-27-1984; Ord. 85-22-354, § 40-46(2), 5-28-1985; Ord. 90-45-
643, 11-20-1990; Ord. 03-04-327, 4-21-2003; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord.
09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 10-01-536, 1-19-2010; Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-2011; Ord.
11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.330. TEMPORARY BUSINESS SIGNS.
   Temporary business signs located on the property of the business being
advertised are permitted in any commercial district without a permit, if the
total allowable square footage for all signs on the property is not exceeded
and all signs meet the setback requirements for principal buildings on the same
lot.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-46(O), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-6.340. ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGNS.
   (A)   Electronic message signs are allowed as follows:
      (1)   Animated, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving, full motion or
any other similar message or transitional movement is prohibited.
      (2)   Signs will only be designed as a wall or monument sign.
      (3)   Only 1 electronic message sign is permitted on a lot.
      (4)   The advertisement of off-premise businesses or services is not
allowed.
      (5)   Each message shall not change more than once every 10 seconds.
      (6)   Signs shall not exceed the total sign area permitted on the site
and shall not exceed a maximum of 32 square feet.
      (7)   All signs must utilize automatic dimming capability that adjusts
the brightness to the ambient light at all times of the day so that signs are
not unreasonably bright for the safety of the motoring public.
(Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 4. LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
§ 1-19-6.400 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING.
   In accordance with the site plan review process provided in §§
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4, the Floating Zone Phase II execution process provided in §§
1-19-10.500 through
1-19-10.500.11, or as otherwise provided within this chapter the Planning
Commission may require landscaping, screening, and buffering along the property
line and around and within the parking areas. Landscaping, screening, and
buffering shall be provided in conformance with the following minimum
standards:
   (A)   Street trees. Street trees shall be provided along the property line
adjacent to the paved surface of an existing or proposed public right of way in
a planting area no less than 7 feet wide, and planted with shrubs or trees in
accordance with the following minimum standards:
      (1)   One tree at least 6 feet in height at the time of planting shall be
provided per 35 feet of roadway frontage.
      (2)   An alternate on-site location for trees may be approved by the
Planning Commission or Planning Commission authorized representative when a
specific finding is made that the alternate location is required due to:
         (a)   Physical site constraints; or
         (b)   The irregular and non-linear nature of landscaping in the GI
zoning district or, the RC, A, R1, or VC zoning districts outside of community
growth areas; or
         (c)   Approval of an alternate planting design by the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   Land use buffering and screening. To achieve buffering and screening
between land uses the following shall be provided along common property lines:
      (1)   Where industrial, mineral mining, or solid waste uses are located
adjacent to residential zoning districts: a mixture of plantings including
predominantly evergreen shrubs or trees spaced at intervals which are expected
to achieve a mixture of height at maturity between 6 feet and 15 feet and to
provide complete buffering and screening from the residential zoning district,
as determined by the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Where commercial or institutional uses are located adjacent to
residential zoning districts: a mixture of plantings including predominantly
evergreen shrubs or trees spaced at intervals which are expected to achieve a
mixture of height at maturity between 6 feet and 15 feet and to provide
effective buffering, as determined by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   All other uses: buffering and screening for all other land uses
shall be determined by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Parking area buffering and screening. Parking areas shall be screened
from roadways in accordance with the following minimum standards:
      (1)   Where parking areas are adjacent to residential uses or zoning
districts, or roadways with at least a collector status as designated on the
County Comprehensive Plan: plantings of predominantly evergreen shrubs or trees
spaced at intervals which may be expected to form effective buffering and
screening at least 30 inches high at the time of planting.
      (2)   All other parking areas: plantings of predominantly evergreen
shrubs or trees spaced at intervals which may be expected to form effective
buffering at least 30 inches high at the time of planting.
   (D)   Parking area landscaping. Within required parking areas landscaping
shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum standards:
      (1)   Parking areas shall be separated into bays with an average of no
more than 10 parking spaces. Each parking bay shall contain no more than 15
continuous parking spaces. Between or at the end of each bay of parking spaces
there shall be a planting area of at least 5 feet in width. Each planting area
shall contain 1 tree at least 6 feet in height at the time of planting and
groundcover containing at least two shrubs for every 100 square feet of
landscape area.
      (2)   Planting area trees shall be predominantly deciduous and provide at
least 20% canopy cover at maturity.
   (E)   Landscaping, screening, or buffering:
      (1)   Shall be maintained in a living condition;
      (2)   Shall emphasize native species, where soil base permits, as listed
in Exhibit L1 and L2 of the Frederick County Forest Resource Ordinance, as
amended.
      (3)   Shall not include species identified as invasive/exotic species as
listed in Exhibit K of the Frederick County Forest Resource Ordinance, as
amended.
      (4)   Shall be located in accordance with §
1-19-4.610.
      (5)   Shall be located and maintained in a condition to minimize adverse
impacts on sightlines and visibility.
      (6)   Opaque fencing, walls, and berms shall be maintained.
   (F)   Existing vegetation may be used to meet the requirements in this
section.
   (G)   Opaque fencing, walls, or berms may be used in addition to trees and
shrubs to meet the minimum buffering and screening standards subject to
approval of the Planning Commission. Opaque fencing, walls, or berms shall be
constructed of materials reflective of neighborhood characteristics as approved
by the Planning Commission. Chain link fencing with vinyl privacy slats shall
be utilized only within industrial zoning districts where specifically approved
by the Planning Commission.
   (H)   Application. To demonstrate the manner in which the application meets
landscaping, buffering, or screening requirements within this chapter, a
landscaping, buffering, and screening plan shall be approved as part of the
site plan review and approval process (§
1-19-3.300.3). The landscaping, buffering, and screening plan shall include the
following elements:
      (1)   A form acceptable to the Community Development Division.
      (2)   The type and location of all proposed landscaping, buffering, and
screening including:
         (a)   Species identification;
         (b)   The height and width of proposed trees or shrubs at planting and
maturity;
         (c)   Identification of existing trees or shrubs to remain including
height and width.
      (3)   Where proposed, fences, walls, or berms including:
         (a)   Height and width;
         (b)   Type of material;
         (c)   Cross-section and elevation details.
      (4)   The total number and percentage mixture of existing and proposed
native species.
      (5)   The application shall demonstrate the manner in which on-site
recycling and refuse management shall be accommodated including:
         (a)   Location of refuse/recycling containers;
         (b)   Dimensions of refuse/recycling location;
         (c)   Proposed access for loading and unloading;
         (d)   Type of material proposed as screening.
   (I)   The Planning Commission may modify the minimum landscaping, buffering,
and screening standards where a specific finding is made that the required
standards result in a practical difficulty, and where an alternate landscaping,
buffering, and screening plan is approved by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 09-22-526, 7-14-2009; Ord. 10-01-536, 1-19-2010; Ord. 13-25-653, 10-31-
2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 5. LIGHTING
§ 1-19-6.500 LIGHTING.
   (A)   In accordance with the site plan review process provided in §§
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4, the Floating Zone Phase II execution process provided in §§
1-19-10.500 through
1-19-10.500.11, or as otherwise provided within this chapter, lighting shall be
designed and installed to be fully shielded. Lighting shall be directed
downward to prevent glare and light trespass onto adjacent properties,
roadways, and the nighttime sky.
   (B)   Pole and building mounted lighting shall not exceed a maximum height
of:
      (1)   14 feet in pedestrian oriented developments including pedestrian
components in Planned Unit Development (PUD), Mixed Use Development (MXD),
Office Research/Industrial (ORI), and Planned Industrial/Commercial
development;
      (2)   18 feet for commercial uses;
      (3)   24 feet for industrial uses;
      (4)   Lighting height shall be measured from the ground to the point of
illumination.
   (C)   For the purpose of reduction in energy consumption, light trespass,
and glare, proposed lighting shall utilize the lowest lighting levels feasible.
Evaluation factors include: light distribution and overlap, number and height
of fixtures.
   (D)   Lighting shall not exceed .50 foot-candles as measured from the
property line.
   (E)   Lighting that is exempt from these requirements includes temporary
lighting and lighting provided for emergency or safety purposes as required by:
the Building Code, Electrical Code, or otherwise within the County Code.
   (F)   Application. Where required within this chapter, a lighting plan shall
be approved as part of the site plan review and approval process (§
1-19-3.300.3). The lighting plan shall include the following elements:
      (1)   A form acceptable to the Community Development Division;
      (2)   The type and location of all proposed lighting including:
         (a)   Lighting standards and specifications;
         (b)   Photometric data, such as that furnished by the manufacturer,
showing the angle of cut off of light emissions, upward and lateral glare
shield details, and foot-candle light values for the entire site;
         (c)   Building and pole mounting heights;
         (d)   Hours of operation.
   (G)   The Planning Commission may modify the lighting standards within this
section based on characteristics of the proposed use, photometric studies,
nationally recognized standards, or other documentation as approved by the
Planning Commission.
(Ord. 09-22-526, 7-14-2009; Ord. 10-01-536, 1-19-2010; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-
2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 13-25-653, 10-31-2013; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
ARTICLE VII: SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS (§§ 1-19-7.100 — 1-19-7.620)
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
1-19-7.100   Generally
Division 2. Resource Conservation District
   
1-19-7.200   Resource Conservation District
Division 3. Agricultural District
   
1-19-7.300   Agricultural District
Division 4. Residential Districts - Reserved
   
1-19-7.400   Residential Districts - Reserved
Division 5. Commercial Districts
   
1-19-7.500   Village Center Zoning District Overlay standards
   
1-19-7.510   General Commercial
   
1-19-7.520   Mixed Use
Division 6. Industrial Districts
   
1-19-7.600   Industrial Districts
   
1-19-7.610   Industrial District Performance Standards
   
1-19-7.620   Performance Standards for the Office/Research Industrial District
(ORI)
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 1-19-7.100. GENERALLY.
   These supplementary district regulations are hereby adopted for the specific
intent and purpose of protecting natural resources, scenic areas, areas of
steep slope, woodlands, and areas of critical state concern. These regulations
also attempt to direct anticipated growth to areas in which the provision of
public services could be feasibly and economically provided.
   (A)   Petroleum, flammable liquids and hazardous substance storage tanks in
all zoning districts. The following provisions shall be applicable in all
zoning districts where such use is permitted.
      (1)   Petroleum or hazardous substance storage tanks shall have 100%
catchment basin, or double-walled containment and a spill protection overfill
alarm. This does not apply to propane or natural gas tanks.
      (2)   Shall comply with §
1-6-50 Wellhead Protection Ordinance.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-62, 1-24-1977; Ord. 07-16-456, 5-15-2007; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 2. RESOURCE CONSERVATION DISTRICT
§ 1-19-7.200. RESOURCE CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
   The following provisions shall apply to the Resource Conservation (RC)
District.
   (A)   Lot area determination for residential uses.
      (1)   On parcels, legal lots of record as of the effective date of Ord.
08-19-495, at least 10 acres in size, but less than 20 acres in size, one (1)
residential lot and a remainder may be created by subdivision. These lots shall
have a minimum lot size of 5 acres after subdivision of the lot, no further
development rights shall exist on the lot or the remainder, and a note shall be
placed on the record plat to this effect.
   (B)   Sensitive area protection.
      (1)   Areas with slopes of 25% grade and greater shall not be developed.
Buildings and structures and parking areas shall not be located on slopes of
25% grade and greater.
      (2)   Floodplains and wetlands shall be protected in accordance with the
standards and requirements set forth in §
1-19-9.100 through §
1-19-9.130, Floodplain District regulations.
      (3)   Habitats of threatened and endangered species, as identified by the
Maryland Department of Natural Resources, shall be protected from development
or disturbance. All subdivision and site development plans involving an area
identified as a habitat site shall be referred by the county to the Maryland
Natural Heritage Program for comment. On sites where a habitat is identified, a
mitigation plan will be required to show that adverse impacts on habitat sites
are minimized.
   (C)   Tree cutting and forestry activities.
      (1)   Forest cutting or clearing activities in connection with land
development shall be minimized. All activities to which the forest resource
ordinance apply shall be subject to the regulations and requirements set forth
in that ordinance. In addition to the forest resource ordinance requirements,
no more than 40,000 square feet shall be cleared for each home site. For all
permitted nonresidential uses, site development plan approval shall require
that site clearing is minimized.
      (2)   Commercial logging and timber harvesting operations for which 5,000
square feet of soil is disturbed shall be subject to all state and local
requirements, such as the following:
         (a)   Review and approval of a timber harvest plan by the Frederick
County Forest Conservancy District Board;
         (b)   Approval of an erosion and sediment control plan by the soil
conservation district.
         (c)   Approval of a grading permit by the Frederick County Division of
Public Works.
         (d)   Where applicable, approval of a stream crossing permit by water
resources administration.
         (e)   All applicable local, state and federal regulations concerning
commercial logging and timber harvesting.
   (D)   Streets. New subdivision streets will not be permitted to be
established in the resource conservation district.
   (E)   Driveways. Approval of a grading permit by the Frederick County
Division of Public Works shall be required for all driveways prior to site
development to ensure that sediment and erosion control and stormwater
management comply with soil conservation service standards.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-62(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 81-13-203, 5-26-1981; Ord. 95-02-
126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 00-21-263, §1, 7-18-2000; Ord. 05-27-388, 10-25-2005; Ord.
08-19-495, 5-20-2008; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 3. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 1-19-7.300. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   In the Agricultural Zoning District, the preferred use is agriculture.
The operation at any time of any machinery used in farming procedures and all
other agricultural operations shall be permitted and have preference over all
other uses.
   (B)   The minimum lot size for single-family dwellings will be 40,000 square
feet and, except as provided in §
1-19-7.300(C), subdivision will be permitted only as follows: a minor
subdivision of 3 lots will be permitted to be subdivided off an original tract
of land; thereafter land will have to be rezoned before additional dwellings,
other than tenant houses, may be built. An original tract of land shall be as
described in the county land records as of August 18, 1976.
   (C)   Clustering.
      (1)   Purpose and intent.
         (a)   To encourage the conservation of farmland in the Agricultural
Zoning District by planning the residential development allowed in the zone to
provide for the best obtainable siting, access and location of lots on a tract.
         (b)   To provide for a well-planned development while minimizing the
use of prime agricultural land.
      (2)   Requirements.
         (a)   For the purpose of this subsection "clustering" shall be defined
as directing the subdivision of lots on a single tract of land to meet the
purposes of this section or transferring the authorized subdivision lots from
adjacent tracts onto one tract for development. The Planning Commission shall
make the final determination as to whether the cluster development can be
achieved in keeping with the purposes of this section.
         (b)   When transferring authorized subdivision lots from 1 or more
tracts, the minimum original tract area required for transfer shall be 25
acres. However, adjoining tracts of less than 25 acres under the same ownership
may receive the rights if the Planning Commission determines that this will
preserve prime farmland.
         (c)   Minimum lot size, width and yard areas shall be as specified in
the Agricultural District. Lot sizes which are part of the cluster should be
kept to a minimum in order to limit the impact on the future agricultural use
of the remainder. Lot size shall average not more than 1.5 acres in size with
no lots exceeding 2 acres. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to
grant modifications to lot sizes based on percolation and other Health
Department requirements.
         (d)   Subdivision under this subsection shall be as follows. A minor
subdivision of 3 lots will be permitted to be subdivided on an original tract
of land 25 acres or less. An original tract shall be as defined in §
1-19-7.300(B). On an original tract of land containing more than 25 acres, the
Planning Commission may allow 1 lot in addition to those allowed on lesser
tracts for each additional 50 acres or part thereof above the first 25 acres
subject to the requirements of this section. The Planning Commission may
preclude clustering rights where subdivision under this section will not
conserve farmland, such as where the tract is primarily in wooded areas,
floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes and other areas not in pasture or crop use.
         (e)   All clusters of 6 or more lots shall be served by an internal
public street and shall not be stripped along an existing roadway.
      (3)   Procedures.
         (a)   Concept plan. For the subdivision of tracts eligible for cluster
lots, a concept plan shall be submitted to the staff a minimum of 60 days prior
to the meeting at which it is to be considered by the Planning Commission
showing all standard and potential cluster rights to determine the feasibility
of subdivision rights for the original tract(s) of land. The plan shall be
prepared in accordance with a "sample" cluster plan and show the following:
            1.   The lot layout (scale no smaller than 1 inch equals 100 feet)
including building restriction lines and appropriate dimensions;
            2.   Street layout;
            3.   Vicinity map (scale no smaller than 1 inch equals 2,000 feet)
showing the tract(s) and total acreages included within the plan;
            4.   Topography with minimum 10 foot contours (USGS Topo.
Interpretation is permitted for Concept Plan);
            5.   Development rights table indicating acreages and development
rights, both standard and cluster, for each tract and the total;
            6.   Soils data for the cluster area and the remaining farmland.
         (b)   The Planning Commission will have final approval over the
location and layout of the proposed clustering of lots. The Planning Commission
shall consider the following when reviewing Concept Plans.
            1.   Soils. The cluster plan should minimize the use of the higher
quality soils (class I, II and III as designated in the soils classification
study) and maximize the use of steeper sloped areas, areas of poorer soils and
areas which are otherwise less productive for agricultural uses.
            2.   Surrounding land use and zoning. The cluster plan shall
consider the existing land uses and zoning in the vicinity. Generally, new lots
which are adjacent to existing development or residential zoning are preferred
to creating an isolated cluster of new houses.
         (c)   Concept plan approval shall become null and void at the end of 1
year from the date of approval unless a combined preliminary/final plat or a
preliminary plat has been submitted for approval for the property.
         (d)   If the concept plan is approved by the Planning Commission, the
developer may then proceed with platting of the clustered development in
accordance with the subdivision regulations and the approved concept plan.
Final plats shall show all remaining parcels combined into 1 remainder except,
however, any remaining parcel(s) separated by a public road shall be considered
separate parcels and each parcel shall retain 1 development right. The plat
shall bear a statement indicating that "The land lies within an approved
agricultural cluster development and no further subdivision of the remaining
land is permitted unless the property is placed in another zone or further
subdivision is allowed by ordinance or regulation of Frederick County,
Maryland."
      (4)   Even though a subdivision plat is not required for land subdivided
for the purpose to be used as a farm, such subdivided land shall be counted as
a lot and will be counted in the number of allowable lots that may be
subdivided off the original tract of land.
      (5)   When filing a subdivision plat for less than the 3 lots allowed to
be subdivided off the original tract of land, the remaining parcel must be
designated "Remainder" on the subdivision plat or lose all further subdivision
rights allowed under this section.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-62(B), 1-24-1977; Ord. 77-10-87, 8-22-1977; Ord. 81-3-193,
1-27-1981; Ord. 81-13-203, 5-26-1981; Ord. 86-35-412, 6-10-1986; Ord. 89-16-
547, 3-21-1989; Ord. 94-19-114, 10-14-1994; Ord. 00-21-263, § 1, 7-18-2000;
Ord. 05-27-388, 10-25-2005; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Ord. 14-30-685, 11-18-2014; Bill No. 16-07, 8-15-2016)
DIVISION 4. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
(RESERVED)
§ 1-19-7.400. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
(RESERVED)
DIVISION 5. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
§ 1-19-7.500. VILLAGE CENTER ZONING DISTRICT OVERLAY STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. To provide for the location of a mix of commercial
services and residential development within the Village Center Zoning Districts
of rural communities with well and septic, and regional/district communities
where public water and sewer are either existing and/or planned. Village Center
zoning is applied to communities that contain an older village center as well
as historic resources which are unique characteristics of Frederick County. It
is the intent of the overlay standards to distinguish between development in
rural communities and growth area communities that accommodate differing
intensities and densities of growth, as well as sustain the distinctive village
center character and community identity through carefully planned development.
The design standards are to ensure that new development is compatible with the
unique characteristics within each community. The scale and density of new
development shall conform to the existing development patterns of the specific
community in which it is located as depicted within the Village Center Zoning
District design guide.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   Density. Development within the Village Center Zoning District may
not exceed 3 dwelling units per acre except in the growth area communities. In
growth area communities the density shall not exceed 5 dwelling units per acre.
      (2)   Height. Structures within the Village Center Zoning District may
not exceed a maximum height of 30' and no more than 2 stories. In the growth
area communities the Planning Commission may grant an increase in height of up
to 40' and no more than 3 stories for townhouse, multi-family, transient
housing, and commercial development. The Planning Commission may grant an
increased height when the specific finding is made that such increased height
is:
         (a)   Compatible with the pattern of or relationship to existing
development on adjacent or confronting lots; and
         (b)   Conforms to §
1-19-7.500(C).
      (3)   Setbacks. Front, side, and rear setbacks will be determined based
upon the average setbacks for structures located on all lots facing and
adjacent to the proposed development, but in no event less than the specific
minimum setbacks where provided in §
1-19-6.100. Where facing and adjacent lots are vacant, the setbacks shall be
based upon the average setbacks of the nearest structures. Accessory and
secondary buildings shall not be utilized to determine principal structure
setback averages. Accessory structure setbacks shall be determined as provided
for in §§
1-19-4.300 through
1-19-4.300.1 or §
1-19-8.240, as applicable.
         (a)   Where establishing average setbacks within the Village Center
Zoning District:
            1.   The Zoning Administrator may approve an increase or decrease
in the minimum setback requirements where a specific finding is made that the
increase or decrease is consistent with the purpose and intent of the Village
Center Zoning District overlay standards in §
1-19-7.500. In making this determination the Zoning Administrator may approve
the elimination of an existing setback where the facing or adjacent setback is
found to be significantly inconsistent with other existing setbacks within that
Village Center Zoning District.
      (4)   Mixed uses. Mixed-use development is encouraged within the Village
Center Zoning District, including residential uses on the second or third
floors above ground floor commercial uses. Multiple principal structures on a
single lot may be permitted within the Village Center Zoning District through
the site plan approval process when the Planning Commission specifically finds
that the resulting development will provide an improved design that would not
otherwise be created on multiple lots. In determining whether to allow
development of multiple principal structures on a single lot the Planning
Commission shall require:
         (a)   Improved on-site and off-site traffic circulation for vehicles
and pedestrians;
         (b)   Building placement that provides for the concentration of
service entrances, mechanical equipment, utilities and non-public facilities
(i.e. refuse containers or outside storage) away from public access areas;
         (c)   The provision of a common plaza/green area(s) (not including
swimming pools or playgrounds) to be provided in addition to all other
landscaping and setback requirements. The common plaza/green area(s) shall be
calculated at the following rate: 726 square feet common plaza/green area(s)
per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area or portion thereof;
         (d)   Joint use or shared parking resulting in a reduction in the
number of required off- street parking spaces;
         (e)   A mix of integrated commercial and residential uses;
         (f)   Preservation of a historic structure or historic site where
applicable.
   (C)   Design standards.
      (1)   All new development within the Village Center Zoning District shall
incorporate the following design standards in addition to all other applicable
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. New development will use existing
development as a guide when determining site development, layout, bulk, and
form of proposed structures within the Village Center District. New development
should be designed and built to reflect existing neighborhood characteristics
including shape, height, massing, roof shapes, and door and window placement
and proportions.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall consider these standards in its
review of all development within the Village Center Zoning District. The
concept plan will allow for review of the proposed development in order to
ensure consistency with the intent of the standards and the purpose of the VC
district. The Planning Commission may not approve development applications that
do not comply with the design standards or other requirements of this section.
      (3)   Site development and layout.
         (a)   Buildings shall be oriented such that the principal face of the
building faces the most dominant adjacent public street as determined by the
orientation of existing surrounding structures.
         (b)   Multi-story buildings with commercial use(s) on the ground and
lower floors and residential uses on the upper floor(s) are encouraged.
         (c)   Garage and service doors for commercial development shall not be
oriented to the dominant adjacent public street. Garage and service doors shall
be located to the rear and/or side of buildings allowing for the principal face
of the building to remain the dominant public street feature.
         (d)   All equipment and supplies shall be stored, maintained, and
repaired outside of the front yard area and within completely enclosed
buildings. The Planning Commission may approve outdoor display of products at
the time of site development plan review.
         (e)   Parking shall be located to the rear and/or side of buildings.
Parking lots shall not create long expanses of empty street frontage.
         (f)   Shared parking is strongly encouraged. The Planning Commission
may reduce the minimum parking requirements where the applicant can demonstrate
the need for fewer parking spaces due to availability of on-street parking,
joint parking, community/shared parking as otherwise provided under §
1-19-6.240.
         (g)   Roadside sidewalks shall be provided when sites are developed or
redeveloped. Sidewalks linking adjacent parcels along the primary street shall
be provided wherever practical.
         (h)   Streets and roadways shall link to existing road networks and
follow the established predominant street pattern.
         (i)   Refuse and recycling dumpsters shall be located away from public
access areas and may be required to be screened. The most appropriate screening
shall be determined at site development plan review with materials reflecting
neighborhood characteristics as approved by the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Building massing and bulk.
         (a)   The overall form of proposed buildings, such as height, front
and side yard setbacks, roof pitch, and length of building frontage shall be
similar to the surrounding buildings in order to maintain a consistent pattern
and texture in the built environment.
         (b)   Community or institutional buildings may be granted increased
height allowances for architectural features that signify the function or
importance of the building to the community.
         (c)   Where abutting a public street, townhouse and multi-family
structures shall have a maximum width of three dwelling units.
         (d)   Non-residential buildings shall not exceed a maximum footprint
of 5,000 square feet except within the growth area communities where the
Planning Commission may grant a maximum non-residential building footprint of
up to 8,000 square feet. The Planning Commission may increase the maximum
footprint above 8,000 square feet within growth area communities where:
            1.   The increased footprint is compatible with the pattern of or
relationship to existing or approved development on adjacent or confronting
lots; and
            2.   The proposed building and site design provide a transition
between existing structures on adjacent and confronting lots and the proposed
development; and
            3.   The proposed development results in preservation and
integration of historic resources into the development where applicable; and
            4.   The increased building footprint does not exceed a maximum
total of 10,000 square feet; or the increased building footprint is in
accordance with county community and corridor plans.
         (e)   The Planning Commission may require changes to building and site
design where an increase above 5,000 square feet has been requested, to
minimize negative impacts on surrounding properties that may result from the
increased footprint. The building and site design changes shall be limited to
new construction and may include: location of public access, buffering and
screening, landscaping, lighting, outdoor recreation areas, building location
and orientation. The Planning Commission must make a specific finding
identifying the negative impacts on surrounding properties where changes to
building and site design are required.
         (f)   Building designs shall not include flat roofs, large expanses of
undifferentiated facades, and long plain wall sections.
   (D)   Procedures - concept. Development requiring site plan review must
receive concept approval from the Planning Commission or its authorized
representative as the first step in the development review process. The concept
must demonstrate the manner in which the Village Center Zoning District design
standards have been met by the proposed development. (§
1-19-3.300.2)
(Ord. 07-27-467, 6-19-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 10-01-536, 1-19-
2010; Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-7.510. GENERAL COMMERCIAL.
   The following provisions shall be applicable in the General
CommercialDistrict.
   (A)   Access requirements. One combined entrance/exit is permitted for each
200 feet of frontage. Access to corner lots will be at least 100 feet from
intersecting street rights-of-way. Entrances to individual lots on a frontage
road will be a minimum of 200 feet apart, except when developing on the
circumference at the end of a cul-de-sac, then entrances may be less than 200
feet apart; however, combined entrances with adjoining properties shall be
provided to limit the number of access points and give the maximum separation
possible.
   (B)   Vehicle and pedestrian circulation. A plan for the internal
circulation of vehicles and pedestrians will be reviewed and approved by the
Department of Planning and Development Review.
   (C)   Signs. Square footage may be increased by 25% if no free-standing or
pylon-type signs are used.
   (D)   Storage and operations. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code,
all operations and the storage of equipment, materials, or products in the GC
District shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. Storage may
be permitted outdoors only when completely screened by a wall, opaque fence, or
planting so that such materials will not be visible from a public way or
adjoining property. The most appropriate screening for the use shall be
determined at site development plan review.
   (E)   Refuse and recycling dumpsters shall be located away from public
access areas and may be required to be screened. The most appropriate screening
shall be determined at site development plan review with materials reflecting
neighborhood characteristics as approved by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-62(C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 81-3-193, 1-27-1981; Ord. 83-14-281,
6-7-1983; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 10-01-536,
1-19-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-7.520. MIXED USE.
   In accordance with the site plan review process provided in §§
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4, the following provisions shall be applicable in the Mixed Use
(MX) District.
   (A)   Storage and operations.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this
code, all operations and the storage of equipment, materials, or products in
the Mixed Use District shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
Storage may be permitted outdoors only when completely screened by a wall,
opaque fence, or planting so that such materials will not be visible from a
public way or adjoining property. The most appropriate screening for the use
and approval for outdoor display of products shall be determined at the time of
site development plan review.
   (B)   Refuse and recycling dumpsters shall be located away from public
access areas and may be required to be screened. The most appropriate screening
shall be determined at site development plan review with materials reflecting
neighborhood characteristics as approved by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Development shall comply with adopted County Community or Corridor
Plans for the area where the development is proposed.
   (D)   Utilize building mounted or monument signs rather than pylon signs.
   (E)   Site development and layout. The following site development and layout
standards shall be met at the time of Site Development Plan Review:
      (1)   Facilitate safe and convenient access to public transit through
building placement and site design in accordance with the Frederick County
Transit-friendly Design Guidelines.
      (2)   Orient buildings so that rear entrances and rear façades face away
from roadways, pedestrian and public areas.
      (3)   Orient as many buildings as possible to pedestrian ways, public
streets, or internal roadways in larger developments.
      (4)   Provide for the concentration of service entrances, mechanical
equipment, utilities and non- public facilities (i.e. refuse containers or
outside storage) away from public access areas.
      (5)   Mark or construct pedestrian walkways and crossings of materials
that provide a distinction from areas of vehicular movement.
      (6)   Locate parking predominantly to the side and or rear of buildings
and design the parking areas to facilitate pedestrian movement.
      (7)   Parking lots shall not create long expanses of empty street
frontage.
      (8)   Design projects to link to existing and planned road networks,
incorporate an interconnected street grid, and avoid commercial 'strip'
development where vehicular access is achieved directly to a collector
classification roadway or higher.
      (9)   Design projects to facilitate joint use, shared parking, and the
use of parking structures. Evaluation factors include: building and parking
placement, mixture of land uses, and parking recommendations contained within
the adopted community or corridor plan where the project is proposed.
      (10)   Provide shared access and interior drives with allowance for
interconnection between properties where feasible. The Planning Commission may
require consolidation of multiple access points in complying with this
standard. At the rear of properties access should be provided by alleyways or
parking lot interconnections.
   (F)   Building massing and bulk. The following building massing and bulk
standards shall be met at the time of site development plan review:
      (1)   Individual structures shall not exceed the maximum building
footprint as provided within the adopted county community or corridor plan.
      (2)   Incorporate pedestrian scale building design and architectural
elements at building entrances and where abutting a public right-of-way.
Evaluation factors include: balconies, terraces, windows, canopies, porches,
and benches.
      (3)   Provide a primary pedestrian entrance onto a street, square, plaza,
or sidewalk.
      (4)   Design and construct buildings to include finishes and materials of
consistent quality and design on all sides such as: changes in building plane,
windows, doorways, entrances, overhanging eaves, and shutters. Buildings shall
not include long expanses of undifferentiated façades and long plain wall
sections.
      (5)   Design and construct buildings with materials and architecture of
traditional villages and towns throughout Frederick County and Central
Maryland, unless otherwise provided within adopted county community or corridor
plans.
      (6)   Locate and design buildings with consideration to the surrounding
development with regard to scale and setbacks.
   (G)   Modifications.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may modify the development standards in §
1-19-7.520(D) through (F), lot area, lot area per unit, lot width, setback, and
height requirements (as provided in §
1-19-6.100 Design Requirements) for the MX District and maximum building
footprint as provided in §
1-19-7.520(F)(1). The Planning Commission may approve a modification where a
specific finding is made that:
         (a)   The modification is in conformance with the adopted county
community or corridor plan; and
         (b)   The modification provides for an improved design that furthers
the goals within the adopted county comprehensive, community, or corridor plan,
and would not otherwise be possible within the existing regulations; and
         (c)   All other provisions of this chapter are met.
      (2)   Where MPDUs are provided the modification shall not exceed the
area, width, yard, and height measurements as provided in §
1-19-8.620.5.
      (3)   The Planning Commission may require modifications to building and
site design where an increase in maximum building footprint has been granted,
to address potential negative impacts on surrounding properties that may result
from the increase. The building and site design modifications may include:
location of public access, buffering and screening, landscaping, lighting,
outdoor recreation areas, building location and orientation.
   (H)   Multiple structures and mixed uses.
      (1)   Mixed-use development is encouraged in the MX District including a
mixture of residential, commercial and employment uses within a structure, a
lot or the district. Multiple principal structures and uses on an individual
lot are permitted within the MX District when approved by the Planning
Commission through the Type I Site Plan Review process (§§
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4) where the Planning Commission finds that the following criteria
have been met in addition to the other provisions in this section:
         (a)   Where identified within an adopted county community or corridor
plan, residential, commercial, or employment land uses, or a mixture thereof,
shall be provided. The mixture of land uses shall comply with the adopted
community or corridor plan and be approved by the Planning Commission.
         (b)   Land uses shall be integrated through provision of the
following: bicycle, pedestrian, transit, and vehicular connections between
uses; site design and building placement that facilitates land use interaction
rather than separation; land use location that provides for a transition
between land uses in both design and intensity, rather than segregation of land
uses.
         (c)   Multiple structure and mixed use development that includes a
residential component shall provide a common plaza/green area (not including
swimming pools or playgrounds), in addition to all other landscaping and
setback requirements, at the following rate: 363 square feet of common plaza/
green area per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area or portion thereof. A
green roof may be considered toward meeting common plaza/green area
requirements.
         (d)   Where provided in (c) above, the common plaza/green area shall
be centrally located to act as a focal point to the development.
         (e)   To the greatest extent feasible shared and joint use parking
shall be integrated into the overall parking plan to achieve a reduction in on-
site parking and impervious surface. Evaluation shall include the feasibility
of utilizing parking structures in meeting on-site parking requirements.
   (I)   Review and approval procedures.
      (1)   Concept plan. Development requiring site development plan review,
as provided in §
1-19-5.310 Use Table, shall receive concept plan approval from the Planning
Commission or its authorized representative as the first step in the
development review process. The concept plan, submitted in conformance with §
1-19-3.300.2(B), shall demonstrate:
         (a)   The manner in which the standards within this section have been
met by the proposed development; and
         (b)   The manner in which the proposed development conforms to adopted
county community or corridor plans for the area where the development is
proposed.
   (J)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all site development
plans or amendments to approved existing site development plans filed on or
after December 2, 2011.
(Ord. 11-28-594, 11-22-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 6. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
§ 1-19-7.600. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall be applicable in the Industrial Districts.
   (A)   Access requirements. One combined entrance/exit is permitted for each
200 feet of frontage. Access to corner lots will be at least 100 feet from
intersecting street rights-of-way. Entrances to individual lots on a frontage
road will be a minimum of 200 feet apart, except when developing on the
circumference at the end of a cul-de-sac, then entrances may be less than 200
feet apart; however, combined entrances with adjoining properties shall be
provided to limit the number of access points and give the maximum separation
possible.
   (B)   Vehicle and pedestrian circulation. A plan for the internal
circulation of vehicles and pedestrians will be reviewed and approved by the
Department of Planning and Development Review.
   (C)   Signs. Square footage may be increased by 25% if no free-standing or
pylon-type signs are used.
   (D)   Storage and operations. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code,
all operations and the storage of equipment, materials, or products in the
industrial districts shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
Storage may be permitted outdoors only when completely screened by a wall,
opaque fence, or planting so that such materials will not be visible from a
public way or adjoining property. The most appropriate screening for the use
shall be determined at site development plan review. The Planning Commission
may waive or modify the requirement for complete screening between adjoining
properties where the adjoining properties are similar in use and reduction or
elimination of complete screening will not adversely impact adjoining
properties.
   (E)   Refuse and recycling dumpsters shall be located away from public
access areas and may be required to be screened. The most appropriate screening
shall be determined at site development plan review with materials reflecting
neighborhood characteristics as approved by the Planning Commission.
   (F)   The requirements of §
1-19-8.402 apply to a critical digital infrastructure facility.
(Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 10-01-536, 1-19-
2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-05,
3-15-2022)
§ 1-19-7.610. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   The following performance standards for Limited and General Industrial
Districts are designed to reduce the impact of industrial districts on
surrounding uses by lessening traffic congestion, protecting the health and
safety of workers and nearby residents, and by preventing detrimental effects
on properties adjoining or in the neighborhood. All applications for a site
plan approval must be accompanied by a registered engineer's certification that
the use complies with all of the applicable standards. Upon receipt of the
certification, the Zoning Administrator will issue a zoning certificate. After
occupancy, if there occurs continuous or frequent, even though intermittent,
violations of the performance standards and provisions of these regulations
without bona fide and immediate corrective work, the Zoning Administrator will
suspend or revoke the zoning certificate of the use and the operation shall
immediately cease until it is able to operate in accordance with this chapter,
at which time the zoning certificate shall be reinstated.
   (A)   Storage and operations.
      (1)   In the LI District all operations and the storage of equipment,
materials or products will be conducted within completely enclosed buildings or
storage may be permitted outdoors only when completely screened by a wall,
opaque fence, or planting so that such materials will not be visible from a
public way or adjoining property. The Planning Commission shall determine the
most appropriate screening for the use. The Planning Commission may waive or
modify the requirement for complete screening between adjoining properties
where the adjoining properties are similar in use and reduction or elimination
of complete screening will not adversely impact adjoining properties.
      (2)   (a)   In the GI District, a use is permitted either indoors or
outdoors but in conformance with the following.
         (b)   Storage. Storage in a GI District within 500 feet of a
residential district boundary may be outdoors but will be effectively screened
by a solid wall, fence, or planting so that the materials will not be visible
from the Residential District.
   (B)   Noise.
      (1)   Noise will be measured with a sound level meter. Impact noise will
be measured using the fast response of the sound level meter. Impact noises are
intermittent sounds such as from a punch press or drop force hammer.
      (2)   The following table describes the maximum sound pressure level
permitted from any industrial source and measured in any adjacent Residential
District, Commercial District, or LI Limited Industrial Lot.
 
Maximum permitted sound levels, dB(A)
Sound Measured to:        Decibels Continuous Slow Impact Fast Meter Response
                          Meter Responses
                         LI GI                    LI GI
Residential District      55 55                    60 60
Commercial District       64 64                    70 75
LI District lot, adjacent 70 75                    80 -
to noise source
 
      (3)   The following sources of noise are exempt.
         (a)   Transportation vehicles not under the control of the industrial
use.
         (b)   Occasionally used safety signals, warning devices, and emergency
pressure relief valves.
         (c)   Temporary construction activity between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
   (C)   Vibration. No vibration will be produced which is transmitted through
the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at or any point
beyond the lot line; nor will any vibration produce a particle velocity of 2
inches per second measured at or beyond the lot line.
   (D)   Dust and particulates.
      (1)   The total emission rate of dust and particulate matter from all
vents, stacks, chimneys, flues or other opening or any process, operation, or
activity except solid waste incinerators within the boundaries of any lot, will
not exceed the levels set forth below. Emissions of dust and particulates shall
be in accordance with the State of Maryland rules and regulations governing air
contamination and air pollution, and, in case of conflict, the most restrictive
will apply.
      (2)   Particulate matter emission from materials or products subject to
becoming windborne will be kept to a minimum by paving, sodding, oiling,
wetting, covering or other means, such as to render the surface wind resistant.
Such sources include vacant lots, unpaved roads, yards and storage piles or
bulk material such as coal, sand, cinders, slag, sulfur, and the like.
   Ambient Air Quality Standard (LI and GI Districts)
Particulate Matter
Suspended
   Annual arithmetic mean, ug/m3   65
   24-hour maximumb, ug/m3   140
Settleable
   Annual arithmetic average, mg/cm/2/month   0.35
   Monthly maximum   0.7
   (E)   Sulfur oxides. Emission of oxides of sulfur (as sulfur dioxide) from
combustion and other processes will be limited in accordance with ambient air
quality standards of the state or those of the county, whichever are the more
restrictive.
Ambient Air Quality Standard (LI and GI Districts)
Sulfur Oxides
   Annual arithmetic mean, ug/m3   60
   (F)   Smoke. For the purpose of grading the density or equivalent capacity
of smoke, the Ringelmann Chart as published by the United States Bureau of
Mines shall be used.
      (1)   LI District. The emission of smoke darker than Ringelmann No. 1
from any chimney, stack, vent, opening, or combustion process is prohibited.
      (2)   GI District. The emission of smoke darker than Ringelmann No. 1
from any chimney, stack, vent, opening, or combustion process is prohibited;
however, smoke of a shade not to exceed Ringelmann No. 2 is permitted for up to
4 minutes total in any 1 hour period.
   (G)   Odor. Odor thresholds shall be measured in accordance with ASTM d1391-
57 "Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres (Dilution Method)"
or its equivalent.
      (1)   LI District. Odorous material released from any operation or
activity shall not exceed the odor threshold concentration beyond the lot line,
measured either at ground level or habitable elevation.
      (2)   GI District. Odorous materials released from any operation or
activity shall not exceed the odor threshold concentration at or beyond the
district boundary line measured either at ground level or habitable elevation.
   (H)   Toxic matter. The ambient air quality standards for the State of
Maryland shall be the guide to the release of airborne toxic materials across
lot lines. Where toxic materials are not listed in the ambient air quality
standards of the state, the release of such materials shall be in accordance
with the fractional quantities permitted below, of those toxic materials
currently listed in the threshold limit values adopted by the American
Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists. Unless otherwise stated, the
measurement of toxic matter shall be at ground level or habitable elevation,
and shall be the average of any 24 hours sampling period.
      (1)   LI District. The release of airborne toxic matter will not exceed
one-thirtieth of the threshold limit value across lot lines.
      (2)   GI District. The release of airborne toxic matter shall not exceed
one-thirtieth of the threshold limit value beyond the district boundary line.
   (I)   Detonable materials.
      (1)   Activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of
products which decompose by detonation shall be in accordance with these new
regulations.
      (2)   Such materials shall include but are not limited to: all primary
explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and tetracene; all
high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN, and picric acid; propellants and
components thereof, such as dry nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides,
hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium
powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as
dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds such as acetylides,
tetrazoles and ozonides; unstable oxidizing agents such as perchloric acid,
perchlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentration greater than 35%; and
nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products, and reactor elements such as
Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.
         (a)   LI District. The storage, utilization or manufacture of
materials or products which decompose by detonation is prohibited.
         (b)   GI District. The manufacture of materials or products which
decompose by detonation is limited to 5 pounds; however, such materials may be
stored or utilized in any quantity.
   (J)   Fire hazards. Solid materials susceptible to fire hazards shall be
subject to the following.
      (1)   LI District. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid
materials which are active to intense burning shall be conducted within spaces
having fire resistive construction of no less than 2 hours and protected with
an automatic fire extinguishing system.
      (2)   GI District. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid
materials which are active to intense burning shall be conducted within walls
having a fire resistance no less than 2 hours or protected by an automatic fire
extinguishing system or the building shall be no less than 40 feet from all lot
lines. The outdoor storage of such materials shall be permitted no closer than
50 feet from all lot lines.
      (3)   Liquified petroleum gas (LP-gas) and flammable/combustible liquids
within the LI and GI Districts shall adhere to the following standards:
         (a)   The total storage capacity of LP-gas shall not exceed 1,000,000
gallons on any site.
         (b)   The total storage capacity of flammable/combustible liquids
shall not exceed 300,000 gallons.
         (c)   On-site blending of fuels is not permitted.
         (d)   The facility shall meet or exceed the requirements of:
            1.   The Frederick County Fire Prevention Code, as amended; and
            2.   The Following National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
Standards as adopted by reference, with local amendments, in the Frederick
County Fire Prevention Code:
               (i)   NFPA 58 (Standard for the Storage and Handling of
Liquefied Petroleum Gases), as amended;
               (ii)   NFPA Standard 30 (Flammable and Combustible Liquids
Code), as amended;
               (iii)   NFPA Standard 30A (Code for Motor Fuel Dispensing
Facilities and Repair Garages), as amended.
         (e)   A minimum lot area of 5 acres is required for a petroleum
product storage facility with product storage capacity of 300,000 gallons or
more.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the above-listed capacities for flammable liquids
and gases, an owner or operator shall be permitted to exceed such capacities
provided that the Zoning Administrator determines that the excess storage
capacity is for an emergency fuel supply only. For purposes of this section,
the term EMERGENCY FUEL SUPPLY means any fuel that is stored on site for use
solely in the event of a disruption in the normal fuel supply. In no event
shall the total storage capacity for an emergency fuel supply approved pursuant
to this subsection exceed that amount of fuel required to operate the subject
facility for a maximum of 5 consecutive 24 hour periods. The facilities to hold
an emergency fuel supply shall be designed, constructed, and operated in
compliance with the Frederick County Fire Prevention Code, §
1-2-69.1 of the Frederick County Code and the National Safety Codes and
standards applicable to the specific emergency fuel.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-62(F), 1-24-1977; Ord. 77-10-87, 8-22-1977; Ord. 86-49-426,
9-23-1986; Ord. 97-20-198, 12-16-1997; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 10-01-
536, 1-19-2010; Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-2011; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-
23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-7.620. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR THE OFFICE/RESEARCH INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
(ORI).
   (A)   In the ORI District, no outside storage of equipment, material or
products will be permitted.
   (B)   In the ORI District, all of the industrial performance standards not
otherwise provided for in this section which pertain to the Limited Industrial
(LI) Zone shall apply to the ORI Zone.
   (C)   In the ORI District, the minimum landscaped open space on any
individual lot shall not be less than 20% of the land area of the lot. The
landscaped open space shall not be impervious or open for vehicular use and the
landscaping shall be maintained in a reasonable manner.
   (D)   In the ORI district, building architectural renderings or plans shall
be submitted to the Planning Commission to assure that the appearance, size,
type of building material or other aspects of the building are consistent with
the purposes and intent of the zone.
(Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
ARTICLE VIII: SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS (§§ 1-19-8.100 — 1-19-8.800)
Section
Division 1. Generally
   
1-19-8.100   Purposes
   
1-19-8.110   Major recreational equipment
Division 2. Accessory Uses
   
1-19-8.200   Purpose and intent
   
1-19-8.205   Accessory uses in all zoning districts
   
1-19-8.205.1   Customary accessory uses
   
1-19-8.205.2   Communications antenna
   
1-19-8.205.3   Farm tenant houses
   
1-19-8.205.4   Solar facility, accessory
   
1-19-8.205.5   Solar facility, community energy generating system
   
1-19-8.205.6   Limited wind energy systems
   
1-19-8.205.7   Commercial vehicle parking as an accessory use to a farm
   
1-19-8.210   Accessory uses on institutional use property
   
1-19-8.211   Gasoline storage tanks with a capacity between 270 gallons and
1,100 gallons as an accessory use on farm lots and in the GC, LI and GI
districts
   
1-19-8.212   Limited accessory dwelling units in the RC, A, R1, R3, R5, R8,
R12, R16, VC, MXD, PUD, and MX districts
   
1-19-8.213   Temporary mobile home
   
1-19-8.214   Class 8 farm brewery license holder as an accessory use to a
commercial roadside stand in the RC, A, R1, R3, VC, MX and GC districts
   
1-19-8.220   Accessory use of a crematory
   
1-19-8.230   Accessory uses in the Agricultural or Resource Conservation
districts
   
1-19-8.230.1   Limited funeral establishment accessory to a single-family
detached dwelling in the RC Zoning District
   
1-19-8.230.2   Cemetery/memorial garden accessory to a place of worship in the
RC District
   
1-19-8.230.3   Child care center/nursery school accessory to a place of worship
in the A and RC zoning districts
   
1-19-8.230.4   Funeral home accessory to a cemetery/memorial garden in the A
District
   
1-19-8.240   Accessory uses on residential properties
   
1-19-8.250   Accessory uses in Commercial and Industrial Districts
   
1-19-8.250.1   Customary accessory uses
   
1-19-8.250.2   Reserved
   
1-19-8.250.3   Child care centers as an accessory use in the ORI District
   
1-19-8.251   Accessory uses in the mineral mining districts
Division 3. Special Exception Uses
   
1-19-8.300   Temporary structures and uses requiring special exception approval
   
1-19-8.310   Reserved
   
1-19-8.320   Generally
   
1-19-8.321   Accessory dwelling units greater than 1,000 square feet
   
1-19-8.322.1   Private aircraft landing and storage areas in A, LI and GI
Districts
   
1-19-8.322.2   Private - commercial use aircraft landing and storage areas in
A, LI and GI Districts
   
1-19-8.323   Child care center/nursery school in the A District
   
1-19-8.324   Auto repair body and fender shops in VC Districts
   
1-19-8.325   Limited agricultural activity in the residential districts
   
1-19-8.326   Bed and breakfast in the residential zoning districts
   
1-19-8.327   Rustic retreat/camp/outdoor club in RC and A Districts
   
1-19-8.328   Reserved
   
1-19-8.329   Child care centers or nursery schools in R-1, R-3, R-5, R-8, and
LI Districts
   
1-19-8.330   Chip and putt golf courses
   
1-19-8.331   Landscape contractor in the A District
   
1-19-8.332   Communication towers in RC and A Districts
   
1-19-8.333   Country inns in RC and A Districts
   
1-19-8.334   Farm equipment sales or service, feed or grain mills in the A
District or agricultural products processing in A and RC Districts
   
1-19-8.335   Reserved
   
1-19-8.336   Reserved
   
1-19-8.337   Nongovernmental electric substation in the LI or GI districts
   
1-19-8.338   Kennels, animal hospitals or veterinary clinics in the A and VC
Districts
   
1-19-8.339   Nongovernmental utility in RC, A, R-1, R-3, R-5, R-8, R-12, R-16
and VC Districts
   
1-19-8.340   Civic community center and civic service club in the A District,
and place of worship in the RC District
   
1-19-8.341   Private schools in the R-1, R-3, R-5, R-8, R-12, R-16, VC and LI
Districts
   
1-19-8.342   Professional offices in R-5, R-8, R-12 and R-16 Districts
   
1-19-8.343   Reserved
   
1-19-8.344   Recreational vehicle storage facility in the Agricultural Zoning
District
   
1-19-8.345   Rodeos
   
1-19-8.346   School bus parking
   
1-19-8.347   Sawmill in the A and RC Districts
   
1-19-8.348   Solid waste operation
   
1-19-8.349   Reserved
   
1-19-8.350   Spring water harvesting in the RC District
   
1-19-8.351   Reserved
   
1-19-8.352   Storage of flammable liquids
   
1-19-8.353   Tennis clubs in R-3, R-8, R-12 and R-16 Districts
   
1-19-8.354   Tent campground in A and RC Districts
   
1-19-8.355   Shooting range/club - trap, skeet, rifle, archery in the RC and A
Districts
   
1-19-8.356   Facility for functions
   
1-19-8.357   Reserved
Division 4. Permitted Uses
   
1-19-8.400   Asphalt plants in the General Industrial District
   
1-19-8.401   Solar facility commercial in the LI or GI Districts
   
1-19-8.402   Critical digital infrastructure facilities
   
1-19-8.403   Critical digital infrastructure electric substation
   
1-19-8.404   Cannabis dispensary, cannabis growing facility, and cannabis
processing facility
   
1-19-8.404.1   Scope
   
1-19-8.404.2   Cannabis dispensary
   
1-19-8.404.3   Cannabis growing facility
   
1-19-8.404.4   Cannabis processing facility
   
1-19-8.404.5   Cannabis on-site consumption facility
   
1-19-8.405   Animal hospital or veterinary clinic in the GC and MX Districts
   
1-19-8.406   Automobile repair or service shop in the Limited Industrial
District
   
1-19-8.407   Apiary
   
1-19-8.408   Limited food waste composting in the A District
   
1-19-8.410   Bed and breakfast
   
1-19-8.420   Communication towers
   
1-19-8.420.1   Scope
   
1-19-8.420.2   Criteria
   
1-19-8.430   Contractor's office and storage in the Limited Industrial District
   
1-19-8.431   Limited farm alcoholic beverages tasting rooms in the Resource
Conservation and Agricultural Zoning Districts
   
1-19-8.432   Private park in the RC District
   
1-19-8.440   Landfills/Borrow Pits
   
1-19-8.440.1   Procedures
   
1-19-8.440.2   Design criteria
   
1-19-8.441   Limited landscape contractor, or woodworking in the A District
   
1-19-8.442   Limited landscape contractor parking and storage in the A District
   
1-19-8.450   Self-storage units
   
1-19-8.460   Shopping centers
   
1-19-8.470   Townhouse development
   
1-19-8.470.1   Scope
   
1-19-8.470.2   Density
   
1-19-8.470.3   Lot width
   
1-19-8.470.4   Row lengths
   
1-19-8.470.5   Yards
   
1-19-8.470.6   Access drives and off-street parking
   
1-19-8.470.7   Maintenance of common land and facilities
   
1-19-8.480   Uses permitted in the Euclidean Institutional (Ie) Zoning District
   
1-19-8.490   Place of worship
   
1-19-8.491   Bodywork
Division 5. Intensive Swine Feeding Operations
   
1-19-8.500   Intent
   
1-19-8.500.1   Purpose
   
1-19-8.500.2   Definitions
   
1-19-8.500.3   Permit
   
1-19-8.500.4   Permit application
   
1-19-8.500.5   Notice and hearing requirements
   
1-19-8.500.6   Waste, nutrient and odor management and soil and water
conservation
   
1-19-8.500.7   Development of odor abatement plan
   
1-19-8.500.8   Swine waste retention structure
   
1-19-8.500.9   Swine waste disposal, application, and accidental spill
procedures
   
1-19-8.500.10   Investigation of complaints; access to premises; records
   
1-19-8.500.11   Issuance of permit amount of fee
   
1-19-8.500.12   Duties of owners and operators
   
1-19-8.500.13   Swine feeding setback requirements
   
1-19-8.500.14   Restrictions on locations of certain swine feeding operations
and waste facilities
   
1-19-8.500.15   Suspension or revocation of permit
   
1-19-8.500.16   Penalties
Division 6. Other
   
1-19-8.600   Historic structures or sites
   
1-19-8.610   Land subject to agricultural land preservation easements
   
1-19-8.620   Moderately priced dwelling unit
   
1-19-8.620.1   Purpose and description
   
1-19-8.620.2   Scope and requirements
   
1-19-8.620.3   Density bonus
   
1-19-8.620.4   Exceptions
   
1-19-8.620.5   Lot area, width, and yard measurements
   
1-19-8.620.6   Procedures for application and approval
   
1-19-8.630   Subdivision and dedication of land for affordable housing
Division 7. Temporary Structures and Uses
   
1-19-8.700   Temporary outdoor activities
Division 8. Commercial Solar Facilities
   
1-19-8.800   Commercial solar facilities in the Agricultural Zoning District
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§ 1-19-8.100. PURPOSES.
   This article establishes additional design requirements for certain uses or
structures, with primary emphasis on uses requiring site plan approval or
special exception approval.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-70, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.110. MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.
   No major recreational equipment will be used for living, sleeping, or other
occupancy when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any other location
not approved for such use.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-49(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
Editor's note:
   Ord. 90-32-630, adopted and effective June 19, 1990, repealed § 1-19-212,
which section pertained to the parking or storage of vehicles and which was
derived from Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-49(B), adopted Jan. 24, 1977.
DIVISION 2. ACCESSORY USES
§ 1-19-8.200. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Although customary accessory uses are expected to develop in conjunction
with a principal permitted use, the accessory uses listed in Division 2,
Accessory Uses, will receive approval only when specific criteria have been
met.
(Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.205. ACCESSORY USES IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.
§ 1-19-8.205.1. CUSTOMARY ACCESSORY USES.
   The following customary accessory uses are permitted in all zoning
districts: auction sales, yard sales and "kids fairs;" however, not more than 1
such event shall be held per lot per year.
(Ord. 81-23-213, 8-4-1981; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-
2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.205.2. COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA.
   A communications antenna not exceeding 10 feet above and attached to an
existing building or structure or attached to a support pole inserted within an
existing electrical transmission line lattice tower is permitted in any zoning
district.
(Ord. 99-14-241, 11-23-1999; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-
2009; Ord. 10-17-552, 6-15-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.205.3. FARM TENANT HOUSES.
   Farm tenant houses are permitted as accessory structures on a farm as
follows: 25 acres to 50 acres, 1 tenant house, thereafter 1 tenant house per 50
acres.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-47(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-
525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.205.4. SOLAR FACILITY, ACCESSORY.
   Solar Facility, Accessory, is a permitted use in all zoning districts.
(Ord. 09-11-515, 4-28-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-07, 5-16-
2017)
§ 1-19-8.205.5. SOLAR FACILITY, COMMUNITY ENERGY GENERATING SYSTEM.
   Solar Facility, Community Energy Generating System is an accessory use in
all zoning districts and the facility may be located on a different parcel of
land than that of the subscribers. A zoning certificate must be obtained prior
to construction or installation of the facility.
(Ord. 09-11-515, 4-28-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-07, 5-16-
2017)
§ 1-19-8.205.6. LIMITED WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Limited wind energy systems are permitted in any zoning district
subject to the following standards except that limited wind energy systems
under 10 feet in height and located on a principal or accessory structure are
not subject to these provisions:
      (1)   The limited wind energy system shall be used for the purpose of
generating power for the property on which the limited wind energy system is
located. Commercial sale of power is prohibited.
      (2)   The limited wind energy system shall be set back a distance equal
to its total height plus an additional 20 feet from:
         (a)   Any right-of-way as designated by the County Comprehensive Plan;
         (b)   Any right of ingress or egress on the owner's property;
         (c)   Any overhead utility lines;
         (d)   All property lines.
      (3)   The limited wind energy system shall not be located within the
required front yard setback.
      (4)   All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
      (5)   All electrical wires associated with a ground mounted wind energy
system shall be located underground, except those wires necessary to connect
the wind generator to the wind tower wiring, the wind tower wiring to the
disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires.
      (6)   A wind tower and generator shall not be artificially lighted unless
such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
      (7)   Wind energy systems shall be painted a non-reflective, non-
obtrusive color such as the manufacturer's default color option or a color that
conforms to the environment and architecture of the community in which it will
be located. Wind energy towers shall maintain a galvanized steel, brushed
aluminum or white finish, unless FAA standards require otherwise. The Zoning
Administrator may require a photo of a wind energy system of the same model
that is the subject of the application, adjacent to a building or some other
object illustrating scale.
      (8)   The blade tip or vane of any wind energy system shall, at its
lowest point, have ground clearance of no less than 15 feet, as measured at the
lowest point of the arc of the blades.
      (9)   Wind energy systems shall comply with all applicable construction
and electrical codes.
      (10)   Wind energy systems that connect to an electric utility company
shall comply with the Public Service Commission regulations.
      (11)   Each property is eligible for 2 wind energy systems. Additional
wind energy systems shall not exceed the total number needed to generate the
amount of electricity for the established uses on the property unless the
applicant can demonstrate the on- site need for additional power.
      (12)   Abandonment.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator may issue a notice of abandonment to
the owner of a wind energy system that is out of service for a continuous 6-
month period. The owner shall have the right to respond in writing, within 30
days, to the notice of abandonment setting forth the reasons for operational
difficulty and providing a reasonable timetable for corrective action. If
sufficient reason is provided, the Zoning Administrator shall withdraw the
notice of abandonment and the owner of the wind energy system will be notified.
         (b)   If the wind energy system is determined to be abandoned, the
owner shall remove the wind energy system within 3 months of the date of the
notice of abandonment, at the owner's expense. If the owner fails to remove the
wind energy system, the Zoning Administrator may pursue legal action to have
the wind energy system removed at the owner's expense.
      (13)   All wind energy systems shall comply with the limitations
contained in the noise ordinance of Frederick County (Frederick County Code §
1-11-6).
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a wind
energy system that is not in compliance with this chapter or with any condition
contained in a building permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or that is in
violation of any state or federal regulation.
(Ord. 09-11-515, 4-28-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.205.7. COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING AS AN ACCESSORY USE TO A FARM.
   The following provisions apply to commercial vehicle parking as an accessory
use to a farm:
   (A)   The subject property must meet the definition of a farm provided in §
1-19-11.100.
   (B)   Parking of commercial vehicles may include but is not limited to:
school buses, tractor trailers, and contractor vehicles.
   (C)   Parking under this section is limited to licensed commercial vehicles
that are used in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise.
   (D)   The maximum number of commercial vehicles permitted is 5.
   (E)   A Minimum setback of 50 feet is required for all yards. Parking may
not be located within the required setback area.
(Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.210. ACCESSORY USES ON INSTITUTIONAL USE PROPERTY.
   Customary accessory uses permitted on institutional use properties include
the following: activities, such as breakfast, lunches, dinners, bazaars,
auctions, sales, game nights, carnivals, farmers markets, and similar
activities. Institutional use properties are those listed in §
1-19-5.310 under the heading "Institutional," namely, civic community center,
civic service clubs, day-care center, nursery school, group homes, hospital,
nursing home, places of worship, private schools, camps and retreats, and fire
and rescue service.
(Ord. 81-23-213, 8-4-1981; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 20-15, 9-29-2020)
§ 1-19-8.211. GASOLINE STORAGE TANKS WITH A CAPACITY BETWEEN 270 GALLONS AND
1,100 GALLONS AS AN ACCESSORY USE ON FARM LOTS AND IN THE GC, LI AND GI
DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to gasoline storage tanks with a
capacity between 270 gallons and 1,100 gallons as an accessory use on farm lots
in the GC, LI and GI Districts.
   (A)   The minimum lot size shall be 40,000 square feet.
   (B)   The storage tank shall be placed aboveground with a capacity not to
exceed 1,100 gallons.
   (C)   The storage tank shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from a well or
as provided in §
1-6-50 (Wellhead Protection Ordinance), whichever is greater.
   (D)   The storage tank must have a minimum setback of 25 feet from all
property lines.
   (E)   The storage tank shall be governed by the International Building Code
2006 as amended concerning storage tanks, and the National Fire Protection
Association 30, as amended.
   (F)   Storage tanks shall have 100% catchment basin, or double-walled
containment and a spill protection overfill alarm.
   (G)   Shall comply with §
1-6-50 Wellhead Protection Ordinance.
(Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.212 LIMITED ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS IN THE RC, A, R1, R3, R5, R8,
R12, R16, VC, MXD, PUD, AND MX DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to limited accessory dwelling units in
the RC, A, R1, R3, R5, R8, R12, R16, VC, MXD, PUD, and MX districts.
   (A)   Only 1 limited accessory dwelling unit ("ADU") may be created on a
lot.
   (B)   A limited accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed within single-
family dwellings, in an accessory structure, or built as a separate accessory
structure on a single-family lot.
   (C)   The owner of the property must reside in the principal dwelling or in
the accessory dwelling unit.
   (D)   There must be at least 1 additional parking space provided for the
limited accessory dwelling unit. On-street parking may be utilized to meet this
requirement.
   (E)   The limited accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 1,000 square feet
in size, excluding decks, porches, patios or other items that are not part of
the primary footprint of the accessory dwelling unit. An accessory dwelling
unit greater than 1,000 square feet shall be reviewed as a special exception
under §
1-19-8.321.
   (F)   A limited accessory dwelling unit located in an accessory structure or
built as a separate accessory structure must comply with the accessory
structure requirements of §
1-19-8.240(B).
   (G)   ADUs are intended to serve ongoing housing needs of county residents.
Short term rental of ADUs in the nature of extended stay hotels, Airbnbs, or
seasonal temporary housing is not permitted.
   (H)   The owner of the principal residence shall file an annual statement
with the Zoning Administrator verifying that conditions under which the limited
accessory dwelling unit was granted remain the same.
   (I)   If the ownership of the lot changes, the subsequent owner must provide
a statement as to the continued use and eligibility of the accessory dwelling
unit.
   (J)   If the Zoning Administrator, after consultation with appropriate
County staff, determines that the limited accessory dwelling unit is not in
compliance with the above provisions as well as all safety, health, and
environmental standards, approval of the accessory dwelling unit may be revoked
pursuant to §
1-19-2.210.
(Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 11-28-594, 11-22-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 18-16, 8-21-2018; Bill No. 20-10, 7-21-2020)
§ 1-19-8.213. TEMPORARY MOBILE HOME.
   The Zoning Administrator may approve a request for a temporary mobile home
in the RC, A, or R-1 districts where the following provisions are met:
   (A)   The mobile home shall be occupied by an immediate member of the family
owning and residing on the subject lot.
   (B)   The occupant of either the mobile home or principal dwelling must have
a physical or mental condition or excessive age which requires constant care
and attention. The physical or mental condition or excessive age shall be
certified by a physician licensed within the State of Maryland and submitted to
the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   The lot must contain no less than 40,000 square feet of area in the RC
and A districts and no less than 80,000 square feet of area in the R-
1 district.
   (D)   Only single-wide mobile homes will be permitted.
   (E)   The mobile home shall:
      (1)   Meet the setback requirements for the district;
      (2)   Be located to the rear of the principal dwelling in the R-
1 district;
      (3)   Be placed so as to minimize the visual impact on the neighborhood;
and
      (4)   Be placed on the property only after a site plan has been approved
by the Zoning Administrator.
   (F)   The application for temporary mobile home approval shall include the
name and address of each person owning property adjacent to the subject
property. The Zoning Administrator shall notify all adjacent property owners
whether separated by streets, railroads, or other rights-of-way of the
application for temporary mobile home approval. The Zoning Administrator shall
approve or deny the application for a temporary mobile home not less than 30
days after notification of adjacent property owners.
   (G)   The renting of rooms under §
1-19-8.240 will not be permitted in conjunction with a temporary mobile home.
   (H)   The owner shall file an annual report with the Zoning Administrator
verifying that conditions remain the same under which the temporary mobile home
was granted.
   (I)   If the Zoning Administrator determines that the temporary mobile home
is not in compliance with the above provisions as well as all safety, health,
and environmental standards, approval may be revoked pursuant to §
1-19-2.210.
(Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.214. CLASS 8 FARM BREWERY LICENSE HOLDER AS AN ACCESSORY USE TO A
COMMERCIAL ROADSIDE STAND IN THE RC, A, R1, R3, VC, MX AND GC DISTRICTS.
   The Zoning Administrator may approve a request for a Class 8 farm brewery
license holder to conduct limited activities as an accessory use to a
commercial roadside stand in the RC, A, R1, R3, VC, MX and GC zoning districts
where the following requirements are met:
   (A)   The holder of a Class 8 farm brewery license under the Annotated Code
of Maryland may sell and deliver beer in accordance with the terms and
approvals of that license.
   (B)   Outdoor promotional events and activities allowed under the Class 8
farm brewery license shall require a temporary outdoor activity permit, except
in the residential zoning districts wherein temporary use permits shall not be
issued.
(Ord. 14-26-681, 11-20-2014)
§ 1-19-8.220. ACCESSORY USE OF A CREMATORY.
   (A)   Crematory operations are permitted as an accessory use to cemetery/
memorial gardens or funeral home. Animal incinerator operations are permitted
as an accessory use to cemetery/memorial garden in the A District.
   (B)   Crematory and animal incinerator operations as an accessory use to a
cemetery/memorial gardens requires a minimum lot size of 15 acres.
   (C)   Crematory and animal incinerator operations as an accessory use to a
cemetery/memorial gardens requires all yard setbacks be a minimum of 50 feet.
   (D)   Crematory and animal incinerator operations must comply with all state
and federal regulations including all licensing requirements.
(Ord. 07-34-474, 11-6-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-
2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.230. ACCESSORY USES IN THE AGRICULTURAL OR RESOURCE CONSERVATION
DISTRICTS.
§ 1-19-8.230.1. LIMITED FUNERAL ESTABLISHMENT ACCESSORY TO A SINGLE-FAMILY
DETACHED DWELLING IN THE RC ZONING DISTRICT.
   (A)   The proposed use must meet the definition of limited funeral
establishment as provided in §
1-19-11.100.
   (B)   The limited funeral establishment includes activities associated with
the practice of mortuary science but shall not include the practice of funeral
direction as defined by the Md. Code Ann., Health Occupations Article, Title 7,
Maryland Morticians and Funeral Directors Act.
   (C)   The limited funeral establishment shall not include activities
associated with cemetery/memorial garden, crematory, stone monument sales, or
funeral home.
   (D)   The limited funeral establishment shall be conducted on a minimum of 5
acres.
   (E)   Minimum setbacks and height are as required in §
1-19-6.100 for a single-family detached residential use in the RC Zoning
District.
   (F)   No retail sales or service other than the practice of mortuary science
shall be conducted on the site.
   (G)   The business must be conducted by a full- time resident of the
property.
   (H)   One nonresident employee (full-time or part- time) is permitted to
work on the premises.
   (I)   There shall be no exterior evidence other than the sign as required by
Title 10 Subtitle 29 Chapter 3, Section 3, Code of Maryland Regulations license
requirements for funeral establishments to indicate the building is being used
for any purpose other than that of a dwelling or an accessory structure.
   (J)   The operation shall not cause any odor, dust, smoke, vibration, or
noise that can be detected at or beyond the property line.
   (K)   There shall be no outside storage of equipment, material or stock.
(Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.230.2. CEMETERY/MEMORIAL GARDEN ACCESSORY TO A PLACE OF WORSHIP IN THE
RC DISTRICT.
   The following provisions shall apply to a cemetery/memorial garden accessory
to a place of worship in the RC District.
   (A)   A cemetery/memorial garden shall not be located within the FEMA
floodplain, flooding soils, or wet soils.
   (B)   Minimum lot area, lot width, yard setbacks, and height requirements
are the same as required for open space uses in §
1-19-6.100.
   (C)   The subject property shall have frontage and access on a paved public
road.
   (D)   The requirements of §
1-19-7.200 of this Code shall be met.
(Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.230.3 CHILD CARE CENTER/ NURSERY SCHOOL ACCESSORY TO A PLACE OF
WORSHIP IN THE A AND RC ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to a child care center/nursery school
as an accessory use to a place of worship in the A and RC zoning districts:
   (A)   A child care center/nursery school shall be an accessory use within a
building utilized for a place of worship.
   (B)   The child care center/nursery school shall not utilize more than 20%
of the building floor area on the particular lot on which such child care
center is located.
   (C)   The minimum size of a child care center/nursery school shall be
determined per child as required under Maryland law.
   (D)   All recreation and open space shall be provided in accordance with
state law for outdoor activity area. Play areas provided must be fully fenced.
   (E)   The child care center/nursery school shall be operated not for profit.
(Ord. 10-04-539, 3-11-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.230.4. FUNERAL HOME ACCESSORY TO A CEMETERY/MEMORIAL GARDEN IN THE A
DISTRICT.
   The following provisions shall apply to a funeral home as an accessory use
to a cemetery/memorial garden in the A District:
   (A)   A funeral home as an accessory use to a cemetery/memorial garden shall
only be allowed where the cemetery/memorial garden lot size is not less than 25
acres; and
   (B)   The cemetery/memorial garden shall have frontage on and direct access
to a roadway with at least a collector status, as designated on the County
Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 13-25-653, 10-31-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.240. ACCESSORY USES ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Customary accessory uses permitted on residential properties include
the following.
      (1)   Accommodations for bona fide servants or guests, including
unattached guest houses.
      (2)   (a)    Keeping of not more than 9 domestic animals; however, a
commercial stable or kennel is not an accessory use. Farm parcels are exempt
from this limitation.
         (b)   Keeping of farm animals in residential districts on a lot
containing 3 acres or more provided no pens, stalls or runs will be located
closer than 50 feet of any lot line, unless approved as a limited agricultural
activity as provided in §
1-19-5.310 and §
1-19-8.325.
      (3)   Recreation facilities, such as swimming pools or tennis courts,
located on residential lots, if the use of the facilities is restricted to
occupants of the principal use and guests for whom no admission or membership
fees are charged, or such facilities occur on a lot adjoining the principal use
and both uses are under the same ownership.
      (4)   Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool shed, or
similar building or other structure.
      (5)   Home occupations.
         (a)   General home occupation standards. All home occupations shall
comply with the following conditions.
            1.   There will be no exterior evidence, other than a permitted
sign, to indicate that the building is being used for any purpose other than
that of a dwelling or an accessory structure.
            2.   No retail sales or services, other than goods grown, produced
or assembled on the premises, shall be conducted on the premises; however,
retail sales of products not produced on the premises are permitted when these
sales are only incidental to and part of the primary function of the business.
As a home occupation, antique shops in the A and RC Zoning Districts shall be
permitted to conduct retail sales in accordance with the remaining requirements
set forth in this chapter.
            3.   Additional off-street parking will be provided in accordance
with the requirements set forth by use in §
1-19-6.220. If there is a question as to the use and corresponding parking, the
Zoning Administrator shall make the determination.
            4.   The home occupation shall not cause any odor, dust, smoke,
vibration, noise, or electromagnetic interference which can be detected at or
beyond the property line.
            5.   There will be no outdoor storage of equipment, material, or
stock.
            6.   There will be no storage on the premises of explosives or
highly flammable or extremely hazardous materials as defined by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
            7.   The business must be conducted by a full-time resident of the
property.
            8.   Home occupations located on properties utilizing a common
drive shall be required to give notice of home occupation use to adjoining
property owners by registered or certified mail.
            9.   Any interior structural alterations to accommodate the home
occupation will require the issuance of a building permit.
            10.   Cannabis dispensary, cannabis growing facility, and cannabis
processing facility are not permissible home occupation uses.
         (b)   Home occupation with "no impact." Home occupations with "no
impact" are a permitted accessory use upon completion of home occupation survey
form in the Department of Planning and Development Review. Home occupation
owners must comply with the general home occupation standards and the following
conditions.
            1.   No more than 5 business- related vehicle visits per week at
the premises, excluding delivery vehicles, are permitted when the business is
located on a local roadway as specified in the Comprehensive Plan. When located
on a collector roadway, no more than 5 business-related vehicle visits per day
at the premises, or no more than 20 per week, whichever is greater, excluding
delivery vehicles, are permitted. There will be no limit on the number of
business-related vehicle visits to a residence when located on an arterial
roadway. Deliveries are only permitted by public or private delivery services
that customarily make residential deliveries.
            2.   No nonresident employees (full-time or part-time) are
permitted to work on the premises.
            3.   No more than 600 square feet of an accessory structure may be
used for business purposes. There is no limit to the amount of square footage
which can be utilized within the principal structure, provided the home
occupation remains incidental to the residential use. For parcels of 10 acres
or greater in size, the size of accessory structures to be used may be enlarged
by special exception after giving due consideration to setbacks, size and
location of structure and its impact on the adjoining properties.
            4.   More than 1 home occupation with no impact may be conducted on
the premises; however, the combined business-related impact of the home
occupations shall not exceed the limits established in items (b)1.-3. above.
            5.   "No impact" home occupations may be permitted in all types of
residential structures.
         (c)   Home occupation with "minor impact." Home occupations with minor
impact must obtain a zoning certificate through the Department of Permits and
Inspections. Home occupation owners must comply with the general home
occupation standards in subsection (5)(a) and the following conditions.
            1.   No more than 2 business- related vehicle visits per day nor
more than 10 visits per week at the premises, excluding delivery vehicles, are
permitted when the business is located on a local roadway as specified on the
Comprehensive Plan. When located on a collector roadway, no more than 5
business-related vehicle visits per day at the premises, or no more than 20 per
week, whichever is greater, excluding delivery vehicles, are permitted. There
will be no limit on the number of business-related vehicle visits to a
residence when located on an arterial roadway. Deliveries are only permitted by
public or private delivery services that customarily make residential
deliveries.
            2.   No more than one nonresident employee (full-time or part-time)
is permitted to work on the premises.
            3.   In residential and conservation zoned parcels, no more than
600 square feet of an accessory structure may be used for home occupation
purposes. This square footage may increase to 1,200 square feet in the
agricultural zone and on lots over 5 acres in the Resource Conservation (RC)
Zone. There is no limit to the amount of square footage which can be utilized
within the principal structure, provided the home occupation remains incidental
to the residential use. For parcels of 10 acres or greater in size, the size of
accessory structures to be used may be enlarged by special exception after
giving due consideration to setbacks, size and location of structure and impact
on the adjoining properties.
            4.   More than 1 home occupation with minor impact may be carried
out on the premises; however, the combined business-related impact of the home
occupations shall not exceed the limits established in items (C)1.-3. above.
            5.   Home occupations with minor impact shall be permitted within
townhouse, condominium, multiplex or apartment dwellings except that vehicle
visits shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
      (6)   Professional offices which:
         (a)   Are located in the same building as the domicile of the
professional practitioner or in an accessory structure existing as of March 28,
1997; and
         (b)   Do not employ more than 2 assistants; and
         (c)   Do not substantially change the character or appearance of the
dwelling or accessory structure.
      (7)   The rental of rooms to no more than 2 persons by a resident family.
      (8)   Radio or television antenna.
      (9)   The parking of no more than 2 school buses driven by resident(s).
   (B)    An accessory structure shall be limited in size when located on a
residentially zoned property to the following:
      (1)   The total square footage of all floors of the accessory structure
shall not exceed that of the dwelling;
      (2)   Except as provided in subsection (B)(3) below, the footprint of an
accessory structure may not exceed the greater of:
         (a)   One-half of the footprint of the principal dwelling; or
         (b)   Six hundred square feet.
      (3)   One (1) accessory structure located on a Residential-1 (R-1) zoned
property may exceed the footprint limits of subsection (B)(2) above, provided
that the footprint of that accessory structure does not exceed 2000 square
feet, and provided that the lot size equals or exceeds 20,000 square feet.
      (4)   The square footage allowed for business purposes in an accessory
structure shall be 600 square feet.
      (5)   Accessory structures shall not exceed 70% of the maximum height
allowed for the principal permitted use, except as otherwise provided within
this chapter.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af9691cbec4604828c677875c7c627f7b6eb5f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3607.gif]
 
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-47(C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 79-19-145, 8-7-1979; Ord. 80-24-176,
8-26-1980; Ord. 92-19-054, 8-18-1992; Ord. 94-28-123, 12-8-1994; Ord. 95-28-
152, 12-5-1995; Ord. 97-05-183, 3-18-1997; Ord. 98-02-204, 2-3-1998; Ord. 08-
26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord.
14-05-660, 5-22-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 23-21, 11-21-2023)
§ 1-19-8.250. ACCESSORY USES IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
§ 1-19-8.250.1. CUSTOMARY ACCESSORY USES.
   Customary accessory uses are permitted in Commercial or Industrial
Districts, including the following.
   (A)   Vending machines.
   (B)   The storage of goods normally carried in stock, used in, or produced
by commercial or industrial uses, unless the storage of particular goods is
prohibited under the district regulations.
   (C)   Incidental repair facilities, unless expressly prohibited under
applicable district regulations.
   (D)   Limited retail sales may be permitted for any manufacturing plant or
warehouse in the Limited Industrial and General Industrial Districts, provided
that the products sold are:
      (1)   Manufactured on the site;
      (2)   Parts or accessories to products manufactured on the site or
elsewhere; or
      (3)   Stored or distributed either by the owner or lessee of the site.
   (E)   It is further provided that not more than 25% of the floor area of the
first floor of the main building, which is used for the manufacturing, storage
or distribution of products, may be used for the retail sales of articles made,
stored or distributed on the premises.
      (1)   Service facilities are limited to repair and/or service of products
manufactured, stored, or distributed by the owner or lessee of the site.
      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit the operation
of general retail sales business other than provided in this subsection.
      (3)   Off-street parking for limited accessory retail uses must comply
with the requirements of §
1-19-6.220.
   (F)   Guardhouses, provided that:
      (1)   It is determined through the site plan approval process that the
guardhouse will provide controlled vehicular and/or pedestrian access to the
site and that controlled access to the site is necessary and appropriate for
security purposes in connection with and in consideration of the nature of the
primary use on the site;
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provisions relating to accessory
structures, the guardhouse may be located anywhere on a lot, including a
panhandle, provided that a 6-foot setback is maintained from any lot line;
      (3)   The guardhouse shall be situated in a location with adequate
setbacks so as to minimize conflict with off-site traffic, existing or proposed
driveways, septic fields and utilities, and shall accommodate other existing
site features, rights-of- way, easements, and/or other uses; and
      (4)   In addition to the site plan requirements of §§
1-19-3.300 and
1-19-3.300.4, the site plan shall include architectural drawings, show
necessary utility connections and water and sewer infrastructure and easements,
indicate the effect of the controlled access on the vehicular flow into the
site and measures that will be taken to mitigate the interference of vehicles
stacking with off-site traffic.
(Ord. 77-1-78, §40-47(E), 1-24-1977; Ord. 84-21-318, 8-21-1984; Ord. 06-24-420,
6-20-2006; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-22-526, 7-14-2009; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.250.2. RESERVED.
§ 1-19-8.250.3. CHILD CARE CENTERS AS AN ACCESSORY USE IN THE ORI DISTRICT.
   In the ORI zoning district, a child care center may be an accessory use
within a building utilized for a permitted use and the child care center shall
not utilize more than 10% of the building floor area on the particular lot on
which such child care center is located. The minimum size of a child care
center shall be determined based on the amount of square footage required under
the State of Maryland Code of Regulations 10.05.01. All recreational and open
space shall be in accordance with state regulations. Play areas provided must
be fully fenced.
(Ord. 89-51-582, 8-15-1989; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 23-19, 10-17-2023)
§ 1-19-8.251. ACCESSORY USES IN THE MINERAL MINING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   A scuba facility is permitted as an accessory use in a mineral mining
district provided the scuba facility:
      (1)   Utilizes an existing, open-pit mine fed by a natural spring;
      (2)   Has setbacks a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines and 300
feet from all mineral extraction, hauling, and processing operations; and
      (3)   Receives approval from the Maryland Department of the Environment
prior to site plan approval.
   (B)   Other uses operated in conjunction with the mineral extraction such as
business office, caretaker or watchman structures, or facilities for the repair
of equipment used in conjunction with the mining operation are permitted as
accessory uses in a mineral mining district.
   (C)   All accessory uses in a mineral mining district shall occupy no more
than 25% of the land zoned mineral mining.
(Bill No. 19-16, 12-17-2019)
DIVISION 3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
§ 1-19-8.300. TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES REQUIRING SPECIAL EXCEPTION
APPROVAL.
   Temporary special exceptions may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals
for the uses indicated by the letter "T" in §
1-19-5.310 for each district. A temporary special exception permit is valid for
no longer than 1 year from date of issuance. Such temporary special exceptions
may be renewed upon approval of the Board. The applicant shall provide the
names and addresses of all adjoining property owners who shall be notified of
any renewal. If the temporary use shall exist for 5 years, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall hold a hearing prior to the issuance of the subsequent renewal.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-49(C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 79-19-145, 8-7-1979; Ord. 79-21-47,
9-5-1979; Ord. 81-28-218, 9-29-1981; Ord. 86-54-431, 10-28-1986; Ord. 91-02-
002, 3-22-1991; Ord. 97-03-181, 1-21-1997; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-
22-526, 7-14-2009; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.310. RESERVED.
§ 1-19-8.320. GENERALLY.
   General conditions for granting a special exception are outlined in §
1-19-3.210 of this Code, and specific requirements for different uses are
established in this article. The following are specific conditions which will
be met for each special exception. In addition, site development plan approval
shall be obtained through the applicable review process as provided in §§
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4 or as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The following
standards apply only to special exceptions.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 90-03-601, 2-6-1990; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.321. ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS GREATER THAN 1,000 SQUARE FEET.
   The following provisions shall apply to all accessory dwelling units greater
than 1,000 square feet in the RC, A, R1, R3, R5, R8, R12, R16, VC, MXD, PUD and
MX districts.
   (A)   Only 1 accessory dwelling unit ("ADU") may be created on a lot.
   (B)   Accessory dwelling units greater than 1,000 square feet shall be
allowed in single-family dwellings, in an accessory structure, or built as a
separate accessory structure, on a single-family lot.
   (C)   The owner of the property must reside in the principal dwelling or in
the accessory dwelling unit.
   (D)   There must be at least 1 additional parking space provided for the
accessory dwelling unit. On-street parking may be utilized to meet this
requirement.
   (E)   An accessory dwelling unit located in an accessory structure or built
as a separate accessory structure must comply with the accessory structure
requirements of §
1-19-8.240(B).
   (F)   ADUs are intended to serve ongoing housing needs of county residents.
Short term rental of ADUs in the nature of extended stay hotels, Airbnbs, or
seasonal temporary housing is not permitted.
   (G)   The owner of the principal residence shall file an annual statement
with the Zoning Administrator verifying that the conditions under which the
special exception was granted remain the same.
   (H)   If the ownership of the lot changes, the subsequent owner must provide
a statement to the Zoning Administrator as to the continuing use and
eligibility of the accessory dwelling unit.
   (I)   Due to the nature of this use, site plan approval can be granted by
the Zoning Administrator in lieu of the Planning Commission.
   (J)   An accessory dwelling unit meeting the provisions of §
1-19-8.212 shall be considered a permitted accessory use and therefore not
subject to this section.
(Ord. 91-33-033, 12-3-1991; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-
2011; Ord. 11-28-594, 11-22-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 18-16,
8-21-2018; Bill No. 20-10, 7-21-2020)
§ 1-19-8.322.1. PRIVATE AIRCRAFT LANDING AND STORAGE AREAS IN A, LI AND GI
DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to private aircraft landing and storage
areas in A, LI and GI Districts.
   (A)   Minimum lot size: 25 acres.
   (B)   Principal user: owner of parcel.
   (C)   Intensity of use: no more than 2 aircraft may use the airfield or
storage area.
   (D)   Aircraft: limited to those which at 95°F require a maximum of 1,800
feet or less of runway surface as recommended by the specific aircraft
manufacturers.
   (E)   Clear zone: must be provided at both approach and departure end of
runway. Such zone shall be a symmetrical trapezoid with a length of 1,000 feet
and with the parallel sides being 176 feet (adjacent to end of runway) and 317
feet respectively. Such zone shall be provided as specified herein unless
modified in accordance with Maryland Aviation Administration Guidelines and
approved by the Zoning Administrator. No structures are permitted within the
clear zone. The clear zone must be under the ownership of the airfield owner.
   (F)   Area of operation: no operation will be permitted within 100 feet of a
property line, or 1,000 feet of any public or private institution devoted to
education or human care.
   (G)   Use limited: the airfield will not be for the use of instruction or
training.
   (H)   The facility, activities, and aircraft operators shall meet all
applicable federal and state regulations and licensing requirements.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-5), 1-24-1977; Ord. 13-25-653, 10-31-2013; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.322.2. PRIVATE-COMMERCIAL USE AIRCRAFT LANDING AND STORAGE AREAS IN A,
LI AND GI DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to private-commercial use aircraft
landing and storage areas in A, LI and GI Districts.
   (A)   Minimum lot size: 100 acres.
   (B)   Principal user: owner of parcel.
   (C)   In the Agricultural Zoning District the owner of the property must
reside in the principal dwelling.
   (D)   Intensity of use: no more than 12 aircraft may use the airfield or
storage area. The Board of Appeals may reduce the maximum number of aircraft,
to a number less than 12, in an effort to minimize adverse effects of the
operation on surrounding properties.
   (E)   Aircraft: limited to those which at 95°F require a maximum of 1,800
feet or less of runway surface as recommended by the specific aircraft
manufacturers.
   (F)   Clear zone: must be provided at both approach and departure end of
runway. Such zone shall be a symmetrical trapezoid with a length of 1,000 feet
and with the parallel sides being 176 feet (adjacent to end of runway) and 317
feet respectively. Such zone shall be provided as specified herein unless
modified in accordance with Maryland Aviation Administration Guidelines and
approved by the Zoning Administrator. No structures are permitted within the
clear zone. The clear zone must be under the ownership of the airfield owner.
   (G)   Area of operation:
      (1)   No operation will be permitted within 100 feet of a property line,
or 1,000 feet of any public or private institution devoted to education or
human care.
      (2)   Hangars constructed after November 10, 2013 shall be located at
least 200 feet from any property line adjacent to a residential use or
residentially zoned property.
   (H)   Use limited:
      (1)   The airfield will not be for the use of instruction or training.
      (2)   Commercial business operations open to the general public such as
sale or leasing of aircraft, maintenance operations, chartering, or skydiving
are prohibited.
   (I)   The facility, activities, and aircraft operators shall meet all
applicable federal and state regulations and licensing requirements.
   (J)   Operation or storage of jet fixed wing aircraft at this facility is
prohibited.
(Ord. 13-25-653, 10-31-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.323. CHILD CARE CENTER/ NURSERY SCHOOL IN THE A DISTRICT.
   The following provisions shall apply to a child care center/nursery school
in the A District:
   (A)   The child care center/nursery school shall be operated not for profit
within buildings or structures on premises which are owned or leased by an
existing, or with final site development plan approval, permitted institutional
use and which premises are regularly used by the institutional use, or are
located on premises owned or leased by an institutional use adjacent to
premises regularly used by the institutional use. Institutional use for the
purposes of this section shall be limited to the uses as provided in §
1-19-5.310 Use Table.
   (B)   The minimum size of a child care center/ nursery school shall be
determined based on the amount of square footage required under Maryland law.
   (C)   All recreation and open space shall be provided in accordance with
state law for outdoor activity area. Play areas provided must be fully fenced.
   (D)   The minimum lot area, lot width, and setback requirements shall be as
provided in §
1-19-6.100 for an institutional use, in the Agricultural Zoning District.
   (E)   The maximum number of children in attendance at any one time shall be
established by the Board of Appeals based on the following:
      (1)   A maximum of one pupil per 1,000 square feet of lot area.
   (F)   The maximum building floor area devoted to the child care center/
nursery school shall be established by the Board of Appeals.
   (G)   The subject property shall have frontage and access on a paved public
road.
   (H)   A child care center/nursery school meeting the provisions within §
1-19-8.230.3 shall be considered a permitted accessory use and therefore not
subject to this section.
(Ord. 10-04-539, 3-11-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.324. AUTO REPAIR BODY AND FENDER SHOPS IN VC DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to auto repair body and fender shop in
VC Districts.
   (A)   The minimum lot area, lot width, yard setbacks and height, shall be as
provided for in the table in §
1-19-6.100.
   (B)   No outdoor work or outdoor storage is permitted.
   (C)   Parking requirements are as established in §§
1-19-6.200 through
1-19-6.240 of this Code.
   (D)   Petroleum, flammable liquid, or hazardous substance storage tanks
shall have 100% catchment basin, or double-walled containment and a spill
protection overfill alarm. This does not apply to propane or natural gas tanks.
   (E)   Shall comply with §
1-6-50 Wellhead Protection Ordinance at site plan approval.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-8), 1-24-1977; Ord. 07-16-456, 5-15-2007; Ord. 07-27-
467, 6-19-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.325. LIMITED AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY IN THE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   A limited agricultural activity shall be permitted in the residential
districts where the following provisions are met:
   (A)   The keeping of farm animals in conjunction with a single family
residence, on lots less than 3 acres, shall be permitted in residential
districts provided that no pens, stalls, or runs will be located closer than 50
feet of any lot line (see also §
1-19-8.240).
   (B)   All criteria in §
1-19-3.210 and all other provisions of this chapter shall be met.
   (C)   The limited agricultural activity shall not cause any odor, dust,
smoke, vibration or unreasonable noise which can be detected at or beyond the
property line.
(Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.326. BED AND BREAKFAST IN THE RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to bed and breakfasts in the
residential zoning districts.
   (A)   The maximum stay for guests shall not exceed 30 days during a period
of 6 months and no 1 visit shall exceed more than 14 consecutive days.
   (B)   Meal service shall be limited to overnight guests only.
   (C)   There shall be no separate kitchen or cooking facilities in any
guestroom.
   (D)   The use of amenities, such as a swimming pool, shall be restricted to
use by guests of the establishment.
   (E)   Minimum lot size and setbacks shall be as provided in §
1-19-6.100 for a single family dwelling in the district where the use is
allowed.
   (F)   Parking shall not be located within required setback areas.
(Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.327. RUSTIC RETREAT/CAMP/OUTDOOR CLUB IN RC AND A DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to rustic retreat/camp/outdoor club in
RC and A Districts.
   (A)   A minimum 10 acre lot size is required.
   (B)   Rustic retreat/camp/outdoor club with a planned capacity of 100
persons or more must have a minimum of 50 feet of frontage with access on a
public road having a minimum pavement width of 20 feet to the nearest paved
road. If the planned capacity is under 100 persons, there will be no specific
road requirements other than the provisions contained in §
1-19-3.210(B)(5).
   (C)   The project will be designed so that an overall density of 3 persons
per acre is not exceeded.
   (D)   Total impervious surface area for buildings and parking shall be
limited to 4,000 square feet for every 1 acre of lot area up to a maximum of:
      (1)   3 acres for lots of 100 acres or less; or
      (2)   4 acres for lots between 101 and 250 acres; or
      (3)   5 acres for lots of 251 acres or larger.
   (E)   The requirements for all yards is 50 feet.
   (F)   One freestanding on-premises identification sign no more than 25
square feet in area and subject to a minimum setback of 15 feet is permitted.
   (G)   Parking shall be limited to that number required by zoning ordinance
and co-located adjacent to the access drive. An increase in the number of
parking spaces may be granted by the Planning Commission where the applicant
can demonstrate need based on characteristics of the proposed use, hourly
parking demand studies published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers
(ITE), or other documentation as approved by the Planning Commission. Parking
approved beyond that number required by zoning ordinance shall be constructed
of pervious materials.
   (H)   Permanent residential occupancy shall be limited to the resident
owner, manager, or caretaker.
   (I)   Caretaker residence(s) is permitted as an accessory use to a rustic
retreat/camp/outdoor club where a specific plan is presented and approved by
the Board of Appeals.
   (J)   Within the RC District:
      (1)   The requirements of §
1-19-7.200 of this Code will be met.
   (K)   Insofar as practical at the time of site development plan review, the
landscape shall be preserved in its natural state by:
      (1)   Minimizing tree and soil removal or disturbance;
      (2)   Retaining existing tree lines, forest buffers, and rock formations
reducing visual impacts of development on surrounding properties and rights-of-
way;
      (3)   Siting buildings to protect and enhance the visual relationship
between buildings and the natural terrain;
      (4)   Reducing visual prominence of proposed structures by building
adjacent to woodland edges and not in the center of open space areas on a
proposed site;
      (5)   Avoiding building on ridge lines, unless alternative site locations
are unavailable and existing forest buffers can be retained to reduce visual
impacts;
      (6)   Opening up views only through selective tree and limb removal
rather than clear cutting.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-11), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 95-02-
126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-
23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.328. RESERVED.
§ 1-19-8.329. CHILD CARE CENTERS OR NURSERY SCHOOLS IN R-1, R-3, R-5, R-8, AND
LI DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to child care centers or nursery
schools in R-1, R-3, R-5, R-8, and LI Districts.
   (A)   Child care centers or nursery schools which are operated by a
nonprofit organization in buildings or structures on premises which are owned
or leased by a religious organization and which premises are regularly used as
a place of worship, or are located on premises owned or leased by a religious
organization adjacent to premises regularly used as a place of worship, or are
used for private parochial educational purposes, are a permitted use not
requiring grant of special exception approval.
   (B)   Special exception child care center or nursery school requires a
minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet with minimum lot width of 100 feet
except in the LI District which requires a minimum lot area of 20,000 square
feet with a minimum lot width of 200 feet.
   (C)   Yard setback requirement is 25 feet from all property lines except in
the LI District which requires a yard setback requirement of 40 feet.
   (D)   The maximum attendance at a child care center or nursery school at any
1 time shall be as follows:
      (1)   One pupil per 1,000 square feet of lot area in R-1, R-3 residential
zoning;
      (2)   One pupil per 500 square feet of lot area in R-5, R-8 residential
zoning;
      (3)   The minimum size of a child care center or nursery school in the LI
District shall be determined based on the amount of square footage required
under the State of Maryland Code of Regulations 10.05.01.
   (E)   All recreational and open space shall be in accordance with state
regulations. Play areas provided must be fully fenced.
   (F)   The subject property must have frontage and access on a paved public
road.
   (G)   In the LI District, the maximum allowable height for a child care
center shall be 30 feet.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-12), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 89-51-
582, 8-15-1989; Ord. 95-02-126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-
21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.330. CHIP AND PUTT GOLF COURSE.
   The following provisions shall apply to chip and putt golf courses.
   (A)   The minimum lot size shall be 5 acres.
   (B)   A minimum setback of 50 feet shall be established from all property
lines. However, the Board of Appeals may increase the setbacks or require
additional screening or buffering where deemed appropriate due to the adverse
impact on adjacent zoning or uses.
   (C)   The lot must have road frontage on a minimum 20-foot-wide paved public
road, and the Board of Appeals must determine that the road system is adequate
to serve the site for the intended use.
   (D)   Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of 2 spaces for each
hole plus 1 space for each employee.
   (E)   Only security lighting will be permitted on-site.
   (F)   Signage will be determined in accordance with §
1-19-6.320 (G) of this Code.
   (G)   Reasonable hours of operation will be determined by the Board of
Appeals as part of its approval process.
(Ord. 92-22-057, 10-6-1992; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.331. LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR IN THE A DISTRICT.
   The following provisions shall apply to landscape contractors in the A
District.
   (A)   A combined total of no more than 10,000 square feet of principal and
accessory structures shall be permitted. When a landscape contractor use
operates in conjunction with a retail or wholesale nursery use, all square
footage provisions are calculated separately.
   (B)   Total impervious surface area for parking and storage of equipment
exterior to any structures shall be limited to 40,000 square feet. When a
landscape contractor use operates in conjunction with a retail or wholesale
nursery use, all square footage provisions are calculated separately.
   (C)   Lot size, setback and height requirements are the same as other
natural resource uses.
   (D)   The parking requirements of §§
1-19-6.200 through
1-19-6.230 of this Code will be met; however, no parking area is permitted
within the required yard setback.
   (E)   Any proposed exterior lighting will be reviewed and approved by the
Board of Appeals. Such lighting will not cause glare onto adjacent properties.
   (F)   One freestanding sign no more than:
      (1)   Fifteen feet in height;
      (2)   Twenty-five square feet in area per face;
      (3)   Fifty square-feet total face area is permitted, subject to the
normal setback requirement for natural resource uses.
   (G)   The subject property must have frontage and access on a paved public
road, with a minimum pavement width of 20 feet and have access to at least a
collector roadway as designated on the County Comprehensive Plan which shall be
built to said classification requirements or shall be within ½ mile of at least
an arterial designated roadway.
   (H)   Petroleum, flammable liquid, or hazardous substance storage tanks
shall have 100% catchment basin, or double-walled containment and a spill
protection overfill alarm. This does not apply to propane or natural gas tanks.
   (I)   Shall comply with §
1-6-50 Wellhead Protection Ordinance at site plan approval.
   (J)   All equipment and materials shall be screened from adjacent properties
and public roads with plantings of evergreens, at least 5 feet in height, or a
fence of equal height.
   (K)   A vehicle circulation plan shall be submitted indicating adequate turn
radius is provided both to and from the subject property as well as for vehicle
movement within the site for all proposed vehicle and equipment being used.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-1), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 95-02-
126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 07-16-456, 5-15-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-
21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.332. COMMUNICATION TOWERS IN RC AND A DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to communication towers in RC and A
Districts.
   (A)   The tower height may exceed the maximum height permitted within the RC
and A Districts after a determination by the approving body that its visual
profile and appearance would make no substantial change in the character of the
area, provided, however, that in no event shall the maximum allowed tower
height exceed 199 feet.
   (B)   All applications for a special exception shall include:
      (1)   Computer modeling information used in selecting the site;
      (2)   Listing of alternative sites considered and why not selected;
      (3)   Photographs of the existing conditions of the site and area;
      (4)   Photo documentation that a balloon test has taken place at the
proposed site location.
   (C)   All applications for a tower shall be accompanied by a non-binding 5
year plan of the applicant or the locating provider, showing the existing and
proposed communications network within the county.
   (D)   A NEPA (National Environmental Policy Act) checklist prepared in
accordance with section 106 of NEPA shall be provided as part of all
applications.
   (E)   The applicant must publicize the proposal, using a block advertisement
of a size acceptable to staff, which includes a map showing the site and a 1
mile radius and must hold an informational meeting in the area of the tower
within 2 weeks after submitting the application. Written notice of such meeting
shall be provided to all abutting property owners of the property on which the
site is located and any homeowners/community associations within the 1 mile
radius.
   (F)   Setbacks for communications towers shall be as follows: setback from
all property lines shall be a distance not less than 1 foot for every foot of
tower height, but in no case less than 300 feet from any adjoining residential
structure. This setback distance may be modified by the Board of Appeals.
   (G)   The zoning certificate issued for a special exception shall be valid
for a period of 5 years from the date that the decision of the Board of Appeals
is signed. This zoning certificate shall be renewed for additional 5 year
periods after review by the Board of Appeals at a regular meeting. The
following are the only grounds on which renewal of a certificate may be denied.
      (1)   The permittee has failed to comply with the conditions of the
special exception approval.
      (2)   The facility has not been maintained in a safe condition.
      (3)   The Board of Appeals determines that the use of the tower for
wireless communications has ceased for a period of 6 months.
   (H)   All special exception approvals must also comply with the requirements
of §
1-19-8.420.2.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-16), 1-24-1977; Ord. 95-02-126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 99-14-
241, 11-23-1999; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.333. COUNTRY INNS IN RC AND A DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to country inns in RC and A Districts.
   (A)   The minimum lot size will be 1 acre with minimum setbacks being the
same as that required for a single-family dwelling in an A District.
   (B)   No parking will be permitted within the required setback areas.
   (C)   The property will have frontage and access on a paved public road.
   (D)   They shall be located only within a structure that exists on January
24, 1977. Conversion of existing structures may include the expansion of such
structures; however, the existing external appearance of the structure must be
maintained although it may be upgraded, repaired or expanded.
   (E)   One freestanding sign no more than 15 feet in height and 25 square
feet in area is permitted and shall be subject to the normal setback
requirement for natural resources uses.
   (F)   Within the RC District, the requirements of §
1-19-7.200 of this Code will be met.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-17), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 95-02-
126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-
23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.334. FARM EQUIPMENT SALES OR SERVICE, FEED OR GRAIN MILLS IN THE A
DISTRICT OR AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS PROCESSING IN A AND RC DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to farm equipment sales or service,
feed or grain mills in the A District or agricultural products processing in A
and RC Districts.
   (A)   The minimum lot size setbacks and height are the same as required for
natural resource uses.
   (B)   The subject property must have frontage and access on a paved public
road.
   (C)   One freestanding sign is permitted and will be no more than 15 feet in
height and 25 square feet in area and subject to the normal setback requirement
for natural resource uses.
   (D)   The parking requirements of §§
1-19-6.200 through
1-19-6.230 of this Code shall be met, except that parking areas will be
permitted within the setback areas.
   (E)   Within the RC District, the requirements of §
1-19-7.200 of this Code will be met.
   (F)   Petroleum, flammable liquid, or hazardous substance storage tanks
shall have 100% catchment basin, or double-walled containment and a spill
protection overfill alarm. This does not apply to propane or natural gas tanks.
   (G)   Shall comply with §
1-6-50 Wellhead Protection Ordinance at site plan approval.
   (H)   The following provisions shall apply to farm equipment sales or
service in the A District:
      (1)   Parking shall not be located within required setback areas.
      (2)   Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential uses or
residential zoning districts with plantings of evergreens, at least 5 feet in
height, or a fence of equal height provided to screen the parking area.
      (3)   The property must have frontage and access on an arterial roadway
as designated in the County Comprehensive Plan and built to said classification
requirements.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-6), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 95-02-
126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 07-16-456, 5-15-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-
21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.335. RESERVED.
§ 1-19-8.336. RESERVED.
§ 1-19-8.337. NONGOVERNMENTAL ELECTRIC SUBSTATION IN THE LI OR GI DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to a nongovernmental electric
substation in the LI or GI district.
   (A)   An application for a nongovernmental electric substation in the LI or
GI district shall include the following:
      (1)   A statement and full explanation of why the proposed
nongovernmental electric substation is necessary and how the facility conforms
to a long-range plan for expansion of service to Frederick County, if a long-
range plan exists, and how it will serve the public need for adequate,
reliable, and economic service.
      (2)   A vicinity map of appropriate scale depicting the tract of land
proposed for nongovernmental electric substation development including
surrounding properties and streets.
      (3)   Information indicating the general conditions of use and existing
improvements on adjoining properties within a 1,000-foot radius surrounding the
subject property.
      (4)   A description of the potential environmental and ecological
(including water, air, wildlife, and vegetation) effect of the proposed
nongovernmental electric substation on properties in the vicinity of the
proposed development.
      (5)   A description of the potential effect of the proposed
nongovernmental electric substation on the scenic, historic and recreational
values and residential property values, of properties in the vicinity of the
proposed development.
      (6)   An assessment of the impact from any electromagnetic fields to be
produced by the proposed development.
      (7)   An assessment of safety and reliability information including
planned provisions for emergency operations and shutdowns.
      (8)   Information as to how the applicant proposes to address the visual
impact of the nongovernmental electric substation on neighboring county
designated preservation areas, such as rural legacy areas, agricultural
preservation areas, critical farms, Monocacy scenic river, Appalachian Trail,
designated heritage areas, historic sites and sites eligible for designation.
      (9)   A description of methods to be utilized to mitigate any negative
waste disposal, air quality, visual or noise impacts associated with the
development or operation of the nongovernmental electric substation.
      (10)   Photographs of the existing conditions of the site and area.
      (11)   Photo-documentation that a balloon test has taken place at the
proposed site location.
      (12)   All applications for a nongovernmental electric substation before
the Board of Appeals shall be forwarded to the Historic Preservation Commission
for review and comment regarding the project's impacts on any historic
district, registered historic property, parks, designated heritage area, and
other historic or cultural resource.
   (B)   The following provisions shall apply to development of a
nongovernmental electric substation in the LI and GI districts:
      (1)   The minimum setback from all property lines is 50 feet, except as
provided in (C) below.
      (2)   Structures and parking are not permitted within the setback area.
      (3)   Screening, landscaping, and fencing of the nongovernmental electric
substation shall be provided as required by the Board of Appeals.
      (4)   The Board of Appeals may approve an increase in the maximum height
established in §
1-19-6.100, where the increased height does not have an adverse impact on
properties in the vicinity of the proposed nongovernmental electric substation.
   (C)   The Board of Appeals may, in addition to other requirements imposed
under this chapter and is hereby authorized to add to the specific requirements
any additional conditions that it may deem necessary to protect adjacent
properties, the general neighborhood, and its residents or workers. In
accordance with this authority: where properties within the 1,000-foot radius
are residentially zoned or contain residential land uses, the Board of Appeals
may increase the minimum required setback to minimize adverse effects of the
project on the surrounding residential properties.
   (D)   When approving a nongovernmental electric substation, the Board of
Appeals may authorize future changes not requiring further Board of Appeals
approval within a 10 year period of the initial special exception approval.
Such changes shall be limited to the addition, relocation, or modification of
foundations or equipment, or additions to existing buildings, within a fence
line approved by the Board of Appeals. The site plan must show initially
proposed and future buildings and structures as reasonably expected within 20
years or the foreseeable future.
   (E)   A reasonable effort shall be made by the applicant to contact and
inform area homeowner associations and community associations of the proposed
use together with an informational meeting.
(Ord. 12-23-618, 9-6-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.338. KENNELS, ANIMAL HOSPITALS OR VETERINARY CLINICS IN THE A AND VC
DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to commercial kennels, animal hospitals
or veterinary clinics in the A and VC Districts.
   (A)   The minimum lot area, lot width, yard setbacks and height, shall be as
provided for in the table in §
1-19-6.100.
   (B)   Operations will be conducted within a completely enclosed building, no
outside runs or kennels are permitted, except in the A District, and then
subject to a 150 foot minimum setback from all property lines.
   (C)   In the A District, the maximum number of animals permitted shall be
100.
   (D)   In the A District, one freestanding sign no more than 15 feet in
height and 25 square feet in area is permitted and shall be subject to the
normal setback requirement for natural resources uses.
   (E)   The subject property must have frontage and access on a paved public
road.
   (F)   Animal incinerators are permitted as an accessory use to an animal
hospital or veterinary clinic in the agricultural district only, and subject to
the following additional requirements:
      (1)   An animal incinerator shall be located only on a lot with a minimum
lot size of 5 acres where an animal hospital or veterinary clinic exists.
      (2)   The minimum setback from any property line for an animal
incinerator use shall be 50 feet.
      (3)   The property must have frontage and access on a paved public road,
with a minimum pavement width of 20 feet and minimum classification of
collector, as shown on the County Comprehensive Plan.
      (4)   An animal incinerator must comply with all applicable state and
federal regulations, including licensing requirements.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-9), 1-24-1977; Ord. 80-24-176, 8-26-1980; Ord. 82-19-
263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 95-02-126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 07-32-472, 7-17-2007; Ord. 08-26-
502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-
23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.339. NONGOVERNMENTAL UTILITY IN RC, A, R-1, R-3, R-5, R-8, R-12, R-16
AND VC DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to a nongovernmental utility in RC, A,
R-1, R-3, R-5, R-8, R-12, R-16 and VC Districts.
   (A)   Minimum setback from all property lines is 50 feet. Structures,
fencing or parking are not permitted within the setback area.
   (B)   Screening and landscaping is required as approved by the Board of
Appeals.
   (C)   Within the RC District, the requirements of §
1-19-7.200 of this Code will be met.
   (D)   When permitted in any residential district, a nongovernmental utility
shall have the exterior appearance of residential buildings and shall have
suitable landscaping, screen planting and fencing, deemed necessary by the
Board of Appeals.
   (E)   Provide information to indicate the general conditions of use and
existing improvements on adjoining properties within a 1,000-foot radius
surrounding the subject property.
   (F)   When approving a nongovernmental utility use, the Board of Appeals may
authorize future changes not requiring further Board of Appeals approval within
a 10 year period of the initial special exception approval. Such changes shall
be limited to the addition, relocation, or modification of foundations or
equipment, or additions to existing buildings, within a fence line approved by
the Board of Appeals. The site plan must show initially proposed and future
buildings and structures as reasonably expected within 20 years or the
foreseeable future.
   (G)   A reasonable effort shall be made by the applicant to contact and
inform area homeowner associations and community associations of the proposed
use together with an informational meeting.
   (H)   Tests to determine mitigation requirements. In the event the Board
determines to grant the special exception, the Board shall consider the
following areas to determine the extent that impact mitigation measures will be
required.
      (1)   The Board shall make findings that the proposed building or
structure at the location selected will not endanger the health and safety of
workers and residents in the community and will not substantially impair or
prove detrimental to neighboring properties.
      (2)   The Board shall make findings regarding adverse effects of the
project on the character of the surrounding area including impacts from sound,
light, visual appearance, impervious surfaces, traffic impacts, and on forest
and wildlife impacts.
      (3)   All applications for nongovernmental utilities before the Board
shall be forwarded to the Historic Preservation Commission for review and
comment. The Board shall consider comments from the Historic Preservation
Commission and shall make findings regarding the project's impacts on any
historic district, registered historic property, parks, designated heritage
area, and other historic or cultural resource. When there is a finding of
negative impact based upon evaluation of the above, the Board shall to the
maximum extent practicable require mitigation. Required mitigation may include
the construction of fences, barriers, mandatory setbacks, the surfacing of
access drives, shielding of lighting, or the establishment of buffers,
vegetative screening, or landscaping.
   (I)   All applications shall include information as to how the applicant has
addressed the visual impact of the nongovernmental utility on neighboring
county designated preservation areas, such as rural legacy areas, agricultural
preservation areas, critical farms, Monocacy scenic river, Appalachian Trail,
designated heritage areas, historic sites and sites eligible for designation.
   (J)   Provide photographs of the existing conditions of the site and area.
   (K)   Provide photo-documentation that a balloon test has taken place at the
proposed site location (for substations only).
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-13), 1-24-1977; Ord. 95-02-126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 00-28-
270, 9-7-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 12-23-618, 9-6-2012; Ord. 14-
23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.340. CIVIC COMMUNITY CENTER AND CIVIC SERVICE CLUB IN THE A DISTRICT,
AND PLACE OF WORSHIP IN THE RC DISTRICT.
   The following provisions shall apply to civic community center and civic
service club in the A District, and place of worship in the RC District.
   (A)   The minimum lot area, lot width, yard setbacks and height shall be as
provided for institutional uses in the table in §
1-19-6.100.
   (B)   The parking requirements of §§
1-19-6.200 through
1-19-6.240 of this Code shall be met except that parking areas will not be
permitted within the setback areas.
   (C)   Parking shall be limited to that number required by zoning ordinance.
An increase in the number of parking spaces may be granted by the Planning
Commission where the applicant can demonstrate need based on characteristics of
the proposed use, hourly parking demand studies published by the institute of
transportation engineering, or other documentation as approved by the Planning
Commission. Parking spaces approved beyond that number required by zoning
ordinance shall be constructed of pervious materials.
   (D)   The subject property must have frontage and access on a public road
with a minimum pavement width of 20 feet
   (E)   At the time of application a statement identifying all accessory uses
including hours of operation, frequency of activity, and average number in
attendance shall be submitted for review and approval by the Zoning
Administrator.
   (F)   Uses determined by the Zoning Administrator not to be a customarily
incidental accessory to a place of worship shall only be established where:
      (1)   The proposed use is allowed in the Resource Conservation Zoning
District as delineated in §
1-19-5.310; and
      (2)   Approval is received through the process provided for the proposed
use in the Resource Conservation Zoning District in §
1-19-5.310.
   (G)   Within the RC District, the requirements of §
1-19-7.200 of this Code will be met.
(Ord. 95-02-126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-
2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.341. PRIVATE SCHOOLS IN THE R-1, R-3, R-5, R-8, R-12, R-16, VC AND LI
DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to private schools.
   (A)   The minimum lot size and setbacks will be the same as normally
required for institutional uses.
   (B)   The lot must have frontage and access on a public road with a minimum
pavement width of 20 feet to the nearest paved road.
   (C)   The maximum attendance (number of students physically present at any 1
time) may not exceed 1 student per 970 square feet of lot area, except in the
LI District where there shall be no maximum attendance limitation.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-15), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 83-15-
282, 6-7-1983; Ord. 95-02-126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 96-26-178, 12-17-1996; Ord. 08-
26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.342. PROFESSIONAL OFFICES IN R-5, R-8, R-12 AND R-16 DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to professional offices in R-5, R-8, R-
12 and R-16 Districts.
   (A)   They will be located only within end units of townhouse structures or
the lowest residential floor of multifamily structures.
   (B)   Professional office parking spaces in addition to those required for
the dwelling units, will meet the requirements of §§
1-19-6.200 through
1-19-6.240 of this Code unless the operating hours are limited to 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
   (C)   No retail or wholesale trade sold or stored on the premises.
   (D)   No more than 3 persons engaged in the operation of the office.
   (E)   The professional office may display 1 exterior identification sign,
attached flat against the structure and no more than 4 square feet.
Freestanding signs are not permitted, however, interior identification signs
are permitted.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-8), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.343. RESERVED.
§ 1-19-8.344. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY IN THE AGRICULTURAL ZONING
DISTRICT.
   A recreational vehicle storage facility shall be permitted in the
Agricultural Zoning District where the following provisions are met:
   (A)   A recreational vehicle storage facility shall be permitted only on a
parcel that is adjacent to or adjoining a parcel on which a conforming
recreational vehicle sales and service center is located. For the purposes of
this subsection, a property separated from a recreational vehicle sales and
service center by a transportation or utility right-of-way (whether fee simple
estate or lesser interest in realty) is deemed to be adjacent along the length
of such right-of-way.
   (B)   No structure for the storage of recreational vehicles is permitted.
   (C)   No recreational vehicle sales are permitted on the parcel containing
the recreational vehicle storage facility.
   (D)   The storage facility may include one accessory building for the
purpose of maintenance of recreational vehicles stored on-site. The building
shall not exceed 5,000 square feet to accommodate the maintenance of stored
recreational vehicles, related offices, and equipment.
   (E)   Maintenance activities (including all equipment and supplies) shall be
conducted within a structure enclosed on at least 3 sides and screened from
public view on the fourth side, unless enclosed.
   (F)   Maintenance activities shall be conducted at least 100 feet from any
residential dwelling on adjacent properties. All other activities shall
maintain a minimum setback of 50' from all property lines. All structures shall
be setback a minimum of 50' from all property lines.
   (G)   Structures, parking, and recreational vehicles shall not be located
within the setback areas.
   (H)   A maximum height of 30'.
   (I)   A vehicle circulation plan shall be submitted indicating adequate turn
radius is provided both to and from the subject property as well as for vehicle
movement within the site for all proposed vehicles and equipment being used.
   (J)   The Board of Appeals may increase the minimum landscaping, buffering,
and screening as provided in § 1-19-6.400, to minimize the adverse effects of
the project on surrounding properties.
   (K)   Petroleum, flammable liquid, or hazardous substance storage tanks
shall have a 100% catchment basin, or double-walled containment and a spill
protection overfill alarm. This does not apply to propane or natural gas tanks.
   (L)   The use shall comply with §
1-6-50 (Wellhead Protection Ordinance) of the Frederick County Code at the time
of site development plan approval.
(Ord. 13-25-653, 10-31-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.345. RODEOS.
   (A)   The minimum area for a parcel to be granted the exception will be 25
acres.
   (B)   The maximum duration for each event shall be 3 consecutive calendar
days, with hours per event to be determined by the Board of Appeals.
   (C)   The number of events per year shall be established by the Board of
Appeals, but shall not exceed 25 per calendar year.
   (D)   The event may use artificial lighting during hours specified in the
Board's approval.
   (E)   One freestanding sign will be permitted on site for the rodeo
facility. Such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet in size or 15 feet in
height.
   (F)   The event may include concessions for food, drinks, and souvenirs at
the applicant's option.
   (G)   All setbacks shall be a minimum of 50 feet except when the use is
adjacent to a residential use property where the minimum setback from the
residential use property line shall be 150 feet.
   (H)   No parking will be permitted within the setback area.
   (I)   The property shall have frontage on and access to a paved road having
a minimum pavement width of 20 feet and minimum classification as an arterial
roadway on the County Comprehensive Plan.
   (J)   The Board of Appeals shall have authority to establish reasonable
hours of operation.
(Ord. 97-17-195, 12-2-1997; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.346. SCHOOL BUS PARKING.
   The following provisions shall apply to school bus parking facilities in the
RC, A, and VC Districts.
   (A)   A maximum of 5 school buses can be parked on the site.
   (B)   All school buses parked or stored outside of a structure shall be
screened from adjacent properties and roads with plantings of evergreens, at
least 5 feet high, or a fence of equal height.
   (C)   No school buses shall be parked or stored within the setback
requirements of 40 feet front yard, 50 feet side yard, and 50 feet rear yard.
   (D)   Adequate parking shall be provided on site for school buses and
drivers.
   (E)   The driveway or access to the school bus parking area shall be paved
by concrete, asphalt or stone surface.
   (F)   Only minor repairs to the provider's own school buses shall be
permitted. In no case shall body work, engine rebuilding, engine reconditioning
or collision services be permitted.
   (G)   A maximum of 550 gallons of fuel may be stored on the site, if
approved by the Board of Appeals, upon compliance with all applicable
environmental regulations and such fuel storage shall be set back a minimum of
50 feet from all property lines.
   (H)   Shall comply with §
1-6-50 Wellhead Protection Ordinance at site development plan review.
(Ord. 95-28-152, 12-5-1995; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-
2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.347. SAWMILL IN THE A AND RC DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to sawmill operations requiring special
exception approval in the A and RC Districts.
   (A)   A minimum lot size of 10 acres.
   (B)   Building setback shall be a minimum of 150 feet from property line.
    (C)   The holder of the special exception must maintain all applicable
valid federal, state and local permits.
   (D)   Conditions may be established regulating the operation of the use,
including, but not limited to, routing of trucks, total number of trucks, hours
of operations, volume of operation and dust control. Parking and maintenance of
trucks and other equipment and activities accessory to the operations must be
included within the application and will be subject to all conditions
established by the Board.
   (E)   The use shall comply with all applicable noise, dust, and other
pollutant standards set forth by federal, state and local regulations and at a
minimum shall comply with §
1-19-7.610 as it applies to the Limited Industrial (LI) District.
   (F)   The site shall have access to a collector or arterial roadway as
designated on the County Comprehensive Plan and shall be built to said
classification requirements.
   (G)   The site shall have a minimum of 80 feet of road frontage. Access to a
site via a panhandle is prohibited.
   (H)   No zoning certificate will be issued by the Zoning Administrator until
all applicable permits have been reviewed by the appropriate federal, state and
local agencies and with the understanding that the issuance of the
corresponding permits is only dependent upon the county issuance of the zoning
certificate.
   (I)   The use and zoning shall correspond to the County Comprehensive Plan
designation.
   (J)   Petroleum, flammable liquid, or hazardous substance storage tanks
shall have 100% catchment basin, or double-walled containment and a spill
protection overfill alarm. This does not apply to propane or natural gas tanks.
   (K)   The use shall comply with §
1-6-50 (Wellhead Protection Ordinance) at site plan development review.
   (L)   One freestanding sign of no more than 15 feet in height and 25 square
feet in area is permitted and shall be subject to the normal setback
requirement for natural resource uses.
(Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.348. SOLID WASTE OPERATION.
   The following provisions shall apply to solid waste operations requiring
special exception approval in Agricultural and General Industrial Districts.
   (A)   Minimum lot area, 10 acres.
   (B)   Building setback shall be 150 feet from property line.
   (C)   The holder of the special exception must maintain all applicable valid
federal, state and local permits.
   (D)   Conditions may be established regulating the operation of the use,
including, but not limited to, routing of trucks, total number of trucks, hours
of operations, volume of operation and dust control. Parking and maintenance of
trucks and other equipment and activities accessory to the operations must be
included within the application and will be subject to all conditions
established by the Board.
   (E)   The use shall comply with all applicable noise, dust, and other
pollutant standards set forth by federal, state and local regulations and at a
minimum in the Agricultural District shall comply with §
1-19-7.610 as it applies to the Limited Industrial (LI) District.
   (F)   The site shall have access to a collector or arterial roadway as
designated on the Comprehensive Plan and shall be built to said classification
requirements.
   (G)   The site shall have a minimum of 80 feet of road frontage. Access to a
site via a panhandle is prohibited.
   (H)   No zoning certificate will be issued by the Zoning Administrator until
all applicable permits have been reviewed by the appropriate federal, state and
local agencies and with the understanding that the issuance of the
corresponding permits is only dependent upon the county issuance of the zoning
certificate.
   (I)   The use and zoning shall correspond to the Comprehensive Plan
designation.
   (J)   Petroleum, flammable liquid, or hazardous substance storage tanks
shall have 100% catchment basin, or double-walled containment and a spill
protection overfill alarm. This does not apply to propane or natural gas tanks.
   (K)   Shall comply with §
1-6-50 (Wellhead Protection Ordinance) at site plan approval.
(Ord. 91-32-032, 11-19-1991; Ord. 07-16-456, 5-15-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.349. RESERVED.
§ 1-19-8.350. SPRING WATER HARVESTING IN THE RC DISTRICT.
   The following provisions shall apply to spring water harvesting uses in the
RC District.
   (A)   The minimum lot area, lot width, yard setbacks and height shall be as
provided for natural resource uses in the table in §
1-19-6.100.
   (B)   Operations will be conducted within a completely enclosed building,
subject to a 150 foot minimum setback from all property lines.
   (C)   An engineer certified hydro-geologic study must be provided to assess
the impact of the operation on the groundwater resources of all properties
within 2,000 feet of the subject site.
   (D)   The subject property must have frontage and access on a paved public
road suitable for the amount and type of vehicle traffic proposed. Spring water
harvesting of less than 10,000 gallons per day does not need frontage to a
paved road, but if an easement is used, agreement from the grantor or users of
the easement must be obtained prior to approval, and operations shall be
limited to straight chassis trucks of a gross vehicle weight not exceeding
66,000 pounds and a maximum of 3 loads per day.
   (E)   Within the RC District, the requirements of §
1-19-7.200 of this Code will be met.
   (F)   One freestanding sign is permitted and will be no more than 15 feet in
height and 25 square feet in area and subject to the normal setback requirement
for natural resource uses.
(Ord. 95-02-126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 97-08-186, 5-22-1997; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.351. RESERVED.
§ 1-19-8.352. STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS.
   The following provisions shall apply where it is proposed to store flammable
liquids in excess of 60,000 gallons in the General Commercial and Highway
Service Districts.
   (A)   The minimum lot size shall be 40,000 square feet.
   (B)   The flammable liquids may be stored above or under ground.
   (C)   The storage shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any well when
underground or as provided in §
1-6-50 (Wellhead Protection Ordinance), whichever is greater.
   (D)   That the containers shall comply with the setback requirements of §
1-19-7.610(J)(4).
   (E)   Shall be governed by the International Building Code 2003 as amended
concerning storage tanks, and the National Fire Protection Association 30 as
amended.
   (F)   Flammable liquid storage tanks shall have 100% catchment basin, or
double-walled containment and a spill protection overfill alarm. This does not
apply to propane or natural gas tanks.
   (G)   Shall comply with §
1-6-50 (Wellhead Protection Ordinance) at site plan approval.
(Ord. 83-14-281, 6-7-1983; Ord. 07-16-456, 5-15-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.353. TENNIS CLUBS IN R-3, R-5, R-8, R-12 AND R-16 DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to tennis clubs in R-3, R-5, R-8, R-12
and R-16 Districts.
   (A)   No minimum lot size is required and setbacks are as follows.
      (1)   Front yard, same as for a single-family dwelling in the district in
which the club is located.
      (2)   Rear yard, 25 feet.
      (3)   Side yard, equal to height of building; if no building exists, the
side yard is 15 feet.
   (B)   No parking is permitted within required setback areas.
   (C)   Signs will be attached flat against the building. Sign size will be
limited to no more than 25 square feet on each face of the building. If there
is no building, then 1 freestanding sign no more than 10 feet in height, 16
square feet in total area and subject to a 15 foot setback requirement will be
permitted.
   (D)   All lighting will be directed away from or screened from adjoining
properties.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-10), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 08-26-
502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.354. TENT CAMPGROUND IN A AND RC DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to tent campgrounds in A and RC
Districts.
   (A)   A minimum lot size of 10 acres.
   (B)   Travel trailer or other residential vehicle is not permitted.
   (C)   The only permitted permanent structure for residential occupancy will
be occupied by the resident owner or manager.
   (D)   The subject property must have frontage on and access to a paved
public road.
   (E)   Density will be no more than 1 camp site per acre.
   (F)   One freestanding off-premise sign is permitted on each access road,
the sign will be no more than 25 square feet in area, 15 feet in height, and
will not be located on or in a public right-of-way.
   (G)   Parking shall be limited to that number required by zoning ordinance
and co-located adjacent to the access drive. An increase in the number of
parking spaces may be granted by the Planning Commission where the applicant
can demonstrate need based on characteristics of the proposed use, hourly
parking demand studies published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers
(ITE), or other documentation as approved by the Planning Commission. Parking
approved beyond that number required by zoning ordinance shall be constructed
of pervious materials.
   (H)   Within the RC District, the requirement of §
1-19-7.200 of this Code shall be met.
   (I)   Insofar as practical at the time of site development plan review, the
landscape shall be preserved in its natural state by:
      (1)   Minimizing tree and soil removal or disturbance;
      (2)   Retaining existing tree lines, forest buffers, and rock formations
reducing visual impacts of development on surrounding properties and rights-of-
way;
      (3)   Siting buildings to protect and enhance the visual relationship
between buildings and the natural terrain;
      (4)   Reducing visual prominence of proposed structures by building
adjacent to woodland edges and not in the center of open space areas on a
proposed site;
      (5)   Avoiding building on ridge lines, unless alternative site locations
are unavailable and existing forest buffers can be retained to reduce visual
impacts;
      (6)   Opening up views only through selective tree and limb removal
rather than clear cutting.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-3), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 95-02-
126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-
23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.355. SHOOTING RANGE/CLUB - TRAP, SKEET, RIFLE, ARCHERY IN THE RC AND A
DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to shooting range/club - trap, skeet,
rifle, archery in the RC and A Districts.
   (A)   Indoor shooting ranges and structures associated with shooting ranges
shall be located at least 250 feet from all property lines and public ways and
450 feet from occupied structures. Permanent structures shall be limited to
those customarily associated with the principal use of the property as a
shooting range.
   (B)   The setback of all structures not used for shooting ranges shall
comply with the setbacks for principal structures in the districts in which
they are located.
   (C)   The property must have a minimum of 20 feet frontage on a public road
or adequate easement to be determined by the Board of Appeals.
   (D)   Shooting range/club - trap, skeet, rifle, archery with a planned
capacity of 100 persons or more must have frontage and access on a paved public
road. If the planned capacity is under 100 persons, there will be no specific
road requirements other than the provision contained in §
1-19-3.210(B)(5).
   (E)   A site development plan shall be submitted to and approved by the
Planning Commission.
   (F)   Within the RC District, the requirements of §
1-19-7.200 of this Code will be met.
   (G)   Outdoor discharging of firearms or release of arrows shall not be
permitted within 500 feet of any property line.
   (H)   Shooting ranges shall be constructed to eliminate danger to persons or
property from flying projectiles. The area between the firing point and target
shall be baffled, fenced, or otherwise shielded so that the fired projectiles
cannot escape the range area. Safety design should be in accordance with
accepted standards and practices.
   (I)   Shooting ranges shall practice lead containment/collection of
projectiles with best management practices for the individual site in
accordance with nationally accepted standards to maximize containment.
   (J)    The minimum lot size shall be 10 acres.
   (K)   The facility shall be designed so that topographic features of the
site are used to enhance safety, minimize firearm noise, and maximize lead
containment.
   (L)   Manner and times of operation shall be approved by the Board of
Appeals.
   (M)   One freestanding sign no more than 15 feet in height and 25 square
feet in area is permitted and shall be subject to the normal setback
requirement for natural resources uses.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-72(A-13), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 85-6-
338, 1-8-85; Ord. 95-02-126, 3-2-1995; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-21-
525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.356. FACILITY FOR FUNCTIONS.
   The following provisions shall apply to a facility for functions under §
1-19-8.600.
   (A)   A property which has been listed on the Frederick County Register of
Historic Places may apply for a special exception under this section.
   (B)   The minimum lot size and setbacks shall be as follows:
Zoning Minimum Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Zoning         Minimum Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
RC             10 acres         300       50         50        50
AG             10 acres         200       40         50        50
R1 through R16 10 acres         200       40         50        50
VC             None             65        ***        10****    40
GC             12,000           100       25         8         25
MX             12,000           75        20         8         35
LI             40,000           100       25         15        40
GI             40,000           100       25         15        40
ORI            40,000           100       25         15        40
***      For development within the Village Center Zoning District see
also §§ 1-19-7.500(B)(2) and (3)
****   Or as determined under §§ 1-19-7.500(B)(3), whichever is greater
 
   (D)   The maximum height shall be the height of the existing primary
historic structure, or as otherwise determined by the Historic Preservation
Commission. For new structures to be built on the historic site, or additions
to a historic structure, the maximum height shall be determined by the Historic
Preservation Committee, but in no event shall the height exceed 10% more than
the height of the primary historic structure on the site.
   (E)   Parking will not be permitted within the required setback areas.
   (F)   (1)   In the VC District, all events shall occur only within the
existing historic structure, which must be currently listed on the Frederick
County Register of Historic Places. Conversion of existing historic structures
or sites may include the expansion of structures or alterations to the historic
site. However, the existing external appearance of a historic structure must be
maintained, although it may be upgraded, repaired, or expanded with approval of
the Historic Preservation Commission as provided in
Chapter 1-23 of this Code. New structures that are proposed to be erected on
the historic site must receive approval of the Historic Preservation Commission
as well as all other approvals required under this chapter.
      (2)   In all other zoning districts, the events shall occur only in an
existing historic structure or at a designated historic site, each of which
must be currently listed on the Frederick County Register of Historic Places.
Conversion of existing historic structures or sites may include the expansion
of structures or alterations to the historic site. However, the existing
external appearance of a historic structure must be maintained, although it may
be upgraded, repaired, or expanded with approval of the Historic Preservation
Commission as provided in
Chapter 1-23 of this Code. New structures that are proposed to be erected on
the historic site must receive approval of the Historic Preservation Commission
as well as all other approvals required under this chapter.
   (G)   Each event may begin no earlier than 10:00 a.m. and end no later than
10:00 p.m. The hours of operation may be further reduced if determined
necessary to protect nearby properties from noise, light, or other
disturbances. This determination will be based on the site and neighborhood
characteristics, such as distance between the activities and the property
lines, proximity to neighboring homes, topography, existing and proposed
screening, and other aspects that may increase or decrease the potential
impacts to the neighborhood.
   (H)   The location where music will be played and the time by which music
must end shall be identified in the application. Music shall not exceed 40
decibels as measured at the property lines. Outdoor music may be prohibited
when it is determined to be detrimental to nearby property owners. Indoor music
may be restricted or prohibited where sound is not adequately contained within
the walls of the structure and impacts adjoining properties.
   (I)   The maximum number and location(s) of potential tents must be
identified in the application. Audible and visual impacts to adjoining
properties and the neighborhood shall be considered in determining if the
number and location of the tent(s) are appropriate and where outdoor activities
may occur.
   (J)   A traffic management plan shall be provided by the applicant that
demonstrates how vehicles will safely enter and exit the site during the peak
hours of operation with minimal interruption to the traffic flow on the public
street.
   (K)   The owner of the property must enter into a Facility for Functions
Memorandum of Understanding (Facility MOU) with the County, which shall be
negotiated with Division staff and approved by the Zoning Administrator based
on the Board of Appeals' conditions of approval of the special exception, prior
to making application for site plan approval. The Facility MOU must include:
      (1)   A statement that the owner agrees to comply with any limitations
and conditions of approval established by the Board of Appeals and agrees to
comply with all of the requirements for establishing the use as outlined under
subsection (O) below.
      (2)   An acknowledgment by the owner that failure to comply with the
provisions of the Facility MOU at any time, whether prior to or after the
establishment of the use, will be a violation of
Chapter 1-19 of the County Code and that enforcement action may be taken by the
County in accordance with §
1-19-2.110 and §
1-19-2.210 through §
1-19-2.230.
      (3)   An agreement by the owner to notify the Zoning Administrator prior
to the sale or transfer of the property.
      (4)   A condition stating that, if a facility for functions changes
ownership, the new owner will enter into a Facility MOU in accordance with
subsection (K) prior to engaging in any facilities for functions activities,
and apply for and receive an occupancy permit.
      (5)   A statement that the owner agrees to work with the Zoning
Administrator to resolve noise, light, and traffic related complains that are
received by the County from neighboring property owners.
   (L)   All exterior changes to the structures and/or site must be approved by
the Historic Preservation Commission.
   (M)   One freestanding sign no more than 15 feet in height and 25 square
feet in area is permitted and shall be subject to the normal setback
requirement in the zoning district.
   (N)   Within the RC District, the requirements of §
1-19-7.200 of this Code will be met.
   (O)   After a special exception and Facility MOU has been approved under
this section the following requirements must be satisfied prior to establishing
the use:
      (1)   A site development plan application must be filed with the County;
      (2)   The site plan must be reviewed by the Historic Preservation
Commission;
      (3)   Any proposed alterations to the exterior of structures or the site
must receive approval from the Historic Preservation Commission in accordance
with
Chapter 1-23 of the County Code;
      (4)   The Planning Commission will review and approve the site plan if it
meets the requirements under this chapter; and
      (5)   The use may be established on the property only after site
development plan approval from the Historic Preservation Commission and the
Planning Commission, and after all necessary Certificates of Appropriateness
and permits have been applied for, approved, and a Certificate of Occupancy
issued.
(Bill No. 22-12, 7-26-2022)
§ 1-19-8.357. RESERVED.
Editor's note:
   Ord. 08-07-483, adopted April 10, 2008, repealed § 1-19-396, which section
pertained to nursing homes in A districts, and which was derived from Ord. 81-
2-192, adopted January 27, 1981, and Ord. 94-29-124, adopted December 20, 1994.
DIVISION 4. PERMITTED USES
§ 1-19-8.400. ASPHALT PLANTS IN THE GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   The establishment of new asphalt plants (also commonly referred to as
blacktop, bituminous concrete or asphaltic concrete) in the General Industrial
District shall be permitted only if:
   (A)   The stack of the plant is set back a minimum of 750 feet from any
property not zoned GI or LI. Setback of stack from property zoned GI or LI
shall be not less than 50 feet; however, when the stack height exceeds 50 feet,
then the setback on all sides shall be equal to or greater than the height of
the stack;
   (B)   Outdoor storage will be permitted. Storage items adjacent to areas not
zoned GI or LI shall not be stacked higher than the height of the berming and
landscaping;
   (C)   All on-site areas regularly traveled by vehicles and not occupied by
the plant, stockpiles or landscaping shall be paved;
   (D)   The facility shall conform with all applicable performance standards
for industrial districts set forth in this chapter, including, but not limited
to §
1-19-7.610 and all applicable state and federal requirements.
(Ord. 94-17-112, 8-2-1994; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.401. SOLAR FACILITY COMMERCIAL IN THE LI OR GI DISTRICTS.
   The following design criteria shall apply to a Solar Facility, commercial in
the LI or GI districts.
   (A)   All applications shall include justification from the applicant as to
why the site was selected and a glint and glare analysis of the proposed solar
facility identifying the angle and height of reflection and the impacts upon
nearby properties, roadways and airports.
   (B)   The appearance and visual impact of the solar facility shall be
minimized by the use of screening.
   (C)   The applicant must comply with all applicable federal and state
regulations, including but not limited to obtaining a certificate of public
convenience and necessity from the Public Service Commission if required, and
in the removal and disposal of the solar facility and all of its components.
   (D)   All solar facilities and panel disconnects must be mapped and
registered with the Frederick County Division of Fire and Rescue Services.
   (E)   If for a period of 6 months, the solar facility ceases to generate
electricity or is disconnected from the electric grid, the approval will
terminate. The property owner shall remove the solar facility within 90 days
after termination. The property owner shall ensure the solar facility removal
and disposal by posting an acceptable monetary guarantee with the County on
forms provided by the office of the Zoning Administrator. The guarantee shall
be for an amount equal to a cost estimate approved by the Zoning Administrator
for the removal and disposal of the solar facility, plus a 15% contingency. If
a guarantee for the cost of removal and disposal of the solar facility is
required by and provided to a state entity, the Zoning Administrator may accept
documentation of the posting of the guarantee with the state entity as
satisfaction of this requirement.
(Bill No. 17-07, 5-16-2017)
§ 1-19-8.402. CRITICAL DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES.
   The following provisions apply to critical digital infrastructure
facilities.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   The critical digital infrastructure use is established to provide a
location for facilities consisting of one or more buildings used primarily for
the storage, management, processing, and transmission of digital data, which
houses computer and/or network equipment, systems, servers, appliances, and
other associated components related to digital data operations.
   (B)   Size and location.
      (1)   Critical digital infrastructure use may be established only where:
         (a)   The tract of land where the critical digital infrastructure use
is proposed has a zoning designation of Limited Industrial (LI) or General
Industrial (GI);
           (b)   The tract of land where the Critical Digital Infrastructure
use is proposed is within the Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone
(CDI-OZ); and
         (c)   Critical digital infrastructure may only be established on a
tract of land that abuts land that is zoned residential or is designated
residential on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use map if the front, side, and rear
yard setbacks set forth in §
1-19-6.100 for a critical digital infrastructure facility are increased to 500
feet from any property line abutting such residentially zoned or designated
land.
      (2)   The tract of land proposed to be utilized for a critical digital
infrastructure use may not be located within a priority preservation area
(PPA), a rural legacy area (RLA), or a treasured landscape management area.
      (3)   The tract of land proposed to be utilized for a critical digital
infrastructure use may not have a designation of no planned service (NPS) in
the Frederick County Water and Sewerage Plan.
      (4)   Additional size and location criteria. Applicants must demonstrate
that:
         (a)   The visual impact of the project on the viewshed, surrounding
properties, public roadways, including roadways with rustic, scenic, or
historic designation, and historic sites will be avoided or minimized to the
maximum extent practicable;
         (b)   Schools, college and universities, daycare centers, health care
facilities, houses of worship, residences, and other non-industrial uses in the
vicinity have been identified and negative impacts to these uses will be
avoided or minimized to the maximum extent practicable;
         (c)   Fragile ecosystems and watersheds in the vicinity have been
identified, and negative impacts will be avoided or minimized to the maximum
extent practicable;
         (d)   Negative impacts to local, state, and federal recreational
amenities and private parks, as defined in §
1-19-11.100, will be avoided or minimized to the maximum extent practicable;
and
         (e)   The siting of the proposed use(s) will not have a negative
impact that disproportionately affects overburdened communities or underserved
communities as those terms are defined in Md. Code Ann., Environmental Article,
§ 1-701.
   (C)   Bulk regulations.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may approve a reduction to, but not
elimination of, the required yard setbacks in §
1-19-6.100 between adjoining critical digital infrastructure facilities during
the site plan review process, if the Planning Commission finds that reducing
the setbacks:
         (a)   Increases the size and usability of open space areas;
         (b)   Increases the landscape buffer areas along other adjacent
property lines with different land uses;
         (c)   Provides additional buffer areas for environmentally sensitive
areas or resources; or
         (d)   Facilitates compliance with the design criteria listed under §
1-19-8.402(B).
      (2)   Notwithstanding any reduction approved by the Planning Commission,
the distance between structures must comply with applicable building code
requirements.
   (D)   Design requirements.
      (1)   Buildings must be predominantly designed and constructed to include
finishes and materials of consistent quality and design on all sides. All
building facades that are in public view must avoid the use of undifferentiated
facades and long, plain wall sections by including a combination of the
following design elements: change in building height, building step-backs or
recesses, windows, doors, changes in building material, patterns, textures,
colors, or use of accent materials. Architectural renderings or plans must be
submitted as part of the site development plan application for approval by
staff and the Planning Commission to assure that the appearance, type of
building materials, or other aspects of the building are consistent with the
purposes and intent of the critical digital infrastructure design requirements.
      (2)   Visual impacts of the critical digital infrastructure on designated
preservation areas, such as rural legacy areas, agricultural preservation
areas, critical farms, Monocacy scenic river, designated heritage areas,
historic sites, and sites eligible for historic designation, must be avoided or
minimized to the maximum extent practicable. A viewshed analysis must be
submitted as part of the site development plan application for approval by
staff and the Planning Commission to assure that visual impacts are avoided or
minimized to the maximum extent practicable through such means as building
placement, building materials, landscaping, and screening.
      (3)   Building entrances must be designed and oriented in terms of their
relationship to the human scale and must reflect this relationship through the
inclusion of human-scaled architectural elements.
      (4)   Refuse and recycling dumpsters, service doors, and mechanical
equipment must face away from roadways, pedestrian routes, and public areas.
      (5)   In order to minimize visibility from adjacent roads and adjacent
properties, ground level and roof top mechanical and electrical equipment,
power generators, water cooling and storage facilities, utility substations,
and other associated utility infrastructure to support sustained operations of
the infrastructure must be screened. This screening may be provided by a
principal building. Mechanical and electrical equipment not screened by a
principal building must be screened by a visually opaque fence, screen wall or
panel, parapet wall, or other visually opaque screen that must be constructed
of materials compatible with those used in the exterior architectural finishes
of the principal building.
      (6)   Staff shall refer site plans to the Architectural Review Committee,
if the committee exists in good standing, for review prior to the site plan
being scheduled for Planning Commission. The recommendations of the
Architectural Review Committee may be considered by the Planning Commission.
      (7)   In addition to meeting the requirements of §
1-19-6.400, the following landscaping, screening, and buffering requirements
must be met.
         (a)   Front yard(s) abutting a roadway must include a landscaped
buffer.
         (b)   Except where adjoining a critical digital infrastructure use,
side and rear yards must include a landscaped buffer.
         (c)   A landscaped buffer must include a four-season visual screen
resulting in multi-layered, staggered rows of overstory and understory trees
and shrubs that are a mix of evergreen and deciduous vegetation, with an
emphasis on species that are native to Frederick County.
         (d)   The minimum height of overstory trees within a landscape screen
or buffer at planting must be a minimum of 6 feet with a minimum caliper of 2
inches. The minimum height of understory trees and shrubs at the time of
planting must be 3 gallon or larger. Trees and shrubs larger than the minimum
sizes listed above will be required where the minimum planting sizes will not
provide adequate screening or buffering within 2 years. Vegetation used to
establish a visual screen shall not be trimmed so as to stunt upward and
outward growth or to otherwise limit the effectiveness of the visual screen.
         (e)   A berm, wall, or fence may be used in combination with
vegetation to satisfy the screening requirement where deemed appropriate by
County Staff and the Planning Commission. Walls and fences must be made of
quality materials and enhance rather than detract from the beautification of
the site. Walls and fences that are in public view must avoid long,
undifferentiated facades and long, plain sections by including a combination of
the following design elements: variations in height, step-backs or recesses,
changes in material, patterns, textures, colors, or use of accent materials.
         (f)   If security fencing is proposed, vegetative screening must be
placed between the fence and the public view. Fencing must be made of high
quality materials. Chain-link and similar woven metal or plastic fencing shall
not be used.
         (g)   If forest or hedgerows exist where screening or buffering is
required, it must be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and
supplemented with new plantings where necessary to provide the desired
screening or buffering.
         (h)   All landscaping, screening, and buffering must be maintained in
living condition.
         (i)   Applicant must submit a landscape, buffering, and screening plan
as part of the site plan application addressing the requirements and timing of
plantings. Screening and buffering must be installed as early in the
development process as possible. Occupancy shall not be granted if screening
and buffering requirements are not installed in accordance with the approved
site plan.
         (j)   The Planning Commission may approve a modification to the
landscaping, buffering, and screening standards where an alternate landscaping,
buffering, and screening plan is provided that meets the purpose and intent of
these design requirements.
      (8)   Parking, loading, and signage must be provided in accordance with §
1-19-6.200 through §
1-19-6.340.
      (9)   In addition to meeting the requirements of §
1-19-6.500, the following lighting requirements must be met:
         (a)   Pole mounted and building mounted lights must not exceed a
height of 18 feet.
         (b)   Lighting shall include elements that reduce negative impacts to
wildlife migration, nocturnal habits, and circadian rhythms, such as the
utilization of lights with amber or yellow tints instead of blue or white light
and the use of timers, motion detectors, and light-sensitive switches to
actively regulate the emission of light from light fixtures.
         (c)   The Planning Commission may require more restrictive lighting
standards where deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission.
      (10)   Bicycle rack requirements shall be in accordance with industrial
parks in table §
1-19-6.220 (H)(1).
      (11)   Critical digital infrastructure facilities must meet all criteria
found in §§
1-19-7.600 and
1-19-7.610.
   (E)   Subdivision and street frontage.
      (1)   Subdivision of lot(s) for critical digital infrastructure uses
shall comply with
Chapter 1-16 of the County Code.
      (2)   Where two or more lots are proposed for critical digital
infrastructure uses, the lot frontage requirement of §
1-19-4.520 may be met by construction of a private street subject to Planning
Commission approval and the following:
         (a)   The lot or parcel from which the new lot is being created has
fee-simple frontage on a public street.
         (b)   The private street connects directly to a public road.
         (c)   The private street will not serve any uses that would be
frequented by the general public.
         (d)   For the purposes of establishing bulk regulations (setbacks, lot
width, etc.), the measurements along the portion of the lot(s) fronting a
private street must be the same as established for public streets.
         (e)   The design of the private street must comply with
Chapter 1-16 of the County Code.
         (f)   Private streets may not create long, dead-end street networks
and must serve a limited number of lots and sites, as determined by the
Planning Commission.
         (g)   Private streets must be maintained by a property owner
association or similar organization.
         (h)   Easements, maintenance agreements, and covenants must be
provided to the County for review with the submission of a final plat, and must
be recorded by the applicant prior to lot recordation and the recording
reference noted on the final plat.
   (F)   Performance standards. These performance standards for critical
digital infrastructure facilities are intended to mitigate potential
detrimental effects on adjacent properties and the neighborhood. All
applications for site plan approval must be accompanied by a registered
engineer's certification that the use complies with all of the performance
standards. If, after occupancy of the structures, continuous or frequent (even
if intermittent) violations of the performance standards occur, and after
notice is given, bona fide and immediate corrective work is not performed which
successfully prevents the violation(s) from reoccurring, the Zoning
Administrator may suspend or revoke the Zoning Certificate and the Certificate
of Occupancy and require the operations and occupancy to immediately cease. The
Zoning Certificate and Certificate of Occupancy will be reinstated after the
property owner demonstrates to the Zoning Administrator's satisfaction, that
operation of the facilities is able to conform to these requirements.
      (1)   Noise.
         (a)   Noise must be measured with a sound level meter.
         (b)   The maximum sound pressure levels permitted from any source,
including but not limited to electrical equipment, air handlers, generators,
and other mechanical devices, measured within an adjacent property line, are
set forth below:
 
Sound Measured To                       Decibels Continuous Slow Meter
                                        Responses
Industrial uses                         70
Commercial uses                         64
Residential uses in any zoning district 55
Institutional uses                      55
All other uses                          55
 
         (c)   All applications for site plan approval must include a sound
study that is prepared by a qualified engineer with experience in environmental
acoustics. The purpose of the detailed study is to assess the impact of all
noise sources and determine the appropriate layout, design, and control
measures. The study must include:
            1.   Details of assessment methodology.
            2.   List of all air handlers, generators, and other mechanical
devices that are included in the sound evaluation, including manufactures
specifications.
            3.   Predicted sound levels for three scenarios:
               a.   All mechanical and electrical equipment required for normal
operation at 100% load.
               b.    Generator testing and maintenance.
               c.    Emergency scenario with all generators, mechanical
equipment, and electrical equipment operating at 100%.
            4.   When multiple buildings are proposed on the site plan
application, the study must include sound levels for each phase of building
construction to ensure that the sound levels listed in the table in (F)(1)(b)
above are met during all phases of buildout.
            5.   Summary of the results and recommended control measures.
         (d)   Within 6 months of the date of occupancy of any completed CDI
building, and biennially thereafter, actual sound levels for scenarios a and b
listed under (F)(1)(c)(3). above must be measured by a qualified engineer with
experience in environmental acoustics and a final sound level report must be
submitted to the county for review and approval. If actual sound levels exceed
the maximum sound pressure levels listed in (F)(1)(b) above, corrective actions
must be executed as soon as reasonably possible, but no later than 180 days
from the date of the submission of the report.
         (e)   The provisions of this section do not apply to:
            1.    Transportation vehicles not under the control of the use.
            2.   Occasionally used safety signals, warning devices, and
emergency pressure relief valves.
            3.   Temporary construction activity between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m.
            4.   Emergency and other exemptions identified in §
1-11-6(F).
      (2)   Vibration.
         (a)   No vibration may be produced which is transmitted through the
ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at any point beyond
the property line; nor may any vibration produce a particle velocity of 2
inches per second measured at or beyond the property line. This provision does
not apply between adjoining critical digital infrastructure facilities uses.
         (b)   All applications for site plan approval must include a vibration
impact study that is prepared by a qualified individual with experience in
vibration analysis.
         (c)   Within 6 months of the date of occupancy of any completed CDI
building, and biennially thereafter actual vibration levels must be measured by
a qualified individual and a vibration report must be submitted to the County
for review and approval. If vibration levels exceed the maximum listed in (F)
(2)(a) above, corrective action must be taken as soon as reasonably possible
but no later than 180 days from the date of the submission of the report.
      (3)   Generators.
         (a)   Generators must meet or exceed Tier 4 or equivalent emission
standards as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
         (b)   Generator testing shall be limited to Monday through Friday, 8:
00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Only one generator per building, or the minimum number
necessary to meet operational standards, may be tested at a time and for a
period not to exceed 60 minutes, unless federal or state law, rule or
regulation, or utility company restrictions prevent testing during such time.
         (c)   Generators must be installed at ground level.
         (d)   Stand-alone fuel storage tanks.
            1.   For the purposes of this section, fuel storage includes the
storage of all petroleum bases fuels, natural gas liquids, biofuels, and
liquids derived from other hyrdocarbon sources.
            2.   The storage tank shall be placed above ground with a capacity
not to exceed 20,000 gallons.
            3.   Only one storage tank is permitted per critical digital
infrastructure building.
            4.   The storage tank shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from a
well or as provided in §
1-6-50 of the County Code (Wellhead Protection Ordinance), whichever is
greater.
            5.   The storage tank shall be governed by the International Fuel
Gas Code concerning storage tanks, and the National Fire Protection Association
30 standards.
            6.   Storage tanks shall have 100% catchment basin, or double-
walled containment, and a spill protection overfill alarm.
            7.   Shall comply with §
1-6-50 of the County Code (Wellhead Protection Ordinance).
            8.   The storage tank must have a minimum setback of 100 feet from
all property lines.
            9.   Storage tanks must meet all applicable state and federal
regulations for above ground storage tanks.
         (e)   Fuel storage tanks attached to stationary equipment:
            1.   For the purposes of this section, fuel storage includes the
storage of all petroleum bases fuels, natural gas liquids, biofuels, and
liquids derived from other hydrocarbon sources.
            2.   Shall not have a capacity greater than 10,000 gallons per
attached storage tank.
            3.   The storage tank and stationary equipment shall be located a
minimum of 100 feet from a well or as provided in §
1-6-50 of the County Code (Wellhead Protection Ordinance), whichever is
greater.
            4.   The storage tank shall be governed by the International
Building Code 2006 as amended concerning storage tanks, and the National Fire
Protection Association 30, as amended.
            5.   Storage tanks shall have 100% catchment basin, or double-
walled containment, and a spill protection overfill alarm.
            6.   Shall comply with §
1-6-50 of the County Code (Wellhead Protection Ordinance).
            7.   The storage tank must have a minimum setback of 100 feet from
all property lines.
            8.   Storage tanks must meet all applicable State of Maryland and
federal regulations for above ground storage tanks.
(Bill No. 22-05, 3-15-2022; Bill No. 25-05, 5-20-2025; Bill No. 25-09, 9-2-
2025)
§ 1-19-8.403. CRITICAL DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE ELECTRIC SUBSTATION.
   The following provisions apply to critical digital infrastructure electric
substations:
   (A)   Size and location.
      (1)   Critical digital infrastructure electric substation use may be
established only where:
         (a)   The tract of land where the critical digital infrastructure
electric substation is proposed has a zoning designation of Limited Industrial
(LI) or General Industrial (GI); and
         (b)   The tract of land where the Critical Digital Infrastructure use
is proposed is within the Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone (CDI-
OZ).
      (2)   The tract of land proposed to be utilized for a critical digital
infrastructure electric substation use may not be located within a priority
preservation area (PPA), a rural legacy area (RLA), or a treasured landscape
management area.
      (3)   Additional size and location criteria. Applicants must demonstrate
the following:
         (a)   The applicant must demonstrate that the visual impact of the
project on the viewshed, surrounding properties, public roadways, including
roadways with rustic, scenic, or historic designation, and historic sites will
be avoided or minimized to the maximum extent practicable.
         (b)   The applicant must demonstrate that schools, colleges and
universities, daycare centers, health care facilities, houses of worship,
residences, and other non-industrial uses in the vicinity have been identified
and negative impacts to these uses will be avoided or minimized to the maximum
extent practicable.
         (c)   The applicant must demonstrate that fragile ecosystems and
watersheds in the vicinity have been identified, and negative impacts will be
avoided or minimized to the maximum extent practicable.
         (d)   The applicant must demonstrate that negative impacts to local,
state, and federal recreational amenities and private parks, as defined in §
1-19-11.100, will be avoided or minimized to the maximum extent practicable.
         (e)   The applicant must demonstrate that the siting of the proposed
use(s) will not disproportionately negatively impact overburdened communities
or underserved communities as those terms are defined in Md. Code Ann.,
Environmental Article, § 1-701.
   (B)   A critical digital infrastructure electric substation may only be
constructed for the purpose of providing power to critical digital
infrastructure facilities, and when a critical digital infrastructure facility
has received site plan approval from the Planning Commission. An application
for a critical digital infrastructure electric substation may be processed
concurrently with an application for a critical digital infrastructure
facility.
   (C)   A critical digital infrastructure electric substation may be connected
to another electrical system within the region. Any expansion of a critical
digital infrastructure electric substation for the purpose of supporting other
uses or users must follow the rules, regulations, and procedures applicable to
nongovernmental electric substation use.
   (D)   An application for a critical digital infrastructure electric
substation must include the following:
      (1)   Information indicating the general conditions of use and existing
improvements on adjoining properties within a 1,000-foot radius surrounding the
subject property.
      (2)   A description of the potential environmental and ecological
(including water, air, wildlife, and vegetation) effects of the proposed
critical digital infrastructure electric substation on properties in the
vicinity of the proposed development.
      (3)   An assessment of the impact on nearby properties from
electromagnetic fields to be generated by the critical digital infrastructure
electric substation.
      (4)   An assessment of safety and reliability, including provisions for
emergency operations and shutdowns.
      (5)   Information as to how the applicant proposes to address the visual
impact of the critical digital infrastructure electric substation on designated
preservation areas, such as rural legacy areas, agricultural preservation
areas, critical farms, Monocacy scenic river, designated heritage areas,
historic sites and sites eligible for historic designation.
      (6)   A description of methods to be utilized to mitigate any waste
disposal, air quality, visual or noise impacts associated with the development
or operation of the critical digital infrastructure electric substation.
   (E)    Design requirements.
      (1)   Landscaping, screening, and buffering.
         (a)   A landscaped buffer must include a four-season visual screen
resulting in multi-layered, staggered rows of overstory and understory trees
and shrubs that are a mix of evergreen and deciduous vegetation, with an
emphasis on species that are native to Frederick County.
         (b)   The minimum height of overstory trees within a landscape screen
or buffer at planting must be a minimum of 6 feet with a minimum caliper of 2
inches. The minimum height of understory trees and shrubs at the time of
planting must be 3 gallon or larger. Trees and shrubs larger than the minimum
sizes listed above will be required where the minimum planting sizes will not
provide adequate screening or buffering within 2 years. Vegetation used to
establish a visual screen shall not be trimmed so as to stunt upward and
outward growth or to otherwise limit the effectiveness of the visual screen.
         (c)   A berm, wall, or fence may be used in combination with
vegetation to satisfy the screening requirement where deemed appropriate by
County Staff and the Planning Commission. Walls and fences must be made of
quality materials and enhance rather than detract from the beautification of
the site. Walls and fences that are in public view must avoid long,
undifferentiated facades and long, plain sections by including a combination of
the following design elements: variations in height, step-backs or recesses,
changes in material, patterns, textures, colors, or use of accent materials.
         (d)   If security fencing is proposed, vegetative screening must be
placed between the fence and the public view. Fencing must be made of high
quality materials. Chain-link and similar woven metal or plastic fencing shall
not be used.
         (e)   If existing forest or hedgerows exist where screening or
buffering is required, it must be preserved to the maximum extent practicable
and supplemented with new plantings where necessary to provide the desired
screening or buffering.
         (f)   All landscaping, screening, and buffering must be maintained in
living condition.
         (g)   The Planning Commission may approve a modification to the
landscaping, buffering, and screening standards where an alternate landscaping,
buffering, and screening plan is provided that meets the purpose and intent of
this section.
         (h)   Applicant must submit a landscape, buffering, and screening plan
as part of the site plan application addressing the requirements and timing of
plantings. Screening and buffering must be installed as early in the
development process as possible. Occupancy shall not be granted if screening
and buffering requirements are not installed in accordance with the approved
site plan.
      (2)   Lighting, if provided, must comply with §
1-19-6.500, and light poles shall not exceed a height of 18 feet. The Planning
Commission may reduce lighting height(s) where deemed appropriate by the
Planning Commission.
      (3)   Noise.
         (a)   Noise will be measured with a sound level meter.
         (b)   The following table describes the maximum sound pressure level
permitted from any source and measured at any adjacent property line.
 
Sound Measured To                       Decibels Continuous Slow Meter
                                        Responses
Industrial uses                         70
Commercial uses                         64
Residential uses in any zoning district 55
Institutional uses                      55
All other uses                          55
 
         (c)   All applications for site plan approval must include a sound
study that is prepared by a qualified engineer with experience in environmental
acoustics. The purpose of the detailed study is to assess the impact of all
noise sources and determine the appropriate layout, design, and control
measures. The study must include:
            1.   Details of assessment methodology.
            2.   List of all devices that are included in the sound evaluation,
including manufacturers specifications.
            3.   Predicted sound levels.
            4.   Summary of the results and recommended control measures.
         (d)   Within 6 months of the beginning date of operation, actual sound
levels must be measured, and biennially thereafter by a qualified engineer with
experience in environmental acoustics and a sound level report must be
submitted to the county for review and approval. If actual sound levels exceed
the maximum sound pressure levels listed in (b) above, corrective actions must
be executed as soon as reasonably possible, but no later than 180 from the
submission of the report.
         (e)   The following sources of noise are exempt:
            1.    Transportation vehicles not under the control of the use.
            2.   Occasionally used safety signals, warning devices, and
emergency pressure relief valves.
            3.   Temporary construction activity between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m.
      (4)   Vibration. No vibration may be produced which is transmitted
through the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at any
point beyond the property line; nor may any vibration produce a particle
velocity of 2 inches per second measured at any point beyond the property line.
All applications for site plan approval must include a vibration impact study
that is prepared by a qualified individual with experience in vibration
analysis. This provision does not apply between adjoining critical digital
infrastructure uses.
      (5)   Height. The Planning Commission may approve an increase in the
maximum height established in §
1-19-6.100, if it finds the increased height would not have an adverse impact
on properties in the vicinity of the proposed critical digital infrastructure
electric substation. For each 3-foot increase in the height above the maximum
height established in §
1-19-6.100, the required front, side, and rear yards set back measurements must
be increased by one additional foot.
(Bill No. 22-05, 3-15-2022; Bill No. 25-05, 5-20-2025; Bill No. 25-09, 9-2-
2025)
§ 1-19-8.404. CANNABIS DISPENSARY, CANNABIS GROWING FACILITY, AND CANNABIS
PROCESSING FACILITY.
§ 1-19-8.404.1. SCOPE.
   The provisions of this division shall apply to:
   (A)   All cannabis dispensaries, cannabis growing facilities, and cannabis
processing facilities legally established in the county prior to January 1,
2023, for which an application is received for an expansion of use; and
   (B)   All applications for establishing a new cannabis dispensary, cannabis
growing facility, or cannabis processing facility.
(Bill No. 23-21, 11-21-2023)
§ 1-19-8.404.2. CANNABIS DISPENSARY.
   The following provisions shall apply to a cannabis dispensary.
   (A)   A cannabis dispensary may not be located:
      (1)   Within 1,500 feet of an existing public or private school, park,
library, playground, recreation center, childcare center, and family childcare
home.
      (2)   Within 1,500 feet of a property owned by Frederick County
Government or owned by the Frederick County Board of Education that is planned
to be used for a public school, park, library, playground, or recreation center
in the future.
      (3)   Within 1,500 feet of a property identified on the Comprehensive
Plan as a future public school, library, recreation center, park, or similar
use that is intended to be used for a public purpose.
      (4)   Within 1,000 feet of another cannabis dispensary.
   (B)   The distance requirements under subsection (A) above shall be measured
using a direct line between the nearest property lines.
   (C)   A cannabis dispensary may not operate as a home occupation.
   (D)   The cannabis dispensary use, requirements, and restrictions apply to
operations under a standard cannabis license issued by the state as well as
operations under a micro license issued by the state.
(Bill No. 23-21, 11-21-2023)
§ 1-19-8.404.3. CANNABIS GROWING FACILITY.
   The following provisions shall apply to a cannabis growing facility.
   (A)   A cannabis growing facility may not operate as a home occupation.
   (B)   Performance standards:
      (1)   In the LI and GI districts, the performance standards under §
1-19-7.610 shall apply.
      (2)   In the ORI district, the performance standards under §
1-19-7.620 shall apply.
   (C)   Growing shall be conducted indoors.
   (D)   Security fencing shall be screened from view by the use of vegetative
landscaping, emphasizing native species.
   (E)   The cannabis growing facility use, requirements, and restrictions
apply to operations under a standard cannabis license issued by the state as
well as operations under a micro license issued by the state.
   (F)   A cannabis growing facility may include an accessory cannabis
processing facility use and an accessory cannabis dispensary use subject to
meeting the requirements under §
1-19-8.250.1.
(Bill No. 23-21, 11-21-2023)
§ 1-19-8.404.4. CANNABIS PROCESSING FACILITY.
   The following provisions shall apply to a cannabis processing facility.
   (A)   A cannabis processing facility may not operate as a home occupation.
   (B)   Performance standards:
      (1)   In the LI and GI districts, the performance standards under §
1-19-7.610 shall apply.
      (2)   In the ORI district, the performance standards under §
1-19-7.620 shall apply.
   (C)   Security fencing shall be screened from view by the use of vegetative
landscaping, emphasizing native species.
   (D)   The cannabis processing facility use, requirements, and restrictions
apply to operations under a standard cannabis license issued by the state as
well as operations under a micro license issued by the state.
   (E)   A cannabis processing facility may include an accessory cannabis
dispensary use and an accessory cannabis growing facility use subject to
meeting the requirements under §
1-19-8.404 and §
1-19-8.250.1.
(Bill No. 23-21, 11-21-2023)
§ 1-19-8.404.5. CANNABIS ON-SITE CONSUMPTION FACILITY.
   Cannabis on-site consumption facilities are not permitted.
(Bill No. 23-21, 11-21-2023)
§ 1-19-8.405. ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR VETERINARY CLINIC IN THE GC AND MX DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to animal hospitals or veterinary
clinics in the GC and MX districts.
   (A)   The minimum lot area, lot width, yard setbacks and height, shall be as
provided for in §
1-19-6.100.
   (B)   Operations will be conducted within a completely enclosed building. No
outside runs or kennels are permitted.
(Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 11-28-594, 11-22-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.406. AUTOMOBILE REPAIR OR SERVICE SHOP IN THE LIMITED INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICT.
   The following provisions shall apply to an automobile repair shop or service
in the Limited Industrial District.
   (A)   an automobile repair shop building shall be at least 100 feet from any
residential buildings on adjacent properties.
   (B)   No outdoor work or outdoor storage of parts, equipment or vehicles
shall be permitted except as provided in condition (C). No parking is permitted
on the required setback areas.
   (C)   No motor vehicles related to the auto repair business shall be parked
outside of a screened parking area. A screened parking area shall be no larger
than 2,500 square feet to allow for 5 vehicles (1 company vehicle and 1
employee vehicle are exempt from this number).
   (D)   Parking areas provided shall be screened from adjacent properties and
roads with plantings of evergreens, at least 5 feet high, or a fence of equal
height provided to screen the parking area.
   (E)   Petroleum, flammable liquid, or hazardous substance storage tanks
shall have 100% catchment basin, or double-walled containment and a spill
protection overfill alarm. This does not apply to propane or natural gas tanks.
   (F)   Shall comply with §
1-6-50 (Wellhead Protection Ordinance) at site development plan approval.
(Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.407. APIARY.
   The following provisions shall apply to apiaries in the R1, R3, R5, R8, R12,
R16, VC, MX, GC, ORI, LI, and GI zoning districts.
   (A)   The apiary shall be located at least 10 feet from any lot line.
   (B)   The apiary shall be located behind a solid fence, hedge, or other
barrier that is at least 6 feet in height, runs parallel to the property line,
and extends 10 feet beyond the apiary in each direction.
   (C)   A water supply shall be provided to minimize honeybees from seeking
water off-site.
   (D)   Apiaries shall comply with Maryland Department of Agriculture
Regulations as they pertain to beekeeping.
   (E)   Beekeepers shall be registered by Maryland Department of Agriculture
and failure to maintain registration with the state constitutes a violation of
this section.
(Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.408. LIMITED FOOD WASTE COMPOSTING IN THE A DISTRICT.
   The following provisions shall apply to limited food waste composting
activities and operations in the A District that are greater than 5,000 square
feet in size.
   (A)   All limited food waste composting activities and operations shall be
located on land zoned agriculture. Food waste composting activities and
operations shall be limited in size as follows:
      (1)   10-acre limit: Limited food waste composting activities and
operations that exceed 10 acres must obtain approval of a solid waste floating
zone designation.
      (2)   Limited food waste composting: agricultural activity. Activities
and operations up to 5 acres in size shall not require site plan approval.
      (3)   Limited food waste composting: commercial activity. Activities and
operations require site plan approval and shall not exceed 10 acres in size.
   (B)   No portion of the limited food waste composting activity or operation
shall be located within the floodplain district as defined in §
1-19-9.100.
   (C)   All limited food waste composting activities and operations shall be
set back a minimum of 25 feet from the floodplain district and 100 feet from
the banks of rivers, streams, or other bodies of water.
   (D)   Limited food waste composting activities and operations shall not
cause any odor, dust, smoke, vibration, or unreasonable noise which can be
detected at or beyond any property line.
   (E)   All activities and operations associated with the limited food waste
composting facility shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from the property
lines and at least 300 feet from a dwelling not owned or operated by the
operator of the composting facility.
   (F)   The subject property must have road frontage and access on a minimum
20-foot-wide paved public road. Commercial/Industrial entrance standards shall
be utilized in the design of any point of access to a public road as determined
to be necessary by the Frederick County traffic engineer.
   (G)   The applicant shall submit a vehicle circulation plan indicating that
adequate turn radius is provided both to and from the subject property.
Adequate space for the safe movement of all proposed vehicles and equipment
being utilized on site shall be provided.
   (H)   Limited food waste composting activities may include delivery and
incorporation of off-site generated food waste into the on-site composting
operation.
   (I)   The applicant shall maintain records detailing the date and source of
off-site generated food waste. The records must be made available to the Zoning
Administrator upon request.
   (J)   All materials at the limited food waste composting facility shall be
sorted and processed in a manner that prevents harboring or breeding of insects
or animals, and prevents creation of odor, litter, or other nuisances that may
be harmful to the public health or the environment.
   (K)   All incoming materials associated with food waste must be incorporated
into the composting processes within 24 hours. Liquids must be controlled to
prevent run off during offloading, storage, and processing of all received
wastes.
   (L)   Commercial sales of on-site generated compost to the general public
are allowed only for the limited food waste composting: commercial activity
use. Such commercial sales shall not be allowed for the limited food waste
composting: agricultural activity use.
   (M)   Limited food waste composting activities and operations shall comply
with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations and shall conform to
the requirements of all federal and State of Maryland permits and other
approvals.
(Bill No. 18-22, 10-16-2018)
§ 1-19-8.410. BED AND BREAKFAST.
   The following provisions shall apply to bed and breakfast.
   (A)   The maximum stay for guests shall not exceed 30 days during a period
of 6 months and no 1 visit shall exceed more than 14 consecutive days.
   (B)   Meal service shall be limited to overnight guests only.
   (C)   There shall be no separate kitchen or cooking facilities in any
guestroom.
   (D)   The use of amenities, such as a swimming pool, shall be restricted to
use by guests of the establishment.
   (E)   Minimum lot size and setbacks shall be as provided in §
1-19-6.100 for a single family dwelling in the district where the use is
allowed.
   (F)   Parking shall not be located within required setback areas.
(Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.420. COMMUNICATION TOWERS.
§ 1-19-8.420.1. SCOPE.
   The provisions of this division shall apply to all communication towers
erected in the county subsequent to the effective date of this amendment, and
to communication towers erected prior to the effective date of this amendment
as set forth in §
1-19-8.420.2(Q).
(Ord. 99-14-241, 11-23-1999; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 12-17-612, 6-21-
2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.420.2. CRITERIA.
   The following design criteria shall apply to all communication towers in the
GC, ORI, LI, GI, MM and non-residential MXD zoning districts as well as special
exceptions in the RC and A Districts.
   (A)   The applicant and the property owner shall be responsible for
maintaining the tower in a safe condition.
   (B)   The tower shall be utilized continuously for wireless communications.
In the event the tower ceases to be used for wireless communications for a
period of 6 months, the approval will terminate. The property owner shall
remove the tower within 90 days after termination. The property owner shall
insure the tower removal by posting an acceptable monetary guarantee with the
county on forms provided by the office of the Zoning Administrator. The
guarantee shall be for an amount equal to a cost estimate approved by the
Zoning Administrator for the removal of the tower, plus a 15% contingency.
   (C)   All towers shall be designed for co-location, which shall mean the
ability of the structure to allow for the placement of antennae for 2 or more
carriers. This provision may be waived by the approving body if it is
determined that co-location will have an adverse impact on the surrounding
area.
   (D)   The tower height may exceed the maximum height permitted within the
GC, ORI, LI and GI Districts, and provided the required setbacks are met after
a determination by the approving body that its visual profile and appearance
would make no substantial change in the character of the area.
   (E)   All applications for approval of communications towers shall include:
      (1)   Justification from the applicant as to why the site was selected;
      (2)   Propagation studies showing service area and system coverage in the
county;
      (3)   Photo simulations of the tower and site, including equipment areas
at the base from at least 2 directions and from a distance of no more than 1
mile.
   (F)   As part of the site plan review, screening and fencing may be required
around the base of the tower structure and any equipment buildings.
   (G)   The appearance of the tower structure shall be minimized by the
reasonable use of commercially available technology to reduce visual impact,
with specific reference to size, color and silhouette properties. The decision
of the approving authority shall be final.
   (H)   No lighting is to be placed on the tower unless specifically required
by the Federal Aviation Administration.
   (I)   Monopoles shall be the preferred tower structure type within the
county.
   (J)   All tower sites shall be identified by means of a sign no larger than
6 square feet affixed to the equipment building or fence enclosure. Said sign
shall identify the tower owner and each locating provider and shall provide the
telephone number for a person to contact in the event of an emergency.
   (K)   Site plan approval for the tower, access, equipment, and structures
shall be by the Planning Commission in accordance with the site plan
regulations specified within the zoning ordinance.
   (L)   No towers are permitted within land designated or eligible for
designation for National Register or Frederick County Historic Districts or
Sites.
   (M)   A copy of all reports including the environmental assessment, NEPA
review, and SHPO review, as required by or provided to the Federal
Communications Commission, shall be included as part of the application.
   (N)   Towers should be sited within or adjacent to areas of mature
vegetation and should be located down slope from ridge lines and towards the
interior of a parcel whenever possible and only should be considered elsewhere
on the property when technical data or aesthetic reasons indicate there is no
other preferable location.
   (O)   All applications shall include information as to how the applicant has
addressed the visual impact of the tower on all county designated preservation
areas, such as: rural legacy areas, agricultural preservation areas, critical
farms, Monocacy scenic river, Appalachian Trail, historic sites and sites
eligible for designation.
   (P)   Towers may be permitted within the Mineral Mining (MM) and non-
residential Mixed Use Development (MXD) floating zones with the approval of the
Planning Commission. Towers shall not be permitted within residential, PUD or
residential MXD Districts.
   (Q)   Communications towers in existence on the effective date of this
ordinance (Ord. 99-14-241) shall not be required to comply with these
provisions, except in the event they increase the height; provided, however,
that any such tower which has ceased to be used for communications purposes for
a period of 12 consecutive months, must comply with the existing requirements
of the zone in which it is located before such tower may be used for
telecommunication purposes. For purposes of this subsection (Q), the proposed
installation of 1 or more antennae on a tower which has ceased to be used for
communications purposes for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be deemed a
use which must comply with the existing requirements of the zone in which it is
located, and shall not be treated as an accessory use pursuant to §
1-19-8.205.2.
   (R)   Except as provided in §
1-19-8.332(F) setbacks for communications towers shall be as follows.
      (1)   Setback from all property zoned residential shall be a distance not
less than 1 foot for every foot of tower height, but in no case less than 300
feet. Setback distance may be modified by the approving body.
      (2)   Setbacks from all properties zoned other than residential shall be
determined by the approving body, but shall not be less than the fall zone of
the tower as defined by the engineering specifications.
(Ord. 99-14-241, 11-23-1999; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-
2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 12-17-612, 6-21-2012; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
Editor's note:
   The effective date of Ord. 99-14-241 as referenced in division (Q) above is
November 26, 1999.
§ 1-19-8.430. CONTRACTOR'S OFFICE AND STORAGE IN THE LIMITED INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICT.
   The storage of contractor's construction equipment and supplies in the
Limited Industrial District shall be permitted only if:
   (A)   The contractor's main office is located on the same lot or immediately
adjacent to the lot on which the construction equipment and supplies will be
stored; and
   (B)   The contractor's construction equipment and supplies are stored,
maintained and repaired in an accessory structure or structures which are fully
enclosed on at least 3 sides and screened from public view on the fourth side
unless enclosed. The Planning Commission may waive or modify the requirement
for storage, maintenance, and repair of contractor's equipment and supplies
within an accessory structure where:
      (1)   It can be determined that the reduction or elimination will not
adversely impact adjoining properties; and
      (2)   the Planning Commission approves an alternate screening plan; and
      (3)   Storage, maintenance, and repair is located and conducted to the
rear of the principal structure and screened from the public way.
   (C)   The storage structure(s) on any lot shall not exceed a .25 floor/area
ratio for the lot on which it is located and in no event shall the storage
structure area exceed 25,000 square feet. The storage building shall comply
with the setback requirements for principal structures in the LI District and
shall meet all other criteria of this Code for accessory structures in the LI
District.
(Ord. 90-46-644, 11-20-1990; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-
2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.431. LIMITED FARM ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TASTING ROOMS IN THE RESOURCE
CONSERVATION AND AGRICULTURAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The following provisions shall apply to limited farm alcoholic beverages
tasting rooms in the Resource Conservation and Agricultural zoning districts.
   (A)   Minimum setbacks and maximum height are the same as required for
Natural Resource uses in the district where the use is proposed.
   (B)   Parking shall be provided at a rate of 1 space per 50 square feet of
floor area devoted to customer service, excluding food prep and storage area.
   (C)   Parking shall not be located within setback areas.
   (D)   These uses shall not be subject to the lot frontage requirements of §
1-19-4.520(C).
   (E)   Music is permitted indoors or in accessory outdoor space, such as
patios or decks. Amplified music or sound shall be contained to the accessory
outdoor space. Hours when amplified music is allowed shall be defined in the
zoning certificate. The zoning certificate may be revoked if the zoning
administrator finds:
      (1)   Amplified music is heard or observed outside the hours defined in
the zoning certificate; or
      (2)   Amplified music volumes are recorded in violation of the noise
ordinance.
(Bill No. 17-04, 5-2-2017)
§ 1-19-8.432 PRIVATE PARK IN THE RC DISTRICT.
   The following provisions shall apply to private parks in the Resource
Conservation District.
   (A)   The minimum lot area, lot width, yard setbacks, and heights shall be
as provided for in §
1-19-6.100.
   (B)   The subject property must have road frontage on and access to a 20-
foot-wide paved public road.
   (C)   The requirements of §
1-19-7.200, and where applicable, § 1-19-7.700 (Sugarloaf Rural Heritage
Overlay District) of this Code must be met.
   (D)   A private park may include natural or paved trails, scenic viewing
areas, parking facilities, forestry activities, tot lots, temporary or
occasional tent camping, a caretaker residence, and private offices for the
operation of the private park.
   (E)   The following commercial uses and facilities are not permitted in or
accessory to a private park: recreational vehicle campground, golf course, golf
driving range, swimming pool, fairgrounds, zoo, hotel, motel, or lodge.
   (F)   After the establishment of a private park, The following accessory
uses are permitted with site development plan approval: a visitors' center,
gift shop, walk-up concession stands, pavilions or open structures for
gatherings.
(Bill No. 22-24, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-19-8.440. LANDFILLS/BORROW PITS.
§ 1-19-8.440.1. PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All landfill sites shall conform to the County Solid Waste Plan and be
located only in areas designated agricultural/rural or industrial on the County
Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Prior to the beginning of any excavations on the site, site plan
approval must be granted by the Frederick County Planning Commission.
   (C)   Copies of all state approved permits shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for review prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate,
including the detailed plans for monitoring wells, site security and on site
supervision.
   (D)   All inspection reports shall be transmitted to the Zoning
Administrator for his review.
   (E)   Any and all conditions placed on the permit by the State of Maryland
shall become conditions of zoning that shall be complied with.
   (F)   Grading and sedimentation permits must be obtained from the Division
of Public Works and appropriate bonds must be posted.
(Ord. 89-1-532, 1-3-1989; Ord. 90-05-603, 2-6-1990; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.440.2. DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Landfills and borrow pit operations shall be located a minimum of 150
feet from all property lines.
   (B)   Landfills and borrow pits shall not be located within any designated
floodplain or wetland areas.
   (C)   All setback areas shall be landscaped and maintained as green area.
   (D)   The road system providing access to the proposed use shall be adequate
to serve the site for the intended use.
   (E)   The Planning Commission shall have the authority to establish the
hours and days of operation for landfills and borrow pit operations.
(Ord. 89-1-532, 1-3-1989; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.441. LIMITED LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR, OR WOODWORKING IN THE A DISTRICT.
   The following provisions apply to the limited landscape contractor, or
woodworking use in the A District.
   (A)   A combined total of no more than 10,000 square feet of principal and
accessory structures is permitted (not including ‘caretaker residence in
conjunction with the permitted use’). When a limited landscape contractor use
operates in conjunction with a retail or wholesale nursery use, all square
footage provisions are calculated separately.
   (B)   Total impervious surface area for parking and storage of equipment
exterior to any structures is limited to 40,000 square feet (not including
‘caretaker residence in conjunction with the permitted use’). When a limited
landscape contractor use operates in conjunction with a retail or wholesale
nursery use, all square footage provisions are calculated separately.
   (C)   Lot size, setback and height requirements are the same as other
natural resource uses in the A District.
   (D)   The parking requirements of §§
1-19-6.200 through
1-19-6.230 of this code will be met; however, no parking area is permitted
within the required yard setback.
   (E)   The maximum number of onsite employees is 10.
   (F)   The subject property must have frontage and access on a paved public
road with a minimum pavement width of 16 feet.
   (G)   Petroleum, flammable liquid, or hazardous substance storage tanks
shall have 100% catchment basin, or double-walled containment and a spill
protection overfill alarm. This does not apply to propane or natural gas tanks.
   (H)   The proposed use shall comply with §
1-6-50 (Wellhead Protection Ordinance) prior to site plan approval.
   (I)   All equipment and materials must be screened from adjacent properties
and public roads with plantings of evergreens, at least 5 feet in height, or a
fence of equal height, or demonstrate the extent that existing landscaping,
hedgerows/tree cover or other natural features provide effective screening.
(Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 23-15, 8-8-
2023)
§ 1-19-8.442. LIMITED LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR PARKING AND STORAGE IN THE A
DISTRICT.
   The following provisions apply to limited landscape contractor vehicle
parking and material and equipment storage in the agricultural zoning district:
   (A)   The subject property must have a minimum lot area of 80,000 square
feet.
   (B)   Setback and height requirements are the same as natural resource uses
in the A District.
   (C)   A combined total of no more than 5,000 square feet of accessory
structures is permitted.
   (D)   Total impervious surface area, excluding driveways, for parking and
storage of equipment exterior to any structures is limited to 25,000 square
feet.
   (E)   All equipment and materials must be screened from adjacent properties
and public roads with plantings of evergreens, at least 5 feet in height, or a
fence of equal height, or demonstrate the extent that existing landscaping,
hedgerows/tree cover or other natural features that are located on the subject
property provide similarly effective screening. Such landscaping and plantings
shall emphasize species that are native to Frederick County.
   (F)   Parking under this section is limited to no more than 10 licensed
commercial vehicles that are used in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise
owned or controlled by the owner of the subject property.
   (G)   The maximum number of on-site employees is 5.
   (H)   Parking and equipment storage may occur in the setback area but shall
not be closer to the property line or right-of-way line than one-half the
normally required setback, provided that the screen required by subsection (E)
is composed of fencing with a minimum height of 6 feet, is visually opaque in
construction, is in combination with landscaping, and is located outside of the
right-of-way.
   (I)   Retail activities, other than those allowed under §
1-19-8.240, are not allowed.
   (J)   The subject property must have frontage and access to a paved public
road with a minimum pavement width of 16 feet.
   (K)   The proposed use shall comply with §
1-6-50 (Wellhead Protection Ordinance) prior to site plan approval.
   (L)   This use is not allowed on properties where a residential dwelling
unit on an adjacent property is within 150 feet of the property line of the
proposed use.
(Bill No. 23-20, 11-21-2023)
§ 1-19-8.450. SELF-STORAGE UNITS.
   (A)   Multiple structures. Multiple self-storage unit buildings may be
located on a single lot if the following requirements are satisfied:
      (1)   Only one building shall be designated as the main or office
building;
      (2)   Signage shall be allowed and calculated only for the main or office
building.
      (3)   Each building, with the exception of one main or office building,
shall be used exclusively for self-storage.
   (B)   Bulk regulations.
      (1)   See §
1-19-6.100.
      (2)   If the development is adjacent to a residential district or use,
then the minimum side yard setback shall be 20 feet or equal to the height of
the building, whichever is greater.
   (C)   Minimum landscaped open space.
      (1)   Minimum landscaped open space shall not be less than 20% of the
land area of the lot.
      (2)   Open space shall not be used for parking or storage of vehicles,
vehicular traffic, or stormwater management facilities.
      (3)   All open space must be landscaped.
   (D)   Design requirements.
      (1)   The design of the building(s) shall be compatible with the
surrounding property and uses. Elements to be considered in determining
compatibility include: building height, scale, massing, orientation, and
materials; lot orientation, size, shapes, widths and depths; distance between
buildings; pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation, access and parking;
lighting, odor and noise impacts.
      (2)   The facades of all building(s) must be of consistent design and
constructed of the same or similar materials.
      (3)   All service and loading areas shall be screened from public view.
      (4)   Storage unit doors and access areas shall not face a public way
(street, road, sidewalk, etc.) or the public view.
      (5)   Lighting shall be designed and directed away, or screened, from
adjoining properties so as not to cause glare on or adversely impact adjoining
properties.
      (6)   Lighting shall not exceed 0.5 foot/candles at the periphery of the
site.
      (7)   Light poles may not exceed 12 feet (measured from the ground to the
point of illumination or lens) unless the Planning Commission grants a
modification during site plan review and approval.
(Ord. 07-31-471, 10-15-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.460. SHOPPING CENTERS.
   In addition to the requirements of §
1-19-7.510 of this Code, the following will apply to shopping centers.
Development within the Village Center Zoning District shall conform to Article
5, Division 3, Supplementary District Regulations, §
1-19-7.500, Village Center District Overlay Standards.
   (A)   Parking for a shopping center may be reduced by 10% over the figure
arrived at by totaling the requirements of each individual use on the property
or may be figured at 5.5 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable
floor area. One of the 2 methods may be used at the option of the developer.
Parking and loading areas may project to within one-half the required setback
distance.
   (B)   The subdivision of any lot off of a tract of land approved as a
shopping center development will be governed by the following.
      (1)   The newly created lot will have vehicular access by the same method
as the shopping center unless another access point is allowed by the Planning
Commission and the new access point will meet the conditions of §
1-19-7.510 as they pertain to access.
      (2)   The newly created lot will be allowed to use the same sign size
formula permitted for shopping centers, but will not be permitted to have a
freestanding or pylon-type sign.
   (C)   Bulk regulations. The Planning Commission may allow the modification
of the shopping center bulk regulations for development within the Village
Center Zoning District where the Planning Commission specifically finds that
the modification provides for development that is more in conformance with the
Village Center Overlay standards.
      (1)   Minimum lot size of 2 acres.
      (2)   Minimum frontage of 80 feet, with access on a public road with a
minimum pavement width of 20 feet.
      (3)   Minimum front yard setback of 50 feet.
      (4)   Minimum side and rear yard setback of 30 feet unless adjacent to a
residential district or use, then the setback shall be not less than 100 feet.
      (5)   Maximum height of structures shall not exceed 60 feet.
   (D)   Minimum landscaped open space.
      (1)   Minimum landscaped open space shall not be less than 20% of the
land area of the lot.
      (2)   Such open space shall not be open to vehicles.
      (3)   All open space must be landscaped and maintained.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-62(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 07-27-467,
6-19-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.470. TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT.
§ 1-19-8.470.1. SCOPE.
   The provisions of this division shall apply to townhouse developments.
Within the Village Center Zoning District development shall also conform to
Article 7, Division 5 Supplementary District Regulations, Village Center
District Overlay Standards §
1-19-7.500.
(Ord. 07-27-467, 6-19-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.470.2. DENSITY.
   The overall density shall not exceed the maximum density permitted within
the zoning district in which the development is located. When recorded as
individual lots, each townhouse lot shall have a minimum of 1,600 square feet.
Forty percent of the difference in lot size and net land area per townhouse
shall be allocated to green area. Townhouse developments are subject to the
requirements of §
1-19-8.620 through §
1-19-8.620.6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-74(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 02-26-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 08-26-
502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.470.3. LOT WIDTH.
   The minimum lot width is 16 feet.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-74(B), 1-24-1978; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.470.4. ROW LENGTHS.
   There shall be no more than 8 and no less than 3 townhouses in a row except
within the Village Center District. In the Village Center District where
abutting a public street, townhouse and multi-family structures shall have a
maximum width of 3 dwelling units.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-74(C), 1-24-1978; Ord. 07-27-467, 6-19-2007; Ord. 08-26-
502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.470.5. YARDS.
   (A)   Each townhouse shall have a front yard of 25 feet. The Planning
Commission may allow enclosure of front yard space in the townhouse development
if the design provides for this feature. Townhouses may be arranged to face
onto a common open area, such a common area shall be provided for unobstructed
access of emergency vehicles. With such an arrangement, the front yard
requirement may be reduced to 10 feet.
   (B)   A side yard at least 10 feet in width shall be provided at each end of
every row of townhouses. When an end unit abuts a street, the side yard shall
have a minimum of 25 feet.
   (C)   Each townhouse shall have a rear yard at least 20 feet in depth.
   (D)   An accessory building may be located in a rear yard and shall occupy
not over 25% of the rear yard area and shall be set back at least 5 feet from
any alley or rear service street line.
   (E)   The Planning Commission may allow the modification of the townhouse
yard requirements for development within the Village Center Zoning District if
the Planning Commission specifically finds that the modification provides for
overall building placement that is more in conformance with the Village Center
Overlay standards.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-74(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 07-27-467, 6-19-2007; Ord. 08-26-
502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.470.6. ACCESS DRIVES AND OFF- STREET PARKING.
   Pedestrian and vehicular access shall be improved to standards specified by
the Design Manual. Off- street parking facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the Design Manual and §§
1-19-6.200 through
1-19-6.240 of this Code. No parking area shall be more than 200 feet from the
townhouse lot it is to serve.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-74(E), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.470.7. MAINTENANCE OF COMMON LAND AND FACILITIES.
   If the townhouse development provides for common area, property, or
facilities, they shall be conveyed to an incorporated nonprofit home
association created under recorded land agreements through which each lot owner
is automatically a member and through which each lot is automatically subject
to a charge for a proportionate share of common property maintenance.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-74(F), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.480. USES PERMITTED IN THE EUCLIDEAN INSTITUTIONAL (Ie) ZONING
DISTRICT.
   The following provisions shall apply to permitted uses within the Euclidean
Institutional Zoning District:
   (A)   Height, and front, side, and rear yard requirements for the Euclidean
Institutional Zoning District are as follows:
      Maximum height         30'
      Minimum setback requirements
      Front               40'
      Side               50'
      Rear               50'
   (B)   Subdivision occurring after May 14, 2010 within the Euclidean
Institutional Zoning District is permitted only as follows:
      (1)   Subdivision of 3 lots will be permitted to be subdivided off an
original tract of land. For the purposes of this section, an original tract of
land shall be as described in the county land records as of August 18, 1976.
      (2)   For all parcels created or resulting from subdivision, minimum lot
area and lot width shall be as follows:
         Minimum lot area   5 acres
         Minimum lot width   300'
   (C)   College or university, or continuing care retirement community (CCRC)
land uses within the Euclidean Institutional Zoning District as provided in §
1-19-5.310(B)(1) are permitted to expand subject to the site plan review
process (§
1-19-3.300 through §
1-19-3.300.4) and must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The expansion shall not include acreage beyond that originally
designated as Euclidean Institutional; and
      (2)   The proposed expansion shall not include non-conforming uses,
structures, or lots; and
      (3)   The proposed use meets the definition of:
         (a)   College or university; or
         (b)   Continuing care retirement community; or
         (c)   Agricultural activities as defined in §
1-19-11.100; and
      (4)   All other requirements of this chapter are met.
   (D)   A private school, private school in conjunction with a place of
worship, residential treatment center in conjunction with a private school,
public school with Euclidean Institutional Zoning shall be permitted to expand
subject to the site plan review process (§
1-19-3.300 through §
1-19-3.300.4) and must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The proposed use(s) meets the definition of:
         (a)   Private school; or
         (b)   Private school in conjunction with a place of worship; or
         (c)   Residential treatment center in conjunction with a private
school;
         (d)   Public school; or
         (e)   Agricultural activities as defined in §
1-19-11.100; and
      (2)   All other requirements of this chapter are met.
(Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 10-18-533, 5-4-2010;
Ord. 10-31-566, 12-21-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.490. PLACE OF WORSHIP
   The following provisions shall apply to place of worship in the Agricultural
Zoning District:
   (A)   At the time of application a statement identifying all proposed
accessory uses including hours of operation, frequency of activity, and average
number in attendance shall be submitted for review and approval by the Zoning
Administrator.
   (B)   Uses determined by the Zoning Administrator not to be a customarily
incidental accessory to a place of worship shall only be established where:
      (1)   The proposed use is allowed in the Agricultural Zoning District as
delineated in §
1-19-5.310; and
      (2)   Approval is received through the process provided for the proposed
use in the Agricultural Zoning District in §
1-19-5.310.
(Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.491. BODYWORK.
   The establishment of a new bodywork use shall be permitted only if the
following requirements are met:
   (A)   Prior to applying for a building permit, a zoning verification letter
must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator which includes:
      (1)   A description of the business;
      (2)   A list of current employees; and
      (3)   Copies of all required licenses from the State of Maryland for each
listed employee or, for uses that do not require a license, verification of
professional training.
   (B)   The owner or operator of a bodywork use shall file an annual report,
as required by the Zoning Administrator, which includes an updated list of
employees and copies of all required State licenses or verification of
professional training.
   (C)   A bodywork use shall not be used as a place of human habitation.
   (D)   Bodywork instruction may only be provided:
      (1)   To individuals who are enrolled in a bodywork training program
recognized by the Maryland Higher Education Commission; and
      (2)   In accordance with applicable state law and regulations governing
bodywork licensure and education.
   (E)   The Zoning Administrator, or designee, is authorized pursuant to §
1-19-2.100(B) to conduct periodic inspections of a bodywork use to verify
compliance with this section.
   (F)   A violation of this section will result in the suspension or
revocation of the zoning certificate approval.
(Bill No. 24-07, 6-18-2024)
DIVISION 5. INTENSIVE SWINE FEEDING OPERATIONS
§ 1-19-8.500. INTENT.
   It is the intent of this article that it shall only apply to swine and
operations which feed swine and shall not apply to any other types of animal
operations.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.1. PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for environmentally responsible
construction and expansion of swine feeding operations and to protect the
natural environment and the safety, welfare and quality of life of persons who
live in the vicinity of a swine feeding operation.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.2. DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article:
   AFFECTED PROPERTY OWNER. A surface landowner within a 1 mile radius of the
designated perimeter of a swine feeding operation.
   APPLICANT. The owner or operator of a swine feeding operation.
   ARTIFICIALLY CONSTRUCTED. Constructed by humans.
   DESIGNATED PERIMETER. The perimeter of any structure or combination of
structures utilized to control swine waste until it can be disposed of in an
authorized manner. Such structures shall include, but not be limited to, pits,
burial sites, barns or roof- covered structures housing swine, compostors,
waste storage sites, or retention structures or appurtenances or additions
thereto.
   EXPANDING OPERATION.
      (1)   A facility that either increases its swine unit capacity to a
number that causes the facility to initially meet the definition of a swine
feeding operation; or
      (2)   A swine feeding operation that seeks to increase its permitted
capacity in excess of 5% of the original facility's permitted capacity.
   FACILITY. Any place, site, or location or part thereof where swine are kept,
handled, housed, or otherwise maintained and processed and includes but is not
limited to buildings, lots, pens, and swine waste management systems.
   INTERESTED PARTY. An affected property owner who validly requests an
individual hearing, in accordance with the provisions of this article regarding
the issuance of a swine feeding operation permit and asserts rights to relief
in respect to or arising out of the same permit.
   LAND APPLICATION. The spreading on, or incorporation of swine waste into the
soil.
   OCCUPIED RESIDENCE. A habitable structure designed and constructed for full-
time occupancy in all weather conditions which:
      (1)   Is not readily mobile;
      (2)   Is connected to a public or permanent source of electricity and a
permanent waste disposal system or public waste disposal system; and
      (3)   Is occupied as a residence.
   ODOR ABATEMENT PLAN or OAP. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or
reduce odor as established by this article.
   OPERATOR. The owner or one who is responsible for the management of each
facility of a swine feeding operation.
   OWNER OR OPERATOR. Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, limited
liability limited partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or other business entity who owns, manages, or operates all or any
part of or interest in the business of a swine feeding operation or the real
property on which a swine feeding operation is located. The term OWNER OR
OPERATOR includes an applicant for a swine farm operation permit and the person
or entity to which a permit is issued.
   PROCESS WASTEWATER. Any water utilized in the facility that comes into
contact with any manure, litter, bedding, raw, intermediate, or final material
or product used in or resulting from the production of swine and any products
directly or indirectly used in the operation of a facility, such as spillage or
overflow from swine watering systems; washing, cleaning, or flushing pens,
barns, manure pits, direct contract, swimming, washing or spray cooling of
swine; and dust control and any precipitation which comes into contact with
swine or swine waste.
   SWINE. A member of the porcine species.
   SWINE FEEDING OPERATION. A lot or facility where 1,000 or more swine have
been, are, or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of
90 consecutive days or more in any 12 month period.
   SWINE WASTE. Animal excrement, swine carcasses, feed wastes, process
wastewaters or any other waste associated with the confinement of animals from
a swine feeding operation.
   SWINE WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. A combination of structures and nonstructural
practices serving a swine feeding operation that provides for the collection,
treatment, disposal, distribution, storage and land application of animal
waste.
   WASTE FACILITY. Any structure or combination of structures utilized to
control swine waste until it can be disposed of in an authorized manner but
does not include open pits or lagoon. Such structures shall include, but not be
limited to, pits, burial sites, barns, or roof-covered structures housing
swine, compostors, waste storage sites, or retention structures or
appurtenances or additions thereto.
   WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN or WMP. A written plan that includes a combination of
conservation and management practices designed to protect the natural resources
of the county and state prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) or a private consultant with review and approval by NRCS.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams (perennial and intermittent), lakes, ponds,
marshes, water-courses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage
systems, storm sewers and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface
and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through or border upon this state or any portion thereof, and
shall include under all circumstances the waters of the United States which are
contained within the boundaries of, flow through or border upon this state or
any portion thereof. Process wastewaters shall not be considered as waters of
the state if contaminated at the site.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.3. PERMIT.
   (A)   Any swine feeding operation shall be required to obtain a permit to
operate.
   (B)   (1)   Two or more swine feeding operations under common ownership
management or control are considered, for the purposes of permitting, to be a
single swine feeding operation if they adjoin each other or if they use a
common area or system for the disposal of wastes.
      (2)   After September 25, 2000, any swine feeding operation shall be
required to obtain a permit for any increase in excess of 5% of the original
facility's permitted capacity.
   (C)   Expanding operations shall be required to seek a new permit prior to
expansion.
   (D)   After September 25, 2000, no new swine feeding operation or expansion
of a swine feeding operation requiring a permit pursuant to this article shall
be constructed or placed in operation unless final design plans and
specifications have been approved by the Zoning Administrator pursuant to §
1-19-8.500.4 of this article.
   (E)   (1)   After the effective date of this article, no new swine feeding
operation or expanding operation shall be constructed until a building permit
for such facility or expansion has been issued by the Zoning Administrator. The
new or expanded swine feeding operation (facility) must be certified and built
to NRCS standards and specifications.
      (2)   No new swine feeding operation or expanding operation shall be
placed in operation until a permit for such facility or expansion has been
issued by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.4. PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall cause to be prepared and available, for
any person desiring or required to apply for a permit, for a new or previously
unpermitted swine feeding operation or expanding operation, the necessary forms
and applications.
   (B)   The application for a permit to operate a new or previously
unpermitted swine feeding operation or expanding operation shall contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the owner, mortgagee, deed of trust holder or
installment sale vendor and/or operator of the facility;
      (2)   Street and mailing address of the property on which the swine
feeding operation will be located;
      (3)   Number and type of swine housed or confined;
      (4)   A diagram or map and legal description showing geographical
location of the facility on which the perimeters of the facility are
designated, location of waters of the state, including, but not limited to,
drainage from the facility, swine waste, storage facilities and land
application sites owned or leased by the applicant;
      (5)   A copy of the waste management plan, nutrient management plan, soil
and water conservation plan, odor abatement plan and such other plans reviewed
and approved by the Maryland Department of the Environment and/or Maryland
Department of Agriculture and/or NRCS and/or University of Maryland Cooperative
Extension and/or Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene;
      (6)   A copy of any written waiver by an adjacent property owner to the
facility releasing specified setback requirements as provided by §
1-19-8.500.13(C) of this article; and
      (7)   Any other relevant information deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator to administer the provisions of this article.
   (C)   (1)   An application for renewal of a permit to operate a swine
feeding operation shall be considered to be properly filed when the Zoning
Administrator has received a completed renewal application and payment of fees
from the applicant.
      (2)   If the application for renewal is denied, written notification of
the denial and an opportunity for an administrative hearing on the denial shall
be given to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator. The notification shall
set forth the reasons for the denial, steps necessary to meet the requirements
for issuance of the renewal permit and the opportunity for the applicant to
request an administrative hearing.
   (D)   For transfer of a permit to a new owner or operator, the following
conditions shall be met.
      (1)   The new owner or operator shall submit to the Zoning Administrator
a transfer application, which shall include any proposed changes to the
conditions of the existing permit resulting from the transfer of ownership or
operation.
      (2)   After receipt of all information required, the Zoning Administrator
shall review the information and within 60 days issue approval or denial of the
transfer. Transfer of a permit shall be denied only if:
         (a)   The new owner or operator cannot comply with the original
conditions under which the original permit was granted;
         (b)   The Zoning Administrator finds a material or substantial change
in conditions to the original conditions of the original permit to operate the
swine feeding operation;
         (c)   Failure of the new owner or operator to meet any other
conditions or requirements for compliance established by the Zoning
Administrator pursuant to this article; or
         (d)   The new owner or operator has failed to meet the requirements of
this article; and
      (3)   If a transfer is denied, written notification of such denial and an
opportunity for an administrative hearing on the denial shall be given to the
applicant for transfer of the permit by the Zoning Administrator. The
notification shall set forth the reasons for the denial, steps necessary to
meet the requirements for transfer of the permit and the opportunity for the
applicant to request an administrative hearing.
   (E)   Any suspension or revocation or nonrenewal of a permit issued pursuant
to this article by the Zoning Administrator shall be made in accordance with §
1-19-8.500.15 of this article.
   (F)   In addition to other information required for issuance of a new permit
or the transfer of an existing permit, an application for a new permit or
transfer of an existing permit for a swine feeding operation shall be under
oath and shall contain the following information.
      (1)   (a)   A statement of ownership.
            1.   If the applicant is a sole proprietorship, limited
partnership, limited liability, limited partnership or joint venture the name
and address of each member thereof and percentage ownership of each shall be
included in the application.
            2.   If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability
company, the name and address of the corporation and the name and address of
each officer and registered agent of the corporation and of each stockholder or
member owning a 10% or greater interest shall be included in the application.
         (b)   The information contained in the statement of ownership shall be
public information and shall be available upon request from the Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   The name and address of management, if the management is not the
applicant and is acting as agent for the applicant.
      (3)   (a)   An environmental history from the past 3 years of any swine
feeding operation established and operated by the applicant or any other
operation with common ownership in this state or any other state. Such
environmental history shall include but not be limited to all citations,
administrative orders or penalties, civil injunctions or other civil actions,
criminal actions, past, current and ongoing, taken by any person, agency or
court relating to noncompliance with any environmental law, rule, agency order,
or court action relating to the operation of a swine feeding operation.
         (b)   A copy of all records relating to the environmental history
required by this paragraph shall accompany the application.
         (c)   Noncompliance with a final agency order or final order of
judgment of a court of record which has been set aside by a court on appeal of
such final order or judgment shall not be considered a final order or judgment
for the purposes of this subsection.
      (4)   Environmental awards or citations received or pollution prevention
or voluntary remediation efforts undertaken by the applicant.
      (5)   Any other relevant information or records required by the Zoning
Administrator for purposes of implementing this article.
   (G)   (1)   In addition to other penalties as may be imposed by law, any
person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, or
certification in, or omits material data from, or tampers with any application
for a permit, or notice relating to the determination of affected property
owners, shall upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each such violation. In addition,
the Zoning Administrator shall deny a permit to the applicant or may require
submission of a new application.
      (2)   The responsibility for ensuring that all affected property owners
are notified pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be upon the
applicant.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.5. NOTICE AND HEARING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any person or entity applying for a permit for a swine feeding
operation shall comply with the notice and hearing requirements as specified by
this section and rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto by the
Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   After submission of a completed application as provided by this
article, the Zoning Administrator shall have 60 days to review the application
for a new or expanding operation for physical and technical suitability.
   (C)   (1)   After such review and after the applicant has submitted any
required information to the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator
shall require the applicant to notify all affected property owners of the
proposed facility or expanding operations. Such notice shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall identify that an
application for a swine feeding operation has been submitted to the Zoning
Administrator, the location of the facility, that a hearing may be requested
pursuant to this subsection, and the date the application will be available for
public review which shall begin no earlier than the day following the certified
mailing of all the required notices, and such other information required by the
Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Each affected property owner requesting a hearing shall submit, in
writing, the following information:
         (a)   The name and address of the interested party and proof that the
interested party is an affected property owner;
         (b)   A statement of specific allegations showing that the proposed
facility or expanding operation may have a direct, substantial and immediate
effect upon a legally protected interest of the interested party; and
         (c)   The relief sought by the interested party.
      (3)   If any of the affected property owners requests an administrative
hearing, such hearing shall be held by the Zoning Administrator within not less
than 30 days nor more than 60 days after the close of the public review period
pursuant to subsection (D)(4) of this section. All interested parties may be
joined as parties to the hearing.
      (4)   At the hearing the Zoning Administrator shall hear testimony and
accept evidence pertaining to the physical and technical suitability of the
proposed facility or expanding operations. In addition, any affected party may
present specific allegations based on scientific and technical findings of fact
showing that the proposed facility or expanding operations may have a direct,
substantial and immediate effect upon a legally protected interest of the
affected property owner.
      (5)   Establishment of property usage which is the date the swine feeding
operation application was made available, pursuant to this section, for public
review versus date of initial construction or placement of occupied residence,
shall be given consideration when determining a contested matter between an
applicant and an interested party on issues other than pollution of the waters
of the state.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to the individual notice required by section of this
article, the Zoning Administrator shall require the applicant to give public
notice of the opportunity to comment on the requested permit.
      (2)   The public notice for a new or expanding operation shall be
published as a legal notice prior to the date the application is available for
public viewing in at least 1 newspaper of general circulation in Frederick
County. The applicant shall also post the property in accordance with §
1-19-3.200.2(C).
      (3)   The notice shall identify locations where the application shall be
available for viewing. Such locations shall include the office of the Zoning
Administrator and a specific public location in the Frederick County.
      (4)   The application shall be available for public review during normal
business hours. The copies of the application posted for public viewing shall
be complete except for proprietary information otherwise protected by law and
must remain posted during normal business hours for at least 20 working days
after notice is published.
      (5)   The Zoning Administrator, as necessary, may hold public meetings at
a location convenient to the proposed facility or expanding operation to
address public comments on the proposed facility or expanding operation.
   (E)   Prior to the issuance of any permit for a swine feeding operation, or
expanding operation, the Zoning Administrator shall require the applicant to
submit:
      (1)   Documentation certifying notice has been issued to all affected
property owners. A map of all affected property owners within 1 mile and the
corresponding mailing list shall be submitted with each application; and
      (2)   Proof of publication notice of a new or expanding application for a
swine feeding permit required by this section.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 05-27-388, 10-25-2005; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.6. WASTE, NUTRIENT AND ODOR MANAGEMENT AND SOIL AND WATER
CONSERVATION.
   (A)   (1)   The applicant shall submit:
         (a)   A nutrient management plan;
         (b)   Soil and water conservation plan;
         (c)   A waste management plan, and
         (d)   An odor abatement or control plan.
      (2)   The above plans shall be prepared by the Maryland Cooperative
Extension Service, NRCS or private consultant with review and approval by NRCS
or Maryland Cooperative Extension Service. For operations over 1,000 animal
units (2,500 hogs), a nonpoint source discharge permit will be required from
the Maryland Department of the Environment.
   (B)   The following records shall be maintained at the site as long as the
facility is in operation. Quarterly reports of the following information shall
be filed with the Zoning Administrator:
      (1)   Water level in the retention structure;
      (2)   Daily precipitation records from on-site rain gauge;
      (3)   Incident reports such as spills and other discharges;
      (4)   Inspection and maintenance reports;
      (5)   Findings from annual inspections of the entire facility;
      (6)   Log of removal of swine waste sold or given to other persons for
disposal, including location and application information;
      (7)   Other specific information deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator to implement the provisions of this article;
      (8)   Copy of general permit issued by the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency if applicable, and other specific records deemed necessary by
the Zoning Administrator to implement the provisions of this article; and
      (9)   The notarized statement signed by the applicant accepting full
responsibility for properly closing all waste retention structures pursuant to
subsection (C) of this section.
   (C)   The applicant shall sign a notarized statement accepting full
responsibility for properly closing all swine waste retention structures if the
facility ceases to function or is ordered to close by any governmental or
regulatory body. When a permit is transferred, the new property owner or
operator shall submit a signed notarized statement accepting full
responsibility for properly closing all waste retention structures if the
facility ceases to function or is ordered to close by any governmental or
regulatory body.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.7. DEVELOPMENT OF ODOR ABATEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   An odor abatement plan shall be developed by each swine feeding
operation prior to the submission of an application pursuant to the provisions
of this article. The odor abatement plan shall include, but not be limited to,
provisions for documentation of structural controls, documentation of
management practices, odor abatement and record keeping provisions.
   (B)   (1)   The odor abatement plan shall include specific methods of odor
reduction which shall be tailored to each facility.
      (2)   The odor abatement plan shall address methods for reducing odors in
relationship to swine maintenance, waste storage, land application, and carcass
disposal.
      (3)   The applicant or owner or operator shall examine the odor abatement
plan at least annually to evaluate the effectiveness of the plan, modify for
changed conditions at the facility and determine if economically feasible
technological advances are available and appropriate for the facility.
   (C)   If, after reviewing the odor abatement plan, the Zoning Administrator
determines that the plan does not adequately meet 1 or more of the factors set
forth in subsection (D), the swine feeding operation shall make and implement
appropriate changes to the plan, which may include the utilization of
economically feasible technology designed to abate odor as required by the
Zoning Administrator pursuant to this article.
   (D)   In determining the adequacy of an odor abatement plan, the Zoning
Administrator shall consider all relevant factors, including, but not limited
to:
      (1)   Design of the facilities;
      (2)   Odor-control technology to be utilized;
      (3)   Prevailing wind direction in relation to occupied residences;
      (4)   Size of operation;
      (5)   Distance from facility to occupied residences; and
      (6)   All information contained in the application.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.8. SWINE WASTE RETENTION STRUCTURE.
   (A)   (1)   Any swine waste retention structure shall be constructed to
standards and specifications of NRCS.
      (2)   Each swine feeding operation shall install and maintain in working
order a leak detection system or sufficient monitoring wells, both up gradient
and down gradient, around the perimeter of each retention structure.
   (B)   All substances entering the retention structures shall be composed
entirely of wastewaters from the property operation and maintenance of a swine
feeding operation and the runoff from the swine feeding operation area. The
disposal of any materials other than substances associated with proper
operation and maintenance of the facility into the containment structures,
including, but not limited to, human waste, is prohibited.
   (C)   All new retention structures of swine feeding operations shall be
designed for odor abatement, groundwater protection and nutrient conservation.
   (D)   Documentation, sampling, data and any other records required by this
section shall be maintained on site for as long as the facility is in
operation. Samples collected during the first year of the retention structure
shall be considered the baseline data and must be retained on site for as long
as the facility is in operation.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.9. SWINE WASTE DISPOSAL, APPLICATION, AND ACCIDENTAL SPILL
PROCEDURES.
   (A)   If, for any reason, there is a spill or other release of any process
wastewater, swine waste or other pollutant as defined in the Federal Clean
Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1362), as amended, (a discharge), the owner or operator is
required to make immediate notification to the Zoning Administrator. The report
of the discharge shall include:
      (1)   A description of the discharge and cause;
      (2)   An estimation of the flow rate and volume discharged;
      (3)   The period of discharge, including exact dates and times, and if
not already corrected, the anticipated time the discharge is expected to
continue;
      (4)   Steps taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the
discharge; and
      (5)   Test results for fecal coliform bacteria, 5 day biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD5), total suspended solids (TSS), ammonia nitrogen, total Kjeldahl
nitrogen (TKN), any pesticides which the operator has reason to believe could
be in the discharge, or such other parameters as required by the Zoning
Administrator which the Zoning Administrator has reason to believe could be in
the discharge. The analysis of the water samples shall be performed by a
qualified environmental laboratory certified by the Maryland Department of the
Environment and approved by the Maryland Department of Agricultural and/or
Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. These samples shall be taken
at the most upstream and downstream point on the property where swine operation
is located within 24 hours after the discharge occurs.
   (B)   Records shall be maintained of all swine wastes applied on land owned
or controlled by the owner and operator and sold or given to other persons for
disposal.
   (C)   If the swine waste from a swine feeding operation is sold or given to
other persons for land application or disposal, the owner or operator of the
swine feeding operation shall maintain a log of: date of removal from the swine
feeding operation; names of such other persons; and amount, in wet tons, dry
tons or cubic yards, of waste removed from the swine feeding operation.
   (D)   (1)   If the swine waste is to be land applied by other persons, a
swine feeding operation shall make available to such other person the most
current sample analysis of swine waste.
      (2)   In addition, the swine feeding operator shall notify, in writing,
any person to whom the swine waste is sold or given of the land application
disposal requirements for swine waste as specified by the waste management
plan.
      (3)   The swine feeding owner or operator shall remain liable and
responsible for compliance with all rules promulgated by the Zoning
Administrator regarding proper handling and disposing of swine waste even if
such disposal or application is performed by persons not employed or controlled
by the swine feeding operation.
   (E)   Soils in areas in which swine waste is applied shall be analyzed
annually for phosphates, nitrates and soil pH prior to the first application of
the swine waste in the calendar year. A copy of the results of the analysis
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and reviewed by a nutrient
management specialist, upon request by the Zoning Administrator. Such analysis
shall be retained by the owner or operator as long as the facility is in
operation.
   (F)   Every swine feeding operation permitted pursuant to this article shall
develop a plan approved by the Zoning Administrator for the disposal of
carcasses associated with normal mortality.
      (1)   Dead swine shall be disposed of in accordance with a carcass
disposal plan developed by the applicant or owner or operator and approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   The plan shall include provisions for the disposal of carcasses
associated with normal mortality, with emergency disposal when a major disease
outbreak or other emergency results in deaths significantly higher than normal
mortality rates and other provisions which will provide for a decrease in the
possibility of the spread of disease and prevent the contamination of waters of
the state.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.10. INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS; ACCESS TO PREMISES; RECORDS.
   The Zoning Administrator or his authorized agents are empowered to enter
upon the premises of any swine feeding operation for the purpose of inspecting
and investigating complaints as to the operation or to determine whether there
are any violations of this article.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.11. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT AMOUNT OF FEE.
   (A)   Permits issued pursuant to this article shall renew on July 1 of each
year upon payment of the annual permit fee and continued compliance with the
provisions of this article.
   (B)   The fees for a swine feeding operation permit and annual renewal
thereof shall be established by the county governing body.
   (C)   All fees received by the Zoning Administrator for permitting of swine
feeding operations shall be deposited in the office of the Treasurer for
Frederick County.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.12. DUTIES OF OWNERS AND OPERATORS.
   (A)   In addition to any other requirement of this article, swine feeding
operations owners and operators who are granted a swine feeding operations
permit shall:
      (1)   Provide adequate veterinarian services for detection, control and
elimination of livestock diseases;
      (2)   Have available for use at all necessary times mechanical means of
scraping, cleaning, and grading feed yard premises;
      (3)   Provide weather resistant aprons adjacent to all permanently
affixed feed bunks, water tanks, and feeding devices;
      (4)   Provide a minimum of a 50 foot vegetated woody buffer strip on both
sides of any perennial or intermittent stream, which is maintained in a living
condition, in accordance with the recommendations made in the soil and water
conservation plan, nutrient management plan, and waste management plan.
   (B)   Any swine feeding operation operated in compliance with a permit
issued under this article shall be deemed an agricultural operation under the
scope of §§
1-6-61 (Right to Farm Ordinance) et seq. of the Code.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.13. SWINE FEEDING SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by subsection (C) of this section, no new
or expanding swine feeding operation shall be constructed where its closest
waste facility is within a distance of one-half of a mile of any occupied
residence not owned or leased by the owner or operator of the swine feeding
operation.
   (B)   Except as otherwise authorized by this subsection, no liquid swine
waste shall be land applied (other than by injection) within 500 feet of the
nearest corner of an occupied residence not owned or leased by the owner of the
swine feeding operation.
   (C)   The setbacks contained in subsections (A) and (B) of this section
shall not apply if the applicable person, persons, entity or entities, such as
property owner, mortgagee, deed of trust holder, or installment sale vendor,
executes a written waiver with the owner or operator of the swine feeding
operation, under such terms and conditions that the parties negotiate. The
written waiver becomes effective upon recording of the waiver in the land
records of Frederick County, Maryland. The filed waiver shall preclude
enforcement of the setback requirements contained in subsections (A) and (B) of
this section. A change in ownership of the applicable property or change in the
ownership of the property on which the swine feeding operation is located shall
not affect the validity of the waiver.
   (D)   No liquid swine waste shall be land applied within 300 feet of an
existing public or private drinking water well.
   (E)   No swine feeding operation shall be established after September 25,
2000, which is located within 1 mile of a designated state, county, city,
federal park, wildlife refuge, natural resources management area or wildland
area.
   (F)   All distances between occupied residences and swine feeding operations
shall be measured from the closest corner of the walls of the occupied
residence to the closest point of the nearest waste facility, as determined by
the Zoning Administrator. The property boundary line of the real property is
not used unless it coincides with the closest point of the waste facility or
occupied residence.
   (G)   All swine feeding operations must be located a minimum of 550 feet
from all property lines.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.14. RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATIONS OF CERTAIN SWINE FEEDING OPERATIONS
AND WASTE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Open pit or lagoon waste facilities are not permitted.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, swine feeding operations
where swine are housed in roof-covered structures shall not be located within
one-half mile from an occupied residence not owned or leased by the owner or
operator of the swine feeding operation.
   (C)   No waste facility or building or structure housing swine shall be
located:
      (1)   Within 1 mile of any designated scenic river area as specified by
the Scenic Rivers Act; including the Monocacy River and the Potomac River;
      (2)   Within 200 feet of any stream, creek, FEMA floodplain or MD-DNR
mapped wetland area;
      (3)   Within a designated public well-head protection area or public well
recharge area;
      (4)   On a lot or parcel with less than 100 feet of road frontage;
      (5)   On a roadway with less than 20 feet of pavement width from the site
in both directions to the nearest collector or arterial roadway;
      (6)   On a roadway that lacks adequate sight distance (horizontal and
vertical alignment) for large truck traffic as determined by the Frederick
County Division of Public Works.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.15. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the power to suspend, revoke, or
not renew the permit of any swine feeding operation after a hearing and after
an administrative determination that such swine feeding operation has violated
or has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the power and duty to reinstate
any such suspended or revoked permits, or review such permits, upon a
satisfactory and acceptable showing and assurance that such swine feeding
operation is conducted in conformity with, and in compliance with, the
provisions of this article and that such conformity and compliance will
continue.
   (C)   In order to protect the public health and safety and the environment
of this county, the Zoning Administrator, pursuant to this article, may deny
issuance of a permit to establish and operate a swine feeding operation on and
after September 25, 2000, to any person or other legal entity which:
      (1)   Is not in substantial compliance with a final agency order or any
final order or judgment of a court of record secured by any state or federal
agency relating to swine feeding operations; or
      (2)   Has evidenced a reckless disregard for the protection of the public
and the environment as demonstrated by a history of noncompliance with
environmental laws and rules resulting in endangerment of human health or the
environment.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.500.16. PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may
be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.
   (B)   Any owner or operator who fails to take such action as may be
reasonable and necessary to avoid pollution of any stream, lake, river or
creek, except as otherwise provided by law, or who violates any rule of the
Zoning Administrator adopted to prevent water pollution from swine feeding
operations pursuant to this article shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be punished by a fine of $500 to
$1,000 for each violation by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than
90 days for each violation.
   (C)   Any person assessed an administrative or civil penalty may be required
to pay, in addition to such penalty amount and interest thereon, costs
associated with the collection of such penalties.
   (D)   The County Attorney or state's attorney, as appropriate, may bring an
action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the prosecution of a violation
by any person of a provision of this article, or order, or permit, issued
pursuant thereto.
   (E)   (1)   Any action for injunctive relief to redress or restrain a
violation by any person of this article, or order, or permit, issued pursuant
thereto or recovery of any administrative or civil penalty assessed pursuant to
this article may be brought by the County Attorney.
      (2)   The court shall have jurisdiction to determine said action, and to
grant the necessary or appropriate relief, including, but not limited to,
mandatory prohibitive injunctive relief, interim equitable relief, and punitive
damages.
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided by law, administrative and civil
penalties shall be paid to the Treasurer for Frederick County, Maryland.
   (G)   In determining the amount of a civil penalty or administrative
penalty, the court or the Zoning Administrator, as the case may be, shall
consider such factors as the nature, circumstances and gravity of the violation
or violations, the economic benefit, if any, resulting to the defendant from
the violation, the history of such violations, any good faith efforts to comply
with the applicable requirements, the economic impact of the penalty on the
defendant, the defendant's degree of culpability, and such other matters as
justice may require.
   (H)   For the purposes of this section, each day upon which a violation is
committed or is permitted to continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (I)   In addition to other penalties as may be imposed by law, any person
who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any
water pollution form, notice or report, or who knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required to be maintained by any water pollution
rules promulgated by the Zoning Administrator shall, upon conviction, be guilty
of a misdemeanor and may be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each
such violation.
(Ord. 00-29-271, 9-14-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
DIVISION 6. OTHER
§ 1-19-8.600. HISTORIC STRUCTURES OR SITES.
   The Board of Appeals may grant a special exception in any zoning district,
for the conversion of an existing historic structure or site into a restaurant,
country inn, antique shop, museum, business or professional office, group home
use, or a facility for functions, provided that other applicable requirements
of this chapter are met. Such conversion shall not result in any substantial
external alteration of the appearance of the historic structure or site.
Historic structure or site as used in this section only means a structure or
site listed on or eligible for the National Register of Historic Places or on
the Maryland Inventory of Historic Properties and listed on the Frederick
County Register of Historic Places. All properties requesting a special
exception under this section shall be listed on the Frederick County Register
of Historic Places prior to making application for a special exception. If the
special exception is granted, the applicant must complete the steps outlined in
§
1-19-8.356(O) before the special exception is utilized.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-62(E), 1-24-1977; Ord. 80-3-155, 1-29-1980; Ord. 00-25-267,
8-1-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-
12, 7-26-2022)
§ 1-19-8.610. LAND SUBJECT TO AGRICULTURAL LAND PRESERVATION EASEMENTS.
   Any land which is subject to an agricultural land preservation easement
purchased pursuant to Md. Code Ann., Subtitle 5, the Agriculture Article may be
subdivided as follows. Upon written application by the grantor of an
agricultural land preservation easement to the Maryland Agricultural Land
Preservation Foundation and approval by the foundation, the grantor of an
easement may subdivide lots of not less than 40,000 square feet for the grantor
of the easement and for each of his children in accordance with Md. Code Ann.,
the Agriculture Article, § 2-513(b); provided further, that the owner who
granted an easement may construct tenant houses for tenants fully engaged in
operation of the farm, but this construction may not exceed 1 tenant house per
100 acres.
(Ord. 80-10-162, 4-8-1980; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.620 MODERATELY PRICED DWELLING UNIT (MPDU).
§ 1-19-8.620.1. PURPOSE AND DESCRIPTION.
   The purpose of the MPDU program is to substantially increase the county's
supply of moderately priced housing units as a natural function of the
development process. This program permits an increase in density above the
total number of dwelling units permitted by the standard method of development
if MPDUs are actually constructed and the applicant does not choose to pay a
per square foot payment in lieu. Construction of MPDUs also permits a reduction
in certain area and dimensional requirements where certain criteria are met
(see also §
1-19-8.620.5). Alternative options to the production of MPDUs in residential
developments may be granted in exceptional cases (Chapter 6A, § 1-6A-5(E) of
the MPDU program). The site plan approval procedures of §
1-19-2.160 and §
1-19-3.300 through §
1-19-3.300.4 of this Code must be followed, except as specifically provided in
this division. Where any of the provisions of this section are elected for a
development, all of the requirements of this division apply.
(Ord. 02-26-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-22-526, 7-14-
2009; Ord. 13-25-653, 10-31-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-28,
10-18-2022)
Editor's note:
   The specific regulations governing the unit costs, income levels and
administration of the MPDU program are established as a separate MPDU ordinance
with accompanying resolutions and shall be the governing authority. See Chapter
6A.
§ 1-19-8.620.2. SCOPE AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The provisions of this division shall apply to all residential developments
consisting of 25 units or more on public water and sewer. Residential
developments consisting of 25 units or more are required to provide no less
than 12.5% of the total units as MPDUs. This includes all developments in VC,
R-1, R-3, R-5, R-8, R-12, R-16 residential districts, MX, MXD, and PUD
districts.
(Ord. 02-26-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-
2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 11-28-594, 11-22-2011; Ord. 12-08-603,
4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-8.620.3. DENSITY BONUS.
   (A)   If at least 12.5% of the total number of dwelling units are
constructed as MPDUs in accordance with
Chapter 1-6A:
      (1)   Density bonuses at a one-to one ratio will be provided; for each
MPDU built, one unit of density bonus is earned.
      (2)   A two-to-one density bonus may be approved by the Planning
Commission for MPDUs constructed in specified growth areas as identified in the
Livable Frederick Master Plan.
   (B)   The density bonus dwelling units must be the same unit type as the
MPDUs. Density bonus units will not be approved if the additional density would
cause the development to violate any applicable State or County regulations, or
to exceed a dwelling unit cap, if any, established at the time of rezoning.
(Ord. 02-26-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-
2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 11-28-594, 11-22-2011; Ord. 12-08-603,
4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-28, 10-18-2022)
§ 1-19-8.620.4. EXCEPTIONS.
   Any existing site plan, preliminary subdivision plat or Phase II PUD plan
approved and having prior APFO approval prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall be exempt from the MPDU requirement as long as such approved plan
or plat, including any extension or modification thereof, remains valid.
Notwithstanding the above, if any revision or modification of an approved plan
which would otherwise be exempt from this chapter increases the density of the
project, the increased density shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 02-26-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-8.620.5. LOT AREA, WIDTH AND YARD MEASUREMENTS.
   (A)   Concept plan approval (submitted in conformance with §
1-19-3.300.2(B)) from the Planning Commission or its authorized representative
is required as the first step in the development review process for projects
with VC, R1, R3, R5, R8, R12, or R16 zoning, utilizing the reduced measurements
as provided for in § 1-19-8.620.5.E.
   (B)   The following lot area, width and yard measurement reductions are
allowed only in developments that include constructed MPDUs.
               Current Proposed Current Proposed Current Proposed Current Proposed Current Proposed
Use            Min.    Min. Lot Lot     Lot      Front   Front    Side    Side     Rear    Rear     Current Proposed
Classification Lot     Area     Width   Width    Yard    Yard     Yard    Yard     Yard    Yard     Height  Height
               Area
                   Current Proposed Current Proposed Current Proposed Current Proposed Current Proposed
Use Classification Min.    Min. Lot Lot     Lot      Front   Front    Side    Side     Rear    Rear     Current Proposed
                   Lot     Area     Width   Width    Yard    Yard     Yard    Yard     Yard    Yard     Height  Height
                   Area
Residential One District R-1
Residential                                                                                           
Single family      40,000  12,000   100     80       40      30       10      10       30      25       30      30
Duplex dwelling    1 acre  12,000** 100     80       40      30       10      10       30      25       30      30
Two family         2 acre  12,000** 150     100      40      30       15      10       30      25       30      30
dwelling
Residential Three District R-3
Residential
   Single family12,000  4,000    80      40       30      10       10      4/10*    30      25       30      40
   Duplex dwelli12,000  2,500**  80      25       30      10       10      1/10*    30      25       30      40
   Two family   24,000  2,000**  100     40       30      10       10      4/10*    30      25       30      40
dwelling
   Townhouse            1,600            16               10               4/10*            20               40
Residential Five District R-5
Residential:
   Single family8,000   3,500    70      35       30      10       8       4/10*    30      25       30      40
   Duplex dwelli8,000   2,000**  70      20       30      10       8       4/10*    30      25       30      40
   Two family   16,000  1,750**  80      35       30      10       8       4/10*    30      25       30      40
dwelling
   Townhouse    1,600   1,600    16      16       10      10       15      4/*10*   20      20       30      40
Residential Eight District R-8
Residential:
   Single family6,000   3,500    65      35       25      5        8       4/10*    30      25       30      40
   Duplex dwelli6,000   2,000**  65      20       25      5        8       4/10*    30      25       30      40
   Two family   12,000  1,750*   100     35       25      5        10      4/10*    30      25       30      40
dwelling
   Townhouse    1,600   1,600    16      16       25      5        15      4/10*    20      20       30      40
   Multi family No Min. No Min.  150     120      40      10       30      10       50      20       40      60
dwelling
   Multi family No Min. No Min.  150     120      40      10       30      10       50      20       40      60
group
Residential Twelve District R-12
Residential:
   Single family6,000   3,000    65      30       25      5        8       4/10*    30      20       30      40
   Duplex dwelli6,000   2,000**  65      20       25      5        8       4/10*    30      20       30      40
   Two family   10,000  1,500**  100     30       25      5        8       4/10*    30      20       30      40
dwelling
   Townhouse    1,600   1,600    16      16       25      5        15      4/10*    20      20       30      40
   Multi family No Min. No Min.  150     100      40      10       +       10       +       20       100     120
dwelling
   Multi family No Min. No Min.  150     100      40      10       +       10       +       20       100     120
group
Residential Sixteen District R-16 and MX
Residential:
   Single family6,000   3,000    60      30       25      5        8       4/10*    30      20       30      40
   Duplex dwelli6,000   2,000**  60      20       25      5        8       4/10*    30      20       30      40
   Two family   10,000  1,500**  60      30       25      5        8       4/10*    30      20       30      40
dwelling
   Townhouse    1,600   1,600    16      16       15      5        10      4/10*    20      20       30      40
   Multi family No Min. No Min.  100     80       50      10       +       10       +       20       100     120
dwelling
   Multi family No Min. No Min.  100     80       120     10       +       10       +       20       100     120
group
Village Center
Residential:
   Single family6,000   3,000    65      30       25      5        8       4/10*    30      20       30      40
   Duplex dwelli6,000   2,000**  65      20       25      5        8       4/10*    30      20       30      40
   Two family   10,000  1,500**  75      30       25      5        8       4/10*    30      20       30      40
dwelling
   Townhouse    1,600   1,600    16      16       15      5        10      4/10*    20      20       30      40
   Multi family No Min. No Min.  65      50       25      10       15      10       50      20       45      45
dwelling
   Multi family No Min. No Min.  150     100      40      10       30      10       50      20       45      45
group
 
*   Minimum 4 ft. with minimum 10 ft. between structures.
**   Minimum lot area per unit.
(Ord. 02-26-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 03-09-332, 6-3-2003; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-2011; Ord. 11-28-594, 11-22-2011; Ord. 12-08-603, 4-
17-2012; Ord. 13-25-653, 10-31-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-
28, 10-18-2022)
§ 1-19-8.620.6. PROCEDURES FOR APPLICATION AND APPROVAL.
   A written MPDU agreement must be drafted prior to Planning Commission
approval of preliminary plans and site plans. The preliminary plan and site
plan must document the number, type, location, and staging of construction, or
otherwise document how the requirements of
Chapter 1-6A (MPDU Ordinance) will be met. A written MPDU agreement must be
approved by the Director of Housing in accordance with
Chapter 1-6A prior to the issuance of a building permit or the recordation of a
final plat.
(Ord. 02-26-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 22-28, 10-18-2022)
§ 1-19-8.630. SUBDIVISION AND DEDICATION OF LAND FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
   (A)   Property may be subdivided and dedicated to the county for the purpose
of supporting affordable housing programs in Frederick County. Such property
may be dedicated in any zoning district where residential uses are permitted.
Dedication of such land will occur following agreement with the Department of
Housing and Community development, and submittal and approval of an appropriate
subdivision plat as required by the Frederick County Subdivision Regulations.
   (B)   In the Agricultural Zoning District, notwithstanding §
1-19-7.300 of this chapter, a property owner may subdivide and dedicate 1
undeveloped building lot, or 1 lot containing an existing residence for the
purposes outlined in subsection (A) above. The remainder property will retain
all subdivision rights permitted before the dedication occurred.
   (C)   In all Residential Districts, except for the Mobile Home Park Zone, a
property owner with a parcel of 20 acres or more may dedicate up to 5% of the
parcel along with the corresponding zoning density to the county for purposes
outlined in subsection (A) above. The remainder of the property, from which the
parcel was subdivided and dedicated for the purposes set forth in subsection
(A) above, shall be permitted to be developed to the full density which would
have been allowed on the original parcel prior to the dedication.
   (D)   Only 1 dedication per original tract will be permitted under this
section. Development of both the dedicated parcel and remainder must comply
with all applicable design standards and permitted uses for the zoning district
in which they are located. A deed must be given to and accepted by the county
and recorded in the land records in conjunction with the recordation of the
subdivision plat.
(Ord. 91-34-034, 12-3-1991; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
DIVISION 7. TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
§ 1-19-8.700. TEMPORARY OUTDOOR ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   An application must be made for a temporary use permit which may be
issued by the Zoning Administrator for all of the following outdoor activities
to which are invited or are open to a segment of the general public: namely
carnivals, circuses, tent revival meetings, musical festivals, public
gatherings, public rallies, dinners, sales, bazaars, and similar activities in
all zoning districts, except residential wherein temporary use permits shall
not be issued. However, customary accessory uses contained in §§
1-19-8.205 and
1-19-8.210 do not require temporary use permits. (Outdoor shall include
activities in a tent, pavilion or open-type permanent structures.) Before
issuing a permit, the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the site is
adequate for its intended temporary use according to the following.
      (1)   The proposed activity is in compliance with all safety, health, and
environmental standards and is not detrimental to the surrounding area.
      (2)   The site is of a sufficient size to accommodate the intended
temporary use.
      (3)   A buffer zone devoid of all activities of 100 feet from all
adjacent property lines will be maintained.
      (4)   Safe and orderly flow of traffic can be ensured.
   (B)   Contractors and lot owner's temporary structures are allowed as a
temporary use in any district in connection with a construction project. Such
structures will comply with the yard requirements of the zoning district. Said
structures will be removed at the completion of construction or expiration of
permit.
   (C)   Farmers market. An applicant may apply for a temporary use permit for
a farmers market from the Zoning Administrator. This permit shall be issued for
a period up to 180 calendar days. A farmers market may operate only on weekends
and shall be open to the general public. Except as provided in §
1-19-8.210, a farmers market shall be permitted in the VC, MX, and GC zones,
and within MXD and PUD overlays. The Zoning Administrator shall determine that
the site is adequate for this temporary use according to the following:
      (1)   The proposed activity is in compliance with all safety, health, and
environmental standards, and is not detrimental to the surrounding area.
      (2)   The site is of sufficient size to accommodate the farmers market
use, including a buffer zone of at least 50 feet from all adjacent property
lines.
      (3)   Safe and orderly flow of traffic can be ensured.
      (4)   Musical entertainment, if proposed, shall cease at dusk.
(Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 20-15, 9-29-
2020)
DIVISION 8. COMMERCIAL SOLAR FACILITIES
§ 1-19-8.800. COMMERCIAL SOLAR FACILITIES IN THE AGRICULTURAL ZONING DISTRICT.
   The following specific design criteria will apply to a commercial solar
facility to be constructed in the Agricultural zoning district pursuant to a
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCN) issued by the Public
Service Commission.
   (A)   Commercial solar facilities are not permitted within designated
priority preservation areas, designated rural legacy areas, or on land
preservation easements held in perpetuity, or on properties in receipt of
financial incentives to maintain historic character through county or state
programs.
   (B)   The Type I site plan application must be prepared in accordance with
Division 3 - Site Plan Review - of this chapter and include all information
required by Md. Code Ann., Public Utilities Article, §§ 7-207 and 7-208 for a
CPCN application.
      (1)   The site plan application must be submitted by the applicant to the
county and at least one multi-agency review cycle must be completed prior to
the applicant submitting an application to the Public Service Commission for a
CPCN.
      (2)   The site plan will be scheduled for a Planning Commission public
hearing after the applicant provides a copy of the CPCN to the county and all
agency comments are addressed.
      (3)   The owner of a property that is zoned Agricultural (AG) and
approved for the installation of a commercial solar facility in accordance with
this section must ensure that any portion of the property not placed into solar
energy production will continue to be used for active or passive agricultural
production, and purposes that are compatible with simultaneous solar
production: by way of example and not limitation, such production and purposes
include owner or tenant pasture production for grazing or harvest, crop
production, beekeeping or timber production. Areas that are not used for
agricultural production must be left as open space or, where streams or
floodplain exist, as environmental buffers.
   (C)   Setbacks for solar energy generating panels and accessories will be
measured from the nearest solar panel/structure.
   (D)   Setbacks for solar energy generating panels and accessories will be:
      (1)   Fifty feet from all property lines;
      (2)   One hundred feet from any residential structure; and
      (3)   Fifty feet from proposed or established road right of way lines as
determined by the Master Highway Plan.
   (E)   All solar energy generating panels and accessories are to be sited
down slope from ridge lines, toward the interior of the parcel, lot, or tract,
whenever possible.
   (F)   Landscaping and screening.
      (1)   In addition to §
1-19-6.400, the following landscaping, screening, and buffering requirements
must be met.
         (a)   A landscaped buffer must be provided along all property lines or
along the exterior boundary of the solar array. The buffer must be designed to
provide four-season visual screening of the solar facility and include multi-
layered, staggered rows of overstory and understory trees and shrubs that are a
mix of evergreen and deciduous vegetation, with an emphasis on species that are
native to Frederick County.
         (b)   Applicant must submit a landscape, buffering, and screening plan
as part of the site plan application addressing the requirements and timing of
plantings. Screening and buffering must be installed as early in the
development process as possible and prior to activation of the solar facility.
Screening and buffering requirements must be installed in accordance with the
approved site plan.
         (c)   The overstory trees within a landscape screen or buffer must be
a minimum of 6 feet in height with a minimum caliper of 2 inches at the time of
planting. The minimum size of understory trees and shrubs at the time of
planting must be 3 gallon or larger. Trees and shrubs larger than the minimum
sizes listed above will be required where the minimum planting sizes will not
provide adequate screening or buffering within 2 years. Vegetation used to
establish a visual screen must not be trimmed so as to stunt upward and outward
growth or to otherwise limit the effectiveness of the visual screen.
         (d)   A berm or fence may be used in combination with vegetation to
satisfy the screening requirement where deemed appropriate by county staff and
the Planning Commission. Fences must be made of quality materials and enhance
rather than detract from the beautification of the site. Berms and fences must
be designed to avoid long, undifferentiated facades and long, plain sections by
including a combination of the following design elements: variations in height,
step-backs or recesses, changes in material, patterns, textures, colors, or use
of accent materials.
         (e)   If security fencing is proposed, vegetative screening must be
placed between the fence and the public view. Fencing must be made of high-
quality materials. Chain-link and similar woven metal or plastic fencing must
not be used. No barbed or razor wire may be used on the security fencing around
the solar panels and accessories.
         (f)   If forest or hedgerows exist where screening or buffering is
required, it must be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and
supplemented with new plantings where necessary to provide the desired
screening or buffering.
         (g)   All landscaping, screening, and buffering must be maintained in
living condition.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may approve a modification to the
landscaping, buffering, and screening standards where an alternate landscaping,
buffering, and screening plan is proposed that meets the purpose and intent of
these design requirements.
   (G)   Lighting. If lighting is proposed, then a lighting plan must be
submitted in accordance with §
1-19-6.500. Lighting will provide the lowest level of illumination practicable
to reduce impact on adjoining properties.
   (H)   Removal and restoration of the property.
      (1)   The property owner will provide a decommissioning and restoration
plan as part of the site plan submission unless a decommissioning and
restoration plan is included in the Public Service Commission's conditions of
CPCN approval.
      (2)   The property owner will ensure the removal and disposal of all of
the solar energy generating panels and accessories and the restoration of the
site to its prior condition, by posting an acceptable monetary guarantee with
the county on forms provided by the office of the Zoning Administrator. The
guarantee must be for an amount equal to a cost estimate approved by the Zoning
Administrator for the removal and disposal of the solar facility, plus a 15%
contingency, ("guarantee amount"). The financial guarantee must be provided
prior to the issuance of a building permit or grading permit, whichever is
applied for first. Notice must be provided to the Zoning Administrator within
30 days of the sale or transfer of the lease and a new financial guarantee must
be provided by the new lease holder. If a guarantee for the cost of removal and
disposal of the solar panels and accessories and the restoration of the
property is required by and provided to a state entity, the Zoning
Administrator may accept documentation of the posting of the guarantee with the
state entity as satisfaction of this requirement.
      (3)   When the commercial solar facility ceases to generate electricity,
does not input electricity into the electric grid for 6 months, or the lease
for the site expires, the site plan approval will terminate automatically and
without notice from the county.
      (4)   Removal of the solar energy generating panels and accessories will
begin within 90 days after termination of the site plan approval, and
restoration of the property to the condition that existed prior to the
installation of the solar energy generating panels and accessories will be
completed within 6 months of the start of solar panel removal.
      (5)   Restoration will include the removal from the property of all
above-ground facilities, as well as all underground footings, supports, wires,
materials, fences, and berms.
   (I)   Notice to county. The property owner or owner of the solar energy
generating panels and accessories must provide notice to the Zoning
Administrator when the lease for the site expires, and when the commercial
solar facility ceases to generate electricity or does not input electricity
into the grid for 60 days or longer, unless due to routine maintenance
activity.
(Bill No. 24-10, 7-16-2024)
ARTICLE IX: ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS (§§ 1-19-9.100 - 1-19-9.400)
Section
Division 1. Floodplain District Regulations
   
1-19-9.100   Floodplain District
   
1-19-9.110   Activities within Floodplain District
   
1-19-9.120   Procedures for activities within the FEMA floodplain
   
1-19-9.130   Watercourse relocation or alteration
Division 2. Danger Reach Areas
   
1-19-9.200   Danger reach areas
   
1-19-9.210   Activities within danger reach areas
   
1-19-9.220   Procedures for activities within danger reach areas
Division 3. Wet Soils
   
1-19-9.300   Structures with basements near wet soils
Division 4. Waterbody Buffer Requirements
   
1-19-9.400   Waterbody buffer requirements
DIVISION 1. FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 1-19-9.100. FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The Floodplain District is established to protect
human life and health, minimize property damage, encourage appropriate
construction practices to minimize future damage, to protect water supply,
sanitary sewage disposal, and natural drainage. For purposes of this chapter,
and other applicable ordinances, the Floodplain District will be considered to
be the most extensive of the following:
      (1)   FEMA Floodplain;
      (2)   Flooding soils; and
      (3)   Wetland areas.
   (B)   Establishing the Floodplain District. The Floodplain District is an
overlay to the underlying zoning districts as shown on the zoning map. The
provisions of the Floodplain District are supplementary to the regulations of
the underlying zoning district. Where there is any conflict between the
provisions or requirements of the Floodplain District and those of any
underlying district, the more restrictive provisions pertaining to the
Floodplain District will apply.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall establish a Floodplain District and
an official map. The Floodplain District will be considered to be the most
extensive of the following: FEMA floodplain, flooding soils, and wetlands. The
Zoning Administrator may also utilize available historic data in determining
the limits of the Floodplain District, including without limitation photographs
and high water elevations.
      (2)   Within the FEMA floodplain, the source of this delineation shall be
at a minimum the most recent effective Flood Insurance Study and Digital Flood
Insurance Rate Map (D-FIRM) for Frederick County, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, as amended.
      (3)   The FEMA floodplain is established with emphasis on the 100-year
flood elevation where defined rather than the area graphically delineated on
the official floodplain maps. Where map boundaries and elevations disagree,
elevations prevail, with no approval from FEMA required.
      (4)   The delineation of the FEMA floodplain may be revised, amended and
modified by the Zoning Administrator in compliance with the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) and the Maryland Department of the Environment, when:
         (a)   There are changes through natural or other causes to flood
elevations and boundaries; or
         (b)   Changes are indicated by detailed hydrologic and hydraulic
information and studies.
         (c)   As soon as practicable, but not later than 6 months after the
date such information becomes available, the Zoning Administrator shall notify
the Federal Insurance Administrator of the changes by submitting technical and
scientific data in accordance with 44 CFR part 65. All such changes shall be
subject to the review and prior approval of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the Maryland Department of the Environment.
      (5)   The location and limits of flooding soils are determined by the
Soil Survey of Frederick County and Web Soil Survey, as amended.
      (6)   The location and limits of wetlands are determined by the Maryland
Department of the Environment Wetland and Waterways Program.
      (7)   Any dispute of the FEMA floodplain shall be appealed to Federal
Emergency Management Agency through the Zoning Administrator. Disputes
regarding wetlands shall be appealed to the Maryland Department of the
Environment.
   (C)   Administration. The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to
administer and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the
Floodplain Administrator.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator may delegate duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator will review permits to assure sites
are reasonably safe from flooding for new construction and substantial
improvements in flood prone areas. Where BFE data are utilized, the Floodplain
Administrator will obtain and maintain records of lowest floor and
floodproofing elevations for new construction and substantial improvements.
      (3)   The County may enter into written agreements or contracts with
other political subdivisions of the State of Maryland or a private sector
entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration
of any part of these regulations by another entity will not relieve the County
of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR).
   (D)   Disclaimers. The degree of flood protection required by these
regulations are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and based on
scientific and engineering considerations.
      (1)   Larger floods can and will occur, and flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. Compliance with these regulations does
not mean that land outside of the special flood hazard areas or uses that are
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage.
      (2)   These floodplain regulations do not create liability on the part of
Frederick County, any officer or employee thereof, the Maryland Department of
the Environment (MDE) or the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), for
any flood damage that results from reliance on these floodplain regulations or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
   (E)   FIS and FIRMs. For the purposes of these regulations, the minimum
basis for establishing special flood hazard areas and base flood elevations is
the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Frederick County, Maryland dated 8/1/23, or
the most recent revision thereof, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map
(s) (FIRMs) and all subsequent amendments and revisions to the FIRMs. The FIS
and FIRMs are retained on file and available to the public at the Offices of
the Zoning Administrator at 30 N. Market Street, Frederick MD 21701.
(Ord. 92-04-039, 2-13-1992; Ord. 07-29-469, 9-4-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 10-31-566, 12-21-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 23-08,
5-23-2023)
§ 1-19-9.110. ACTIVITIES WITHIN FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   A permit is required for all development within the FEMA
floodplain, flooding soils, and wetlands. It shall be granted only after all
necessary permit applications are approved by Federal, State, and County
agencies.
      (2)   The issuance of any permits by the State of Maryland or Corps of
Engineers does not permit development within the Floodplain District except in
conformity with provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator may use tax assessment records to
determine substantial improvement when an improvement is proposed to an
existing structure. Substantial improvement will be calculated on a cumulative
basis.
      (4)   Any substantial improvement or replacement approved shall be in
conformance with the requirements of the permit program of the Maryland
Department of the Environment and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
      (5)   Within the FEMA floodplain, substantial improvements, substantial
improvements due to existing structures substantial damage, replacement or
relocated dwelling units (including manufactured homes), the addition of
accessory buildings, the expansion or replacement of an existing nonconforming
use, or development of an existing parcel of record lying totally within the
FEMA floodplain, require approval by the Board of Appeals (§
1-19-9.120 (A)).
      (6)   Within a danger reach area, the replacement of dwelling units
(including manufactured homes) damaged by flood, the substantial improvement of
habitable area within existing structures, the addition of habitable area to an
existing structure, or development of an existing parcel of record lying
partially within a danger reach area require approval by the Board of Appeals
(§
1-19-9.220(A)).
   (B)   Land development.
      (1)   FEMA Floodplain and Wetlands. Within the FEMA floodplain and
wetlands, no new development, including agricultural structures, residential or
nonresidential buildings, parking lots impervious to water, or fill, or
excavation operations in conjunction with development will be permitted.
Substantial improvements, substantial improvements due to existing structures
substantial damage, replacement or relocated dwelling units (including
manufactured homes), the addition of accessory buildings, the expansion or
replacement of an existing nonconforming use, or development of an existing
parcel of record lying totally within the FEMA floodplain shall be permitted
only with approval by the Board of Appeals. Open shelters, pole-type structures
(open on all sides and without walls), open fences and recreational uses, and
recreational equipment which are not contained in a building, are exempt from
the requirements of this section upon obtaining a zoning certificate in order
to ensure the type of construction will not alter the flood elevation, except
as outlined in §
1-19-9.110(D).
      (2)   Watershed Management Plans. All substantial improvements,
replacements or other developments within the FEMA floodplain shall be
consistent with watershed management plans where such plans exist. Structures
slated for acquisition under future flood hazard management projects may not be
improved or replaced.
      (3)   Floodplain and stream setbacks. A minimum setback of 25 feet shall
be provided from all Floodplain district boundaries, except as otherwise
approved through the mitigation process described in §
1-19-9.110(B)(7), or a minimum setback of 50 feet shall be provided from the
bank of any perennial or intermittent stream, whichever is greater.  In any
area designated as a special flood hazard area, the setback must be 100 feet
from the top of bank of a watercourse. All setback areas shall be maintained or
planted with natural vegetation.
      (4)   Subdivisions and site plans. All new subdivisions or site plans
shall have stream setbacks as well as the 100-year floodplain and floodway
delineations and elevations, as reflected on Frederick County's Flood Insurance
Study and Digital FIRM published by FEMA clearly shown and certified by a
registered professional engineer, registered professional land surveyor, or
registered property line surveyor. The plan shall demonstrate that development
will avoid the FEMA floodplain. No new lots shall be created unless they have
adequate buildable area outside of designated FEMA floodplain areas.
      (5)   Approximate FEMA floodplain. For development proposed in the
approximate floodplain Zone A (no water surface elevations or floodway data
provided), the applicant must use the best available information to determine
the elevation of the 100-year flood and the extent of the floodway, and must
delineate these on the site plan submitted for approval. For new subdivisions,
the applicant must have the 100-year flood elevations certified by a registered
professional engineer based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses which include
a floodway analysis. For individual lot development if no data are available,
methods described in FEMA Publication #265 "Managing Floodplain Development in
Approximate Zone A Areas" should be used to determine the 100-year flood
elevation at the site.
      (6)   Floodway restrictions. No new development shall be permitted in the
floodway except as provided in §
1-19-9.110(D).
      (7)   Flooding soils. No new development shall be permitted in areas of
flooding soils unless approved through a mitigation process including the
following:
         (a)   Submission by the applicant of a geotechnical report and soils
report prepared by a registered professional engineer in the State of Maryland
and a soil scientist with full membership in a State Soils Professional
Organization or that meets certification requirements. The report shall address
soil characteristics to include flooding frequency, duration, and surface water
depth.
         (b)   Determination of buildable areas by the Community Development
Division.
         (c)   Submission by the applicant of a mitigation plan for approval by
the Community Development Division. The mitigation plan shall include such
factors as:
            1.   Retention pond releasing at predevelopment rates to include
capacity for temporary inundation as determined in §
1-19-9.110 (B)(7)(a).
            2.   Use of techniques to reduce off-site runoff and ensure
adequate groundwater recharge.
   (C)   Building standards. Development within the FEMA floodplain shall meet
the standards as provided in subsection 1 through 5 below. Replacement or
relocated dwelling units (including manufactured homes) or substantial
improvements due to existing structures substantial damage or addition of
accessory buildings will not be permitted without the approval of the Board of
Appeals and then only if the lowest floor is elevated 1 foot above the
elevation of the 100 year flood and the dwelling or improvement is placed on a
permanent foundation or securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
      (1)   Elevation.
         (a)   The elevation of the lowest floor (see definition of "lowest
floor") of all substantially improved or replaced structures shall be at least
1 foot above the elevation of the 100 year flood. Basements are prohibited.
         (b)   All applicants shall agree in writing to provide an elevation
certificate completed by a registered professional engineer or surveyor to
certify the lowest floor (as built) of any structure is elevated above the 100-
year flood. An Elevation Certificate must be submitted before a Zoning
Certificate may be approved.
      (2)   Enclosures below lowest floor. The relocation or substantial
improvements to existing structures or the addition of accessory structures
containing fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (including, but not
limited to crawl spaces, solid footings and continuous foundations) shall be
designed to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of 2 openings having a total net area of not less than
1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall
be provided.
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above
grade.
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      (3)   Anchoring. All structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with acceptable engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement during flooding. All large pipes and storage tanks located
below the Flood Protection Elevation shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation.
      (4)   Utilities.
         (a)   Electric: All electric utilities to the building side of the
meter, both interior and exterior to the building, must comply with all
requirements of this chapter. Distribution panel boxes must be at least 2 feet
above the Flood Protection Elevation. All outlets and electrical installations,
such as heat pumps, air conditioners, water heaters, furnaces, generators,
distribution systems, including duct work, must be installed at or above the
Flood Protection Elevation. Replacement HVAC equipment shall be elevated to the
Flood Protection Elevation unless proven to be impractical.
         (b)   Plumbing: Toilets, sinks, showers, water heaters, pressure
tanks, furnaces, and other permanent plumbing installations must be installed
at or above the Flood Protection Elevation.
         (c)   Gas: Gas meters and gas appliances must be installed at or above
the Flood Protection Elevation.
         (d)   Fuel tanks: All gas (propane) tanks installed in the floodplain
are required to be anchored to prevent flotation in accordance with the
National Fire Protection Association Code 58. All tanks installed in floodplain
areas shall be either elevated or adequately anchored to prevent flotation up
to the Flood Protection Elevation. All fuel oil storage tanks installed in the
floodplain must be either elevated or securely anchored to prevent flotation up
to the Flood Protection Elevation. Vent pipes must extend to or above the Flood
Protection Elevation and fill caps below the Flood Protection Elevation must be
screw type with a tight fitting gasket to prevent mixing of water with oil.
         (e)   Water supply and sanitary facilities: Water supply distribution
and sanitary disposal collection systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate the infiltration of flood waters into the systems or discharges from
the systems into flood waters and shall be located and constructed so as to
minimize or eliminate flood damage. On-site sewage disposal systems shall meet
these same standards.
      (5)   Floodproofing.
         (a)   Floodproofing for substantial improvement of existing
nonresidential buildings may be allowed in nontidal waters of the State.
         (b)   If floodproofing is proposed, structures shall:
            1.   Be designed to be dry floodproofed such that the building or
structure is watertight with walls and floors substantially impermeable to the
passage of water to the level of the Flood Protection Elevation plus 1.0 foot;
            2.   If located in an area of shallow flooding (Zone AO), be dry
floodproofed at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth
number specified on the FIRM plus 3 feet, or at least 5 feet if a depth number
is not specified;
            3.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
            4.   Have floodproofing measures that are designed taking into
consideration the nature of flood-related hazards; frequency, depth and
duration of flooding; rate of rise and fall of floodwater; soil
characteristics; flood-borne debris; at least 12 hours of flood warning time
from a credible source; and time necessary to implement any measures that
require human intervention;
            5.   Have at least one door above the applicable flood elevation
that allows human ingress and egress during conditions of flooding;
            6.   Have an operations and maintenance plan that is filed with
local emergency management officials and that specifies the owner/occupant's
responsibilities to monitor flood potential; the location of any shields,
doors, closures, tools, or other goods that are required for implementation;
maintenance of such goods; methods of installation; and periodic inspection;
and
            7.   Be certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensed
architect, through execution of a Floodproofing Certificate that states that
the design and methods of construction meet the requirements of this section.
The Floodproofing Certificate shall be submitted with the construction drawings
as required in §
1-19-9.110 (c)(5).
   (D)   Exemptions. This section does not prohibit the placement or repair of
road crossings; water impoundments for stormwater management; retention areas;
agricultural activities not requiring zoning certificate approval; public
utility lines; environmental mitigation projects; or other minor wetland fill
activities (less than 5,000 square feet of wetland impact) within designated
FEMA floodplain, flooding soils, or wetlands. These floodplain activities must
obtain all federal, state and local permits required and for minor wetland
fills receipt of a letter of no significant impact from the responsible federal
or state agency.
   (E)   Inspections. The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic
inspections of development permitted in special flood hazard areas, at
appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor
compliance. Such inspections may include:
      (1)   Stake-out inspection, to determine location on the site relative to
the flood hazard area and designated floodway.
      (2)   Foundation inspection, upon placement of the lowest floor and prior
to further vertical construction, to collect information or certification of
the elevation of the lowest floor.
      (3)   Inspection of enclosures below the lowest floor, including crawl/
underfloor spaces, to determine compliance with applicable provisions.
      (4)   Utility inspection, upon installation of specified equipment and
appliances, to determine appropriate location with respect to the base flood
elevation.
      (5)   Final inspection prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 92-04-039, 2-18-1992; Ord. 92-13-048, 7-7-1992; Ord. 93-13-077, 6-1-1993;
Ord. 07-29-469, 9-4-2007; Ord. 08-21-497, 8-5-2008; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008;
Ord. 10-31-566, 12-21-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 23-08, 5-23-
2023)
§ 1-19-9.120. PROCEDURES FOR ACTIVITIES WITHIN THE FEMA FLOODPLAIN.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall review the following activities within the
FEMA floodplain: substantial improvements, substantial improvements due to
existing structures substantial damage, replacement or relocated dwelling units
(including manufactured homes), the addition of accessory buildings, the
expansion or replacement of an existing nonconforming use, or development of an
existing parcel of record lying totally within the FEMA floodplain.
Applications to allow new structures or fill to be placed in the floodway shall
not be considered. The Board of Appeals may grant an application for approval
for activity within the FEMA floodplain when the Board specifically finds that:
      (1)   Failure to grant the application for approval would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      (2)   The granting of an application for approval would not increase
flood heights, add threats to public safety, result in extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and
      (3)   The granting of an application for approval would not allow new
structures or fill to be placed in the floodway; and
      (4)   The granting of an application for approval is the minimum
necessary considering the flood hazard to provide relief and that public funds
may not be available to mitigate the results of the approval; and
      (5)   All new structures and substantial improvements to existing
structures will have the lowest floor elevated to the greatest extent possible
with respect to the 100 year flood elevation, but at least to the Flood
Protection Elevation, and a FEMA elevation certificate filed. In addition, all
structures, including manufactured homes, must be firmly anchored in accordance
with acceptable engineering practices (i.e., FEMA publication 85 "Manufactured
Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas"); and
      (6)   The granting of a permit by the Maryland Department of the
Environment if located within a FEMA floodplain; and
      (7)   The action is duly recorded with the deed of the property on which
the application for approval is granted prior to the issuance of a building
permit. Any expense incurred by the recording is the responsibility of the
applicant.
      (8)   The Board of Appeals shall not grant approval of the above
activities for lots containing floodplain created after June 6, 1989.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals will notify the applicant of approval in writing
through the Zoning Administrator. The decision of approval and findings shall
include the notification that:
      (1)   The issuance of a decision to allow construction of a structure
below the 100 year flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance;
      (2)   Such construction below the 100 year flood level increases risks to
life and property.
   (C)   The Board of Appeals will maintain a record of all decisions,
including justification for their issuance, and the Zoning Administrator will
report such decisions in the county biennial reports submitted to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(Ord. 92-04-039, 2-18-1992; Ord. 07-29-469, 9-4-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-9.130. WATERCOURSE RELOCATION OR ALTERATION.
   In the event that a proposed development requires the relocation or
alteration of a watercourse, evidence shall be presented as part of the permit
application that all adjacent communities and the Maryland State NFIP
Coordinating Office, Maryland Department of the Environment have been notified
by certified mail and have approved of the proposed alteration or relocation.
Copies of these notifications shall then be forwarded to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration. In addition, the developer
shall assure the Zoning Administrator, in writing, that the flood-carrying
capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse in question
will be maintained.
(Ord. 92-04-039, 2-18-1992; Ord. 07-29-469, 9-4-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 2. DANGER REACH AREAS
§ 1-19-9.200. DANGER REACH AREAS.
   A danger reach area shall be defined as the Lake Merle Danger Reach Area as
specified in the Greenhorn & O'Mara study dated 1995 and approved by the
Maryland Department of the Environment on May 8, 1995.
(Ord. 96-02-154, 2-6-1996; Ord. 07-29-469, 9-4-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-9.210. ACTIVITIES WITHIN DANGER REACH AREAS.
   (A)   Except as provided for herein, within the danger reach area, no land
development or fill or excavation operations in conjunction with land
development including parking lots impervious to water will be permitted which
will increase the flood elevation or expand the danger reach area.
   (B)   No new lots shall be created which are encumbered by the danger reach
area, unless sufficient building area is available outside the danger reach
area.
   (C)   For all new construction a minimum horizontal setback of 10 feet or a
vertical setback of plus 5 feet shall be provided from all danger reach area
boundaries and shall be maintained or planted with natural vegetation, unless a
variance is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
   (D)   All new subdivisions or site plans shall have danger reach area
boundaries delineated and certified by a registered professional engineer,
registered professional land surveyor or registered property line surveyor,
where applicable.
   (E)   The above requirements do not prohibit the placement or repair of road
or driveway crossings, water impoundments for stormwater management, retention
areas, agricultural activities, public utility lines, environmental mitigation
projects, or other minor wetland fill activities (less than 5,000 square feet
of wetland impact) within designated danger reach areas. The owner must obtain
all federal, state and local permits required for these activities.
(Ord. 96-02-154, 2-6-1996; Ord. 07-29-469, 9-4-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-9.220. PROCEDURES FOR ACTIVITIES WITHIN DANGER REACH AREAS.
   (A)   Within the danger reach area the Board of Appeals may grant an
application for approval for the replacement of dwelling units (including
manufactured homes) damaged by flood, the substantial improvement of habitable
area within existing structures, the addition of habitable area to an existing
structure, or development of an existing parcel of record lying partially
within a danger reach area. The Board of Appeals may grant an application for
approval for activity within a danger reach area when the Board specifically
finds that:
      (1)   Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship
to the applicant; and
      (2)   The granting of an application for approval would not increase
flood heights, expand the danger reach area, or threaten public safety; and
      (3)   The granting of an application for approval is necessary
considering the flood hazard to provide relief; and
      (4)   All new structures and substantial improvements to existing
structures will have the lowest floor elevated to the greatest extent possible
with respect to the danger reach elevation and an elevation certificate is
filed with the Zoning Administrator; and
      (5)   A waterway construction permit, or other approval, by the Maryland
Department of the Environment if improvements are to be located within an area
subject to state regulatory authority; and
      (6)   If any portion of the improvement is within the danger reach area,
the action shall be recorded with the deed to the property on which an
application for approval is granted prior to the issuance of a building permit.
Any expense incurred by the recording is the responsibility of the applicant.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals may approve within the danger reach area the
substantial improvement of habitable area within existing structures or the
addition of habitable area to an existing structure or permit development of an
existing parcel of record lying partially within a danger reach area if:
      (1)   The (lowest) habitable floor is elevated at least 1 foot above the
elevation of the danger reach area and the dwelling or improvement is placed on
a permanent foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement; and
      (2)   The relocation or substantial improvements to existing structures
or the addition of accessory structures containing fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor (including, but not limited to crawl spaces, solid footings
and continuous foundations) shall be designed to meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of 2 openings having a total net area of not less than
1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall
be provided.
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above
grade.
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (C)   The Board of Appeals will notify the applicant of approval in writing
through the Zoning Administrator. The decision of approval and findings shall
include the notification that:
      (1)   The issuance of a decision to allow construction of a structure
within the danger reach area may result in increased premium rates for
insurance;
      (2)   Such construction in the danger reach area may increase risks to
life and property.
   (D)   The Board of Appeals shall not grant approval to build within the
danger reach area for lots created after the enactment of these provisions.
   (E)   With respect to existing lots affected by the danger reach area, the
Zoning Administrator may, by the issuance of a zoning certificate, approve the
following:
      (1)   The location on a lot of open shelters, pole-type structures (open
on all sides and without walls), open fences and recreational uses, and
recreational equipment which are not contained in a building, provided that the
type of construction will not increase the flood elevation or expand the danger
reach area;
      (2)   The replacement of a habitable structure or portion thereof damaged
or destroyed other than by flooding;
      (3)   The expansion of a structure to add nonhabitable improvements,
including, but not limited to, porches, decks, patios, etc., when such
improvements will be located within the danger reach area, provided that the
construction will not increase the flood elevation or expand the danger reach
area;
      (4)   The expansion of a structure to create additional habitable areas,
provided that the additional habitable area does not fall within the danger
reach area.
(Ord. 96-02-154, 2-6-1996; Ord. 07-29-469, 9-4-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 3. WET SOILS
§ 1-19-9.300. STRUCTURES WITH BASEMENTS NEAR WET SOILS.
   (A)   (1)   No zoning certificate or building permit shall be issued for
construction of a residential structure with a basement if proposed on or
within 100 feet of "wet soils" until a soils delineation report is prepared by
a licensed soils scientist or professional engineer registered in the State of
Maryland. The soils report shall be submitted for review prior to the Zoning
Administrator's approval of the certificate or permit unless such a report was
completed at an earlier stage of the development review process.
      (2)   If a residential structure(s) with a basement(s) is proposed within
"wet soils," the developer must:
         (a)   Perform one of the following:
            1.   Construct a gravity drainage system in accordance with the
BOCA Code; or
            2.   Utilize another similar solution acceptable to the permits
office; or
            3.   Submit a geotechnical report by a registered professional
engineer in the State of Maryland; and
      (b)   Place a note on the plat requiring that all construction shall be
in conformance with the approved solution.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-31, 1-24-1977; Ord. 78-12-110, § 2, 5-29-1978; Ord. 96-17-
169, 8-6-1996; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 10-31-566, 12-21-2010; Ord. 14-
23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 4. WATERBODY BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
§ 1-19-9.400. WATERBODY BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   A parcel, lot, or tract of land submitted to Frederick County for
subdivision or resubdivision review and approval shall be subject to the
following waterbody buffer requirements. The requirements in this section shall
not apply to existing structures.
   (A)   All subdivision plans shall have waterbody buffers clearly shown and
certified by a professional engineer, registered professional land surveyor, or
registered property line surveyor. To meet the requirements of this section,
applicants shall use best available data.
   (B)   All waterbody buffer areas shall be maintained in a natural vegetative
state unless otherwise utilized for reforestation or afforestation to satisfy
forest resource ordinance obligations or for environmental enhancement projects
administered or approved by federal, state, or local government agencies.
   (C)   Waterbody buffer widths shall be determined in accordance with the
requirements described below and shall apply to each side of a waterbody. As
used herein, the term "moderate slope" means a slope with a gradient of 15% to
less than 25%; and the term "steep slope" means a slope with a gradient of 25%
or greater.
      (1)   The waterbody buffer width shall be derived by calculating the
gradient of the slope within a 175-foot cross-section on each side of a
waterbody, drawn perpendicular to the direction of water flow. Cross-sectional
measurements shall be taken every 50 feet along the bank(s) of the waterbody.
      (2)   The minimum waterbody buffer shall be 100 feet.
      (3)   Except as provided in subsection (C)(4) below, if 60% or more of
the 175-foot cross-section includes moderate (15% to less than 25%) slopes,
then the waterbody buffer shall be increased to 150 feet for that side of the
waterbody.
      (4)   If the toe and the crest of a moderate (15% to less than 25%) slope
and the adjoining backslope are located within the 175-foot cross-section, the
waterbody buffer will extend to the crest of the moderate (15% to less than
25%) slope, or 100 feet, whichever is greater, for that side of the waterbody.
      (5)   Waterbody buffer widths may be greater than those provided herein
if floodplain and wetlands extend beyond the waterbody buffer area.
      (6)   Except as provided in subsections (C)(7) or (C)(8) below, if 60% or
more of the 175-foot cross-section includes steep (25% or greater) slopes, then
the waterbody buffer shall be increased to 175 feet, for that side of the
waterbody.
      (7)   Within the Linganore Watershed Protection Area only, if the 175-
foot cross-section includes a steep (25% or greater) slope and the steep slope
extends beyond 175 feet, the waterbody buffer shall be extended to include the
entire steep slope area(s) for that side of the waterbody.
      (8)   If the toe and the crest of a steep (25% or greater) slope and the
adjoining backslope are located within the 175-foot cross-section, the
waterbody buffer will extend to the crest of the steep slope, or 100 feet,
whichever is greater, for that side of the waterbody.
   (D)   No buildings, structures, or impervious surfaces, and no activities
requiring clearing or grading over 5,000 square feet will be permitted in
waterbody buffers, except for stormwater management facilities, structures and
appurtenant conveyances; environmental restoration or mitigation projects;
utilities; public and private roads; driveways; bikeways, and trails.
Utilities, public and private roads, and driveways must meet the requirements
of subsection (F) below or qualify for the exemption in subsection (G) below in
order to be located within the waterbody buffer.
   (E)   Sewage disposal systems, including but not limited to septic tanks and
their associated piping, drainfields, septic reserve areas or sand mound
systems, receiving approval after August 15, 2008 shall be located outside the
waterbody buffer area. If Frederick County Health Department-administered
percolation tests outside the waterbody buffer fail and the applicant can
demonstrate that an alternative location outside the waterbody buffer is not
feasible, the Frederick County Health Department may approve a sewage disposal
system within the waterbody buffer area provided all Code of Maryland
regulations are met.
   (F)   (1)   Public and private roads, driveways, and utilities may be
permitted in the waterbody buffer only if the applicant has clearly
demonstrated that no feasible alternative exists, and that every reasonable
effort has been made to locate the public and private roads, driveways, and
utilities outside of the buffer area.
      (2)   In order to locate public and private roads, driveways, or
utilities in the waterbody buffer, the applicant must submit a justification
statement to the appropriate county agency or division, including: (a) an
evaluation of at least one alternative location for the requested public and
private roads, driveways, and utilities; and (b) the reasons why the
alternative location or locations are not feasible.
      (3)   Public and private roads, driveways, and utilities that are allowed
in the buffer area must be located to create the least disturbance to existing
vegetation, grade, and wetlands.
      (4)   Where feasible, utility easements shall be set back a minimum of 50
feet from all waterbodies or outside wetlands and their buffers, whichever is
greater.
      (5)   Utility, bikeway or trail easements or rights-of-way within the
waterbody buffer shall be co-located whenever possible.
   (G)   Upgrades, maintenance or repair of existing public and private roads,
driveways, utilities, bikeways and trails shall be exempt from the requirements
of subsection (F) above.
   (H)   Sediment and erosion control structures or facilities may be allowed
as a temporary use in the waterbody buffers. At a minimum, grading must be at
least 25 feet from the bank of the waterbody and from any wetlands.
   (I)   Deposition or stockpiling of any material, including excavated rock,
topsoil, stumps, shrubs, or any building or construction material, within the
designated waterbody buffer is prohibited. However, stockpiling which is
necessary to restore an area within a utility easement or temporary sediment
control area may be approved by the appropriate county agency or division on a
temporary basis.
(Ord. 07-24-464, 7-10-2007; Ord. 07-29-469, 9-4-2007; Ord. 08-21-497, 8-5-2008;
Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 13-23-651, 10-31-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 15-12, 12-1-2015; Bill No. 20-14, 9-15-2020)
Comment: This Section shall apply to applications for subdivision or
resubdivision approved after November 10, 2020. This Section shall not apply
to: addition plats; correction plats; outlot plats; revisions to previously
approved subdivision plats that do not increase the number of lots; extensions
or re-approvals of previously approved subdivision plats that have not expired;
and submission of final plats for recordation, provided that the final plat is
consistent with the approved preliminary subdivision plat.
ARTICLE X: OPTIONAL METHODS OF DEVELOPMENT (§§ 1-19-10.100 — 1-19-10.1000)
Section
Division 1. Cluster Development
   
1-19-10.100   Purpose
   
1-19-10.100.1   Scope
   
1-19-10.100.2   Districts where permitted
   
1-19-10.100.3   Density determination and design requirements
   
1-19-10.100.4   Green area space requirement
   
1-19-10.100.5   Procedure
Division 2. Cohousing Development
   
1-19-10.200   Purpose
   
1-19-10.200.1   Scope
   
1-19-10.200.2   Districts where permitted
   
1-19-10.200.3   Density determination and design requirements
   
1-19-10.200.4   Green area space requirement
   
1-19-10.200.5   Procedure
   
1-19-10.200.6   Access drives and off-street parking
Division 3. Planned Commercial/Industrial Development
   
1-19-10.300   Planned commercial/industrialdevelopment
Division 4. Mineral Mining District
   
1-19-10.400   Mineral Mining (MM)
   
1-19-10.400.1   Purpose and intent
   
1-19-10.400.2   Size and location
   
1-19-10.400.3   Approval criteria
   
1-19-10.400.4   Review and approval procedures
   
1-19-10.400.5   Application
   
1-19-10.400.6   Land use
   
1-19-10.400.7   General development standards
   
1-19-10.400.8   Transitional provisions
Division 5. Planned Development Districts
   
1-19-10.500   Planned Development Districts
   
1-19-10.500.1   Purpose and intent
   
1-19-10.500.2   Size and location
   
1-19-10.500.3   Approval criteria
   
1-19-10.500.4   Review and approval procedures
   
1-19-10.500.5   Application
   
1-19-10.500.6   Land use, mixture, and design requirements within the PUD
District
   
1-19-10.500.7   Land use, mixture, and design requirements within the MXD
District
   
1-19-10.500.8   Public facilities and utilities within the Planned Development
Districts
   
1-19-10.500.9   General development standards within the Planned Development
Districts
   
1-19-10.500.10   Specific development standards within the Planned Development
Districts
   
1-19-10.500.11   Transitional provisions for Mixed-Use Developments (MXD) and
Planned Unit Developments (PUD)
Division 6. Mobile Home Park District
   
1-19-10.600   Mobile Home Park (MH)
   
1-19-10.600.1   Purpose
   
1-19-10.600.2   General provisions
Division 7. Reserved
   
1-19-10.700   Reserved
Division 8. Solid Waste District
   
1-19-10.800    Solid Waste District (SW)
Division 9. Institutional Floating Zoning District
   
1-19-10.900    Institutional Floating Zoning District (I)
Division 10. Open Space Recreation Floating Zoning District
   
1-19-10.1000   Open Space Recreation Floating Zoning District (OSR)
Division 11. Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone
   
1-19-10.1100      Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone (CDI-OZ)
DIVISION 1. CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT
§ 1-19-10.100. PURPOSE.
   The purpose of cluster development is to provide a method of development
that permits variation in lot sizes without an increase in the overall density
of population; that allows home buyers a choice of lot sizes according to their
needs; that preserves green space, tree cover, scenic vistas, natural
drainageways, or preserves features of outstanding national topography; in
order to prevent soil erosion and provide green areas for rest and recreation.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-71(A), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.100.1. SCOPE.
   The provisions of this division shall apply only to cluster developments.
MPDU projects are excluded from the provisions of this division.
(Ord. 02-26-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-10.100.2. DISTRICTS WHERE PERMITTED.
   In all R Districts, the Planning Commission in approving subdivision plats,
may permit modifications in lot area, lot width, yards (building restriction
areas) including zero lot lines, or other requirements. Use regulations are
governed by the zoning district in which the development is located. Cluster
development is not permitted unless public water and public sewer are provided.
However, if public water cannot be feasibly provided or is not readily
available and the developer can prove that individual water supplies are
feasible by providing a hydrogeologic study and drilling sufficient test wells,
then the Planning Commission may approve a cluster development with public
sewer and individual well with a minimum lot size of 12,000 square feet. In the
event that cluster development is approved by the Planning Commission using
individual wells, no building permits shall be issued for any lot until after a
well has been drilled and approved by the Frederick County Health Department
under its regulations.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-71(B), 1-24-1977; Ord. 82-11-255, 6-8-1982; Ord. 84-6-302,
4-3-1984; Ord. 89-2-533, 1-3-1989; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.100.3. DENSITY DETERMINATION AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   The average dwelling unit density will be no greater than the permitted
density for the district in which the units are located. For the purposes of
this division, DENSITY means the maximum number of dwelling units which could
be built on net developable land area in the zoning district. Net developable
land is that land remaining after flooding soils areas and rights-of-way for
principal highways have been deducted from the gross site area.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-71(C), 1-24-1977; Ord. 07-29-469, 9-4-2007; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.100.4. GREEN AREA SPACE REQUIREMENT.
   Reduction of individual lot areas will be reserved as green area. The county
may accept the conveyance of the green areas or it shall be conveyed to a
nonprofit homes association.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-71(D), 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-
678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.100.5. PROCEDURE.
   The procedure to obtain approval of plats under residential cluster
development is as follows.
   (A)   A Concept Plan is to be submitted to the Planning Commission at least
60 days prior to the Commission meeting at which it is to be considered which
shows:
      (1)   The type of dwelling unit (single-family, townhouse, garden
apartment, etc.) and building restriction lines; and
      (2)   Street layout; and
      (3)   Green area system; and
      (4)   Vicinity map (Scale: no smaller than 1 inch equals 2,000 feet); and
      (5)   Topography with minimum 10 foot contours (USGS topographic maps are
permitted for the concept plan); and
      (6)   Number of acres in the entire tract; and
      (7)   Overall dwelling unit density.
   (B)   If the concept plan is approved by the Planning Commission, the
developer will then proceed with platting of the development in accordance with
the subdivision regulations. Final plats filed on cluster development shall
bear a statement indicating that the land lies within an approved residential
cluster development.
   (C)   In addition, the development is subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   The development of land within the cluster is permitted only in
accordance with the approved final plat.
      (2)   The agreements concerning the ownership and maintenance of open
space land will be recorded simultaneously with the final plat.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-71(E), 1-24-1977; Ord. 00-21-263, 7-18-2000; Ord. 05-27-
388, 10-25-2005; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Subdivisions, see
Chapter 1-16
DIVISION 2. COHOUSING DEVELOPMENT
§ 1-19-10.200. PURPOSE.
   The purpose of cohousing development is to provide a method of development
that promotes social interaction, permits a quality living environment,
safeguards children, conserves the natural environment, and conserves energy.
The intent is to encourage resident participation in design, and planning, as
well as self-management and community, in a compact and orderly development.
(Ord. 91-31-031, 11-19-1991; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-10.200.1. SCOPE.
   The provisions of this division shall apply only to cohousing developments.
Such developments shall consist of no more than 35 units, not including common
facilities. An incorporated development organization consisting of a majority
of the intended number of residents of the development shall be required for
application under these provisions. All cohousing developments are subject to
the requirements of §
1-19-8.620 through §
1-19-8.620.6.
(Ord. 91-31-031, 11-19-1991; Ord. 02-26-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.200.2. DISTRICTS WHERE PERMITTED.
   Cohousing developments are permitted in all R Districts. The Planning
Commission in approving subdivision plats may permit modifications in lot
areas, lot width, yards (building restriction areas), including zero lot lines,
or other requirements consistent with meeting the purposes of this division.
Cohousing development is not permitted unless community water and sewer are
provided, or such other available ecologically sound methods of water
distribution and sewage disposal as may be approved by the county and state
authorities. Individual wells and septic systems are not allowed.
(Ord. 91-31-031, 11-19-1991; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-10.200.3. DENSITY DETERMINATION AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The average dwelling unit density will be no greater than the
permitted density for the districts in which the units are located.
   (B)   For the purpose of this division, DENSITY means the maximum number of
dwelling units which could be built on net developable land area in the zoning
district. Net developable land is that land remaining after flooding soils
areas and rights-of-way for principal highways have been deducted from the
gross site area.
   (C)   Attached housing is permitted in approved co-housing development
projects in all R Districts under this division, provided any attached units
comprise blocks of no more than 6 units each.
(Ord. 91-31-031, 11-19-1991; Ord. 07-29-469, 9-4-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.200.4. GREEN AREA SPACE REQUIREMENT.
   Reduction of individual lot areas will be reserved as green area, which
shall be conveyed to a nonprofit home association comprised of the homeowners
of the development. The amount of green space shall be a minimum of 60% of the
total land area of the development. Such green area shall not be impervious or
include any parking areas, vehicular access or circulation driveways and shall
otherwise meet the definition of green area in this case.
(Ord. 91-31-031, 11-19-1991; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-10.200.5. PROCEDURE.
   The procedure to obtain approval of a cohousing development is as follows.
   (A)   A Concept Plan is submitted to the Planning Commission at least 45
days in advance of the meeting at which is proposed to be considered which
shows:
      (1)   The type of dwelling units, the common facilities, and building
restriction lines;
      (2)   Vehicular and pedestrian street layout;
      (3)   Green area system;
      (4)   Vicinity map (scale no smaller than 1 inch equals 2,000 feet);
      (5)   Number of acres in the entire tract;
      (6)   Overall dwelling unit density; and
      (7)   The name of the incorporated resident development organization.
   (B)   The property in question shall be posted for a minimum of 30 days
prior to the Planning Commission meeting.
   (C)   If the Concept Plan is approved by the Planning Commission, the
developer will then proceed in accordance with the regulations. Final plats on
cohousing development shall bear a statement that the land lies within an
approved cohousing development.
   (D)   In addition, the development is subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   The development of land within the cohousing development is
permitted only in accordance with the approved final plat.
      (2)   The agreements concerning the ownership and maintenance of open
(green) space land will be recorded simultaneously with the final flat.
(Ord. 91-31-031, 11-19-1991; Ord. 00-21-263, § 1, 7-18-2000; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.200.6. ACCESS DRIVES AND OFF- STREET PARKING.
   The intent of this division is to encourage the removal of cars and roads to
the periphery of the development. Therefore all parking shall be off-street
parking and must be within the boundaries of the cohousing property. There
shall be no minimum distance from a parking area to the home which it serves.
Suitable emergency access lanes shall be provided to permit entry of fire and
rescue vehicles to the immediate vicinity of each unit. All access points to
state and county roads must comply with the requisite access permit
requirements.
(Ord. 91-31-031, 11-19-1991; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
DIVISION 3. PLANNED COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
§ 1-19-10.300. PLANNED COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   Encourage concentration of complementary uses grouped adjacent to
major thoroughfares, thus limiting sprawling strip commercial and industrial
development.
      (2)   Provide for well-planned development on sites with adequate
frontage and depth to permit controlled access and maximum convenience and
efficiency for users of such facilities.
      (3)   Allow for more than 1 principal use or building on a single lot in
the GC, ORI, LI and GI zoning districts where due to the size and location of
the development, and its relationship to the surrounding properties,
flexibility of planning may be permitted without disturbance to the harmony of
the neighborhood.
   (B)   Review and approval.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall make the final determination as to
whether a planned commercial/industrial development shall be approved. Review
and approval of a planned commercial/ industrial development shall include a
preapplication conference and applicable site development plan or subdivision
approval.
      (2)   Preapplication conference. Prior to application submission, a
preapplication conference shall be held with the Community Development
Division. The applicant shall submit a preapplication concept including
information in a format acceptable to the Community Development Division,
including: a description of the tract of land for which the planned commercial/
industrial development is proposed; existing and proposed land uses; existing
historic and natural features; or other information as required to adequately
evaluate the application.
      (3)   In making a determination as to whether the development shall
receive approval, the Planning Commission shall consider the purpose and intent
of this section as well as the following design standards, which shall serve as
a guide in reviewing the plan and setting conditions to be placed upon the
development. The following design standards may be modified as necessary by the
Planning Commission in order to achieve the purpose and intent of this section.
Subdivision plats shall comply with subdivision regulations and conditions of
site development plan approval.
   (C)   Design standards.
      (1)   Layout.
         (a)   In general, the plan shall provide a unified and organized
arrangement of buildings, service areas, parking and landscaped open space.
Buildings shall be so grouped to provide a safe and efficient arrangement of
land use, pedestrian access, infrastructure and transportation circulation
systems reflective of the underlying zoning district, and existing and planned
development.
         (b)   Building placement shall consider future subdivision including
planned road networks. However, this does not require the project to meet
future subdivision requirements.
      (2)   Use. All proposed uses shall be identified on the submitted site
plan. The uses proposed within the planned commercial/industrial development
shall be in accordance with the existing, underlying zoning. More than 1
principal use or building may be approved on the site.
      (3)   Bulk regulations.
         (a)   Project area. A planned commercial/industrial development may
only be approved for tracts of land with underlying zoning of GC, ORI, LI, or
GI.
         (b)   Setbacks and height shall be established by the Planning
Commission based upon the underlying zoning, the location of the proposed
development within the county, consideration of existing and planned
development surrounding the proposed development, and applicable county
community and corridor plans.
      (4)   Building separation. Unless buildings are built to a common party
wall, they shall be separated by a minimum distance of not less than 10 feet.
      (5)   Minimum off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking shall
be provided and may be modified in accordance with §
1-19-6.220.
      (6)   Minimum landscaping, screening, lighting, and signage. Landscaping,
screening, lighting, and signage shall be provided in accordance with §
1-19-6.300 through §
1-19-6.340, §
1-19-6.400, and §
1-19-6.500.
      (7)   Planned commercial/industrial development shall comply with
applicable supplementary district regulations as provided in §
1-19-7.510, §
1-19-7.600, §
1-19-7.610, and §
1-19-7.620 consistent with the underlying zoning.
   (D)   Covenants. Agreements to provide for the use and maintenance of all
common use areas shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and
recorded by the developer if subdivision occurs.
   (E)   Subdivision. A site receiving site plan approval may only be
subdivided in full compliance with Frederick County subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 80-22-174, 7-22-1980; Ord. 92-10-045, 6-9-1992; Ord. 00-21-263, § 1, 7-
18-2000; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-2011; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Subdivision rules and regulations, see
Chapter 1-16
DIVISION 4. MINERAL MINING DISTRICT (MM)
§ 1-19-10.400 MINERAL MINING (MM).
§ 1-19-10.400.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The Mineral Mining District (MM) is a floating zone established for the
purpose of providing for the development of needed mineral resources in areas
where such resources exist subject to adequate safeguard for the conservation
of the environment.
(Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.400.2. SIZE AND LOCATION.
   The Mineral Mining District (MM) shall be a floating zone which may be
established where specifically designated on the Comprehensive Plan Map as
appropriate.
(Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.400.3. APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   Mining activities have the potential to adversely impact the surrounding
area by virtue of the noise, dust, light, glare, vibrations and traffic
generated, and may also impact groundwater supplies. Therefore, compliance with
or satisfaction of the criteria contained in this division shall not require
the granting of the requested reclassification. Because of the potentially
adverse impact on the area, the applicant shall demonstrate the following:
   (A)   In addition to the criteria set forth in §
1-19-3.110.4, the application may be granted if the County Council finds that
the proposed use conceptually satisfies the development standards and
provisions set forth in this division to demonstrate compatibility with uses in
the neighborhood where the proposed use is to be located; and
   (B)   The existence of a mineral deposit which is economically important and
commercially valuable, which can be extracted within the limitations set forth
by this article and applicable state, federal and local laws.
(Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.400.4. REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Phase I justification and floating zone reclassification. The
application shall be filed and processed in the same manner as a zoning map
amendment as set forth in §§
1-19-3.110 through
1-19-3.110.6.
   (B)   Phase II execution. The procedure for Phase II approval shall follow
the site development plan review or subdivision process.
   (C)   Site development plan review shall occur in accordance with §§
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4. Subdivision shall occur in accordance with county subdivision
regulations.
(Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.400.5. APPLICATION.
   (A)   The applicant shall submit an application in a format acceptable to
the Zoning Administrator including:
      (1)   A concept plan in a size acceptable to the Zoning Administrator
showing the location of all lot lines; the generalized location, configuration,
and description of existing and proposed land use areas including zoning and
county comprehensive land use designation; the location, use, size and height
of existing buildings and structures; the location of all roads, parking lots,
truck loading areas, internal circulation patterns, and ingress/egress drives;
haul routes and adequacy thereof; the location, configuration, and description
of existing land uses surrounding the subject property including zoning and
county comprehensive land use designation;
      (2)   A mining and reclamation plan which meets the requirements of Md.
Code Ann., Subtitle 7-6A, Natural Resources Article;
      (3)   If the applicant is licensed, a copy of its Maryland surface mining
license or evidence of application for the license; if the applicant is not
licensed, a copy of the license of the proposed operator;
      (4)   The applicant shall submit a justification statement describing the
manner in which the proposed development will, at the time of site development
plan review, comply with the general development standards as set forth in §
1-19-10.400.7.
(Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.400.6. LAND USE.
   Mineral mining, as used herein, applies to the extraction and processing of
crushed stone, building stone, sand, clay, limestone, gravel deposits, and
other minerals mined in a quarry type operation. The standards set forth in
this section do not regulate or permit the extraction of metallic minerals,
fossil fuels or other minerals not specifically enumerated above.
   (A)   The uses permitted in the mineral mining district shall be
agricultural activities and forestry activities permitted in the agricultural
zone over which the mineral mining designation was attached and the following:
      (1)   Mineral extraction and processing, including grinding, polishing,
washing, mixing and sorting, stockpiling, and manufacture of finished products
which contain at least 40% of material derived on site;
      (2)   Borrow pits and rubble fills; and
      (3)   Those accessory uses listed under §
1-19-8.251.
(Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 19-16, 12-17-
2019)
§ 1-19-10.400.7. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The following general development standards shall be met at the time
of site development plan review in addition to the approval criteria found in §
1-19-3.300.4.
      (1)   On site.
         (a)   Minimum lot size shall be 25 acres.
         (b)   Required setbacks:
 
Type of Operation:                           Adjacent Zoning:
                                             RC, R, ORI, GC, MX, RR* A, GI, LI
Crushing or rock processing of stone, gravel 300 ft.                 150 ft.
or other material
Stockpile of materials                       300 ft.                 150 ft.
Building used for mineral mining operation   300 ft.                 50 ft.
 
*RR is a land use designation on the County Comprehensive Plan and for the
purpose of these standards is intended to be treated as land zoned residential.
         (c)   Blasting activities shall be conducted in accordance with the
rules and regulations promulgated by the State of Maryland, Department of
Natural Resources, Water Resources Administration, applicable to surface mining
activities.
         (d)   Building height restrictions. The height of principal use
equipment shall not exceed 100 feet from grade; accessory structures shall not
exceed 60 feet from grade. Agricultural buildings are exempt from height
restrictions.
         (e)   Frontage. The site shall have a minimum of 80 feet frontage on a
public road meeting the collector street standards established in the
comprehensive plan. Access shall not be provided by use of a panhandle.
         (f)   Lot width. The lot width at the front building line shall be a
minimum of 300 feet.
         (g)   Open space/green areas. All setback areas shall be landscaped
and maintained as green space.
         (h)   Exclusions from setbacks. Fences, railroad access, warning
signs, security/noise barriers, berms may be located within the setback areas.
         (i)   Fencing. Fencing shall be required around all mineral mining and
accessory activity areas.
         (j)   Lighting. Lighting shall be designed and directed so as not to
adversely impact adjoining properties and shall be specifically approved during
the site plan approval process.
         (k)   Access. Commercial/industrial entrance standards shall be
utilized in the design of any point of access to a public road, including
acceleration and deceleration lanes.
      (2)   Off-site.
         (a)   The applicant shall establish that the roads serving the site
and which will be utilized as haul routes meet the collector street standards
and are capable of handling the traffic to be generated by the proposed
activities.
         (b)   The applicant shall provide evidence as to what effect the
proposed use will have on the groundwater supply and quality of all adjoining
properties.
      (3)   Additional regulations. Mineral mining and all activities conducted
on site shall meet all federal, state and local regulations governing noise,
dust, air pollutant emissions, vibrations, water appropriation and discharge.
   (B)   Development standards for property with existing mineral mining zoning
as of April 27, 2012.
      (1)   The minimum lot size for all permitted uses within the district
will be 25 acres.
      (2)   All operations including storage or stockpiling of excavated or
processed materials will be located a minimum of 150 feet from all property
lines, except land zoned GI general industrial or land upon which other
extraction or processing operations are being conducted, in which case the
setback from all property lines will be 50 feet. The required setback area will
be landscaped and maintained as green area.
      (3)   The public road providing access to the site will meet the minimum
pavement standard of a collector street as established in the County
Comprehensive Plan.
      (4)   Mineral mining operations shall conform to all State of Maryland
permits and other approvals.
(Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.400.8. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Existing mineral mining developments as of April 27, 2012:
      (1)   Shall retain existing approvals and conditions.
      (2)   Amendments to existing Phase I or Phase II approvals, or equivalent
existing approval, resulting in an increase in intensity shall comply with the
provisions of this division.
   (B)   Mineral mining developments with Phase I but without Phase II approval
as of April 27, 2012 shall comply with the Phase II provisions of this
division.
   (C)   Mineral mining operations in existence as of April 27, 2012 shall
retain existing approvals and shall adhere to the following development
standards at the time of site development plan review:
      (1)   The minimum lot size for all permitted uses within the district
will be 25 acres.
      (2)   All operations including storage or stockpiling of excavated or
processed materials will be located a minimum of 150 feet from all property
lines, except land zoned General Industrial (GI) or land upon which other
extraction or processing operations are being conducted, in which case the
setback from all property lines will be 50 feet. The required setback area will
be landscaped and maintained as green area.
      (3)   The public road providing access to the site will meet the minimum
pavement standard of a collector street as established in the County
Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 5. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
§ 1-19-10.500. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.
§ 1-19-10.500.1. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The Planned Development Districts (Planned Unit Development and Mixed Use
Development) are floating zones established to provide for new development and
redevelopment within identified growth areas that result in an integrated
mixture of commercial, employment, residential, recreational, civic and/or
cultural land uses as provided within the appropriate Frederick County
Comprehensive, Community, or Corridor Plan. These uses planned and developed as
a unit are intended to:
   (A)   Result in an efficient use of land and the efficient extension of
public facilities;
   (B)   Allow innovative design involving flexibility not permitted within
Euclidean zoning districts;
   (C)   Promote continuity of new development with existing development
through building and site design, including consideration of architectural
elements, landscape design, building placement, and street network;
   (D)   Promote building and site design that reduces dependence on vehicular
movement through the provision of bicycle, pedestrian, and transit friendly
elements which include transportation circulation networks linking internal and
external residential, commercial, employment areas, and recreation, open spaces
and public facilities;
   (E)   Result in an integrated mixture of uses within the Mixed Use
Development District and a mixture of housing types within the Planned Unit
Development District;
   (F)   Promote the protection, preservation, and integration of historic
resources into the planned development through reuse, adaptive use, and
rehabilitation;
   (G)   Promote the evaluation, protection, and integration of natural
features and sensitive environmental resources into building and site design;
   (H)   Provide development flexibility to respond to market demands.
(Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 20-07, 8-4-2020)
§ 1-19-10.500.2. SIZE AND LOCATION.
   (A)   The PUD District may only be established where the tract of land
receiving the PUD District has a County Comprehensive Plan Land Use designation
of Low Density Residential, Medium Density Residential, or High Density
Residential except as provided in §
1-19-10.500.2(D) below.
   (B)   The MXD District may only be established where the tract of land
receiving the MXD District has a County Comprehensive Plan land use designation
of Mixed Use Development, Office Research Industrial, or Limited Industrial
except as provided in §
1-19-10.500.2(D) below.
   (C)   The Planned Development Districts may only be established where the
tract of land receiving the Planned Development District has a category of
Planned Service or higher as shown on the Frederick County Water and Sewerage
Plan.
   (D)   The Planned Development District may be applied to a County
Comprehensive Plan land use designation of Natural Resource where the Natural
Resource land use designation is a minor portion of the overall tract receiving
the Planned Development District. Those portions of the project having a land
use designation of Natural Resource may not be included in the density
calculation.
   (E)   There shall be no minimum tract size, lot area, or lot width for the
Planned Development Districts.
(Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 20-07, 8-4-2020)
§ 1-19-10.500.3. APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   The County Council may approve or disapprove a request for rezoning of
property to a Planned Development District if persuaded that granting the
request is appropriate and serves the public interest. The approval or
disapproval of a request for the application will be determined through
evaluation of several criteria to establish whether the proposed project meets
the purpose and intent of the zoning district. In addition to the requirements
in § 1-19-3.110.4, the Planning Commission and County Council must find that
the project adequately addresses the following criteria:
   (A)   The proposed development is compact, employing design principles that
result in efficient consumption of land, efficient extension of public
infrastructure, and efficient provision of public facilities;
   (B)   The proposed development design and building siting are in accordance
with the County Comprehensive Plan, and any applicable community and corridor
plans;
   (C)   The proposed development is compatible with existing or anticipated
surrounding land uses with regard to size, building scale, intensity, setbacks,
and landscaping, or the proposal provides for mitigation of differences in
appearance or scale through such means as setbacks, screening, landscaping; or
other design features in accordance with the County Comprehensive Plan, and any
applicable community or corridor plans;
   (D)   The proposed development provides a safe and efficient arrangement of
land use, buildings, infrastructure, and transportation circulation systems.
Factors to be evaluated include: connections between existing and proposed
community development patterns, extension of the street network; pedestrian
connections to, from, and between buildings, parking areas, recreation, and
open space;
   (E)   The transportation system is or will be made adequate to serve the
proposed development in addition to existing and pipeline uses in the area.
Factors to be evaluated include: roadway capacity, level of service and safety,
on-street parking impacts, access requirements, neighborhood and natural
resource impacts, projected construction schedule of planned improvements,
pedestrian and bicycle safety, and results of travel demand modeling assessing
the change in future daily travel volumes, with and without the proposed
development;
   (F)   The proposed development provides design and building placement that
optimizes walking, biking, and use of public transit. Factors to be evaluated
include: extension of the street network; existing and proposed community
development patterns; and pedestrian connections to, from, and between
buildings, parking areas, recreation, and open space;
   (G)   Existing fire and emergency medical service facilities are or will be
made adequate to serve the increased demand from the proposed development in
addition to existing uses in the area. Factors to be evaluated include:
response time, projected schedule of providing planned improvements, bridges,
roads, and nature and type of available response apparatus;
   (H)   Natural features of the site have been adequately considered and
protected in the design of the proposed development. Factors to be evaluated
include: the relationship of existing natural features to man-made features
both on-site and in the immediate vicinity, natural features connectivity,
energy efficient site design, use of environmental site design or low impact
development techniques in accordance with
Chapter 1-15.2 of the Frederick County Code;
   (I)   The proposed mixture of land uses is consistent with the purpose and
intent of the underlying County Comprehensive Plan land use designation(s), and
any applicable community or corridor plans;
   (J)   Planned developments shall be served adequately by public facilities
and services. Additionally, increased demand for public facilities, services,
and utilities created by the proposed development (including without limitation
water, sewer, transportation, parks and recreation, schools, fire and emergency
services, libraries, and law enforcement) shall be evaluated as adequate or to
be made adequate within established county standards;
   (K)   Sensitive environmental resources are protected to the maximum extent
practicable; and
   (L)   All efforts have been made to promote the protection, preservation,
and integration of historic resources into the planned development through
reuse, adaptive use and rehabilitation.
(Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 20-07, 8-4-
2020)
§ 1-19-10.500.4. REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   Review and approval of the Planned Development District includes a
preapplication conference, neighborhood meeting, Phase I justification and
floating zone reclassification, and Phase II execution. The applicant must
obtain all necessary approvals at each phase prior to proceeding to the next
phase.
   (A)   Preapplication conference. Prior to a Phase I application submission,
a preapplication conference shall be held with the Division. The conference is
intended to provide information to the applicant regarding application
requirements, review and approval procedures, neighborhood meeting
requirements, discussion of development constraints and opportunities, county
policy initiatives, and the County Comprehensive Plan. The applicant shall
submit preapplication information in a format acceptable to the Division,
including: a description of the tract of land for which the Planned Development
District is proposed; existing and proposed land uses; existing historic and
natural features; or other information as required to adequately evaluate the
application.
   (B)   Neighborhood meeting. Prior to submitting a Phase I application the
applicant shall hold a neighborhood meeting. The meeting will provide an
opportunity to identify impacts that the project may have on the neighborhood
surrounding the proposed project.
      (1)   A public notice sign shall be erected by the applicant within ten
feet of each property line that abuts a public or private street. The sign
shall note the time, date, place, and purpose of the neighborhood meeting and
shall be posted at least 30 days prior to the neighborhood meeting.
      (2)   The applicant shall notify by mail all adjoining property owners,
whether separated by streets, railroads, or other rights-of-way, and homeowner
associations located within five miles of the subject property, of the time,
date, place and purpose of the neighborhood meeting.
      (3)   The applicant shall provide a formal record of the neighborhood
meeting, including the date and location of the meeting, how it was advertised,
attendees, issues raised by the attendees, and responses by the applicant to
address the questions and concerns raised at the meeting.
   (C)   Phase I justification and floating zone reclassification. The
procedure for Phase I approval is the same as for zoning map amendments set
forth in §§
1-19-3.110.1 through
1-19-3.110.6.
      (1)   Prior to Phase I application the tract of land receiving the
proposed Planned Development District shall be classified as Planned Service or
higher on the Frederick County Water and Sewerage Plan.
      (2)   Phase I approval shall include approval of a concept plan
graphically illustrating the project. The concept plan shall be submitted for
review as part of the Phase I application.
   (D)   Phase II execution. The procedure for Phase II approval shall follow
the applicable subdivision or site development plan review process.
      (1)   Prior to Phase II application the Planned Development District
property must be classified at least W4/S4 on the Frederick County Water and
Sewerage Plan.
      (2)   Subsequent to Phase I approval and prior to or concurrent with
Phase II approval the applicant shall obtain Adequate Public Facilities
Ordinance (APFO) approval in accordance with
Chapter 1-20 of the Frederick County Code.
      (3)   Subdivision shall occur in accordance with county subdivision
regulations. Site development plan review shall occur in accordance with §§
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4.
(Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 12-04-599, 2-21-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 16-10, 9-6-2016; Bill No. 20-07, 8-4-2020)
§ 1-19-10.500.5. APPLICATION.
   A Phase I application for Planned Development District reclassification and
concept plan approval must include sufficient information to provide the County
Council with a basis to approve the overall concept of the project, rezone the
property, and set a maximum permitted land use density, or the County Council
may in its sole discretion, disapprove the rezoning request. At a minimum, a
Phase I application shall include: information regarding the existing site
conditions, a concept plan providing a graphic illustration of the proposed
development, a justification statement, and a proposed phasing plan in
accordance with the following standards:
   (A)   Existing site conditions. Existing site conditions information shall
include the following:
      (1)   A vicinity map at a scale of 1 inch equals 2,000 feet or more to
the inch, depicting the tract of land proposed for development with respect to
surrounding properties and streets. At a minimum the map will show all streets
and highways within 2,000 feet of the property proposed for development. Where
available, the vicinity map shall include state assessment tax map, parcel
number, and tax identification for all properties depicted.
      (2)   A boundary survey prepared and certified by a registered land
surveyor within the State of Maryland. The boundary survey shall identify all
easements affecting the tract of land proposed for development, and other
physical encumbrances readily identified by a field inspection.
      (3)   A transportation map indicating the location of the tract of land
proposed for development, with respect to local, collector, and arterial
streets, existing easements and rights-of-way on or abutting the tract of land
proposed for development, all existing bicycle and pedestrian facilities, and
existing and planned transit facilities including routes and stops. The
transportation map scale shall be determined at the preapplication conference
based on project specifics.
      (4)   A land use map at a scale of 1 inch = 100 feet, indicating the
type, location, acreage, and density of all existing land uses, the general
street layout and circulation pattern, including existing zoning and County
Comprehensive Plan land use designation. Existing land uses shall be included
to a distance of 500 feet surrounding the tract of land proposed for
development.
      (5)   An aerial photograph with the tract of land proposed for
development and project site clearly delineated.
      (6)   An environmental and natural features map at a minimum scale of 1
inch = 100 feet. Unless otherwise specified by the Division, the map shall
reflect the tract of land proposed for development and the first 100 feet of
adjoining land or width of the adjacent lot, whichever is less, and include the
following:
         (a)   Intermittent and perennial streams, drainage courses, and
historic flow-ways on or within 200 feet of the tract of land proposed for
development, including stream setbacks as required in §
1-19-9.400;
         (b)   Areas of 100 year floodplain as depicted by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency flood insurance rate maps or amendments thereto,
including floodplain and stream setbacks as required in §
1-19-9.110;
         (c)   Topography at a minimum of 5 foot contour intervals unless
otherwise required by the Division;
         (d)   Moderate slopes (15% to <25%) and steep slopes (25% or greater);
         (e)   Wetsoils and flooding soils, including buffers;
         (f)   Tree lines, forested areas, and rock formations including
historic, champion, and specimen trees and green infrastructure hubs and
corridors;
         (g)   Location and type of native, exotic, and invasive vegetation;
         (h)   Jurisdictional wetlands and their buffers, including total
acreage;
         (i)   Any other relevant information as required by the Division;
      (7)   The location and description of all sites, buildings, structures,
or other objects listed on or eligible for the National Register of Historic
Places, Frederick County Register of Historic Places, or as listed on the
Maryland Inventory of Historic Properties.
   (B)   Concept plan. The concept plan shall be scaled to fit the sheet size
of 24 inch x 36 inch, and shall also be submitted at 11 inch x 17 inch, and
include the following:
      (1)   Generalized location and type of existing and proposed easements;
      (2)   Generalized location, configuration, and typical dimensions of all
proposed subdivision lots;
      (3)   Generalized location, configuration, and description of proposed
land use areas including: land use, square footage, height, and number of
stories of proposed buildings, proposed density, parking and loading areas,
ingress and egress, natural features, historic and cultural features, and
recreation/open space areas;
      (4)   Existing land use surrounding the subject property including zoning
and County Comprehensive Plan land use designation;
      (5)   A transportation map detailing the generalized location and design
of the proposed internal and external vehicular and nonvehicular transportation
network, connections to existing transportation facilities, and general trip
generation for the proposed land use(s).
      (6)   A table and comparative analysis providing an explanation of the
project gross and net density as proposed within the PUD or MXD District
compared to the gross and net density as permitted within the existing land use
designation. For the purposes of calculating gross and net density the
following formulas shall be used:
      total number of dwelling units ÷ total project acreage = gross density
      total number of dwelling units ÷ the total project buildable acreage =
net density
The calculation of net density excludes:
         (a)   FEMA floodplain boundaries, including 25-foot floodplain buffer;
         (b)   Priority forest conservation and forestation areas as listed
under §
1-21-40;
         (c)   Jurisdictional wetland boundaries and 25-foot buffers;
         (d)   Hydrography, including perennial and intermittent streams and
stream body buffer setback;
         (e)   Steep slopes (over 25%) associated with hydrological features
and/or erodible soils;
         (f)   Nonresidential components (i.e. commercial areas); and
         (g)   Roadways and other land proposed to be dedicated for public
purpose.
      (7)   Building and spaces visualization. The Phase I application shall
include a buildings and spaces visualization component to serve as a graphical
translation of the Planned Development District concept plan. This application
component may utilize any visualization tool necessary to adequately
demonstrate the conceptual layout of streets, buildings, open spaces, and
structures in the Planned Development District. The primary purpose of this
component shall be to communicate the conceptual form of the proposed
development for the purpose of evaluating whether the project meets the Planned
Development District provisions.
      (8)   Identification of scenic views onto the tract from surrounding
roads and public areas, and how impacts to these view sheds are mitigated.
      (9)   Identification of historic resources and how all efforts have been
made to promote the protection, preservation, and integration of historic
resources into the planned development through reuse, adaptive use and
rehabilitation.
      (10)   Identification of sensitive environmental resources and how
impacts to these resources are avoided or minimized to the maximum extent
practicable. Sensitive environmental resources include but are not limited to:
         (a)   FEMA floodplain boundaries, including 25-foot floodplain buffer;
         (b)   Priority forest conservation and forestation areas as listed
under §
1-21-40;
         (c)   Jurisdictional wetland boundaries and 25-foot buffers;
         (d)   Hydrography, including perennial and intermittent streams and
stream body buffer setbacks;
         (e)   Steep slopes (over 25%) associated with hydrological features
and/or erodible soils; and
         (f)   Areas identified as green infrastructure network and/or
sensitive species areas in the green infrastructure sector of the Livable
Frederick Master Plan.
   (C)   The justification statement. The justification statement shall address
each of the approval criteria set forth above and within §§
1-19-3.110.1 through
1-19-3.110.6 of this chapter.
   (D)   The phasing plan. The proposed phasing plan shall describe the timing
and sequence for dedication of public lands and development of public
facilities and utilities.
   (E)   The Phase II application shall be provided in accordance with all
applicable subdivision or site development plan review requirements, in
addition to other required submissions and approvals (including without
limitation, Adequate Public Facilities Ordinance studies, Forest Resource
Ordinance plans, sight-distance studies, and stormwater management concepts).
   (F)   A combined application for PUD and MXD Districts may be submitted
where the subject property is to be divided into development areas which
correspond to a different planned development category; and where each
development area is identified by a separate legal description.
   (G)   Traffic analysis. Based on an approved scope of work by the county and
the methodologies set forth in the Guidelines For The Preparation Of Traffic
Impact Analyses For Development Applications, analyze the adequacy of the road
network based on pertinent criteria from §
1-19-10.500.3(E) and detail improvements, timing of improvements, and phasing
of development necessary, if the impact of the development causes inadequacy of
the road or a high degree of reduction of service.
(Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 20-07, 8-4-2020)
§ 1-19-10.500.6. LAND USE, MIXTURE, AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS WITHIN THE PUD
DISTRICT.
   (A)   Land use permitted within the PUD District. General land use type and
location shall be approved by the County Council in concept at Phase I and
specifically by the Planning Commission through site development plan review at
Phase II. Land uses permitted within the PUD district are limited to:
      (1)   Residential. All residential uses including single family, duplex,
townhouse, multifamily, or a continuing care retirement community (CCRC).
      (2)   Commercial. T Those uses permitted within the Village Center zoning
district, indoor sports recreation facilities without racetracks, and funeral
homes.
      (3)   Employment. Those uses permitted within the ORI zoning district as
approved by the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Institutional. Institutional uses shall be limited to recreational
and community activities, public services and facilities, health care
facilities, schools, and institutional uses as provided within §
1-19-5.310 Use Table.
      (5)   Uses which are customary, accessory or associated with uses as
permitted within this section or specifically approved by the Zoning
Administrator including: private garages, storage spaces, tool sheds, or other
similar uses.
      (6)   A CCRC PUD or a CCRC as a portion of a PUD may include related
accessory uses for the benefit or convenience of the residents and their guests
including but not limited to: kitchen and dining facilities, restaurants,
places of worship, indoor and outdoor recreational uses, retail and banking
facilities, beauty salon and barbershops, gift shops, classrooms, medical
offices, medical clinic, laboratory services, exercise and vocational activity
areas. A complete listing and range of square footage for each individual
accessory use must be shown on the Phase I plan. The County Council may deny or
reduce the size, type, location, and/or mixture of the various accessory uses
if determined that it is inappropriate for the site or overall area of the
CCRC.
   (B)   Residential land use mixture within the PUD District. A goal of the
PUD district is to provide an optimal mixture of housing types, including
single family dwellings, townhouses, and multifamily dwellings. It is
recognized that each development project is unique and will benefit from its
own mixture of housing types. The specific mixture of housing types for each
development project shall be established by the County Council at Phase I,
based on an evaluation of the following:
      (1)   Existing County Comprehensive Plan land use designation and the
intended dwelling type and density.
      (2)   Need for a particular dwelling type based on existing and proposed
residential dwelling types surrounding the tract of land receiving the PUD
district.
      (3)   The County Comprehensive Plan community design policy of including
a variety of dwelling types in all communities in Frederick County.
      (4)   The mixture of dwellings recommended within the County
Comprehensive, Community, and Corridor Plans for the tract of land receiving
the PUD district.
      (5)   The amount and type of moderately priced dwelling units to be
constructed.
   (C)   Commercial land use mixture within the PUD District. In establishing
the mixture of land uses in the PUD District the County Council shall include
an evaluation of the relationship between proposed residential land uses and
surrounding existing and proposed commercial land uses. This evaluation shall
establish whether existing and proposed commercial land uses can adequately
provide retail, business, and personal services to the proposed residential
land use. Where it is determined that existing and proposed commercial and
employment land uses will not adequately provide for the proposed residential
land use, a minimum amount of commercial and employment land uses shall be
required as part of the proposed development. The requirement of additional
commercial and employment land uses shall be determined based on an evaluation
of the following factors:
      (1)   Whether the number and type of existing or proposed commercial/
employment land uses located within a distance that may be reasonably expected
to serve a majority of the proposed residential dwelling units adequately
provide retail, business, and personal services to the proposed residential
land use.
      (2)   Whether the design of the proposed development maximizes use of
alternate modes of transportation (pedestrian, bicycle, and transit) reducing
the need for vehicular movement between residential and commercial/employment
land uses.
      (3)   Whether the proposed development reflects a land use mixture
consistent with the County Comprehensive, Community, and Corridor Plans.
   (D)   Open space/green area within the PUD District.
      (1)   Open space/green area within the proposed PUD development shall be
calculated based on gross project area, and provided at the following minimum
rates:
 
Gross Density Required Minimum Percentage of Open Space/Green Area Exclusive of
              Floodplain
3-6 du/acre   30%
6-12 du/acre  35%
12-20 du/acre 40%
 
      (2)   The County Council may require public parks and recreation
facilities in addition to open space/green area. (See also §
1-19-10.500.8(A).)
      (3)   A reduction of not more than 50% of the open space/green area
requirement may be granted where the County Council finds that open space/green
area requirements are met through the use of low impact development techniques,
environmental site design techniques, open space green area located in close
proximity to the proposed development (to include public park facilities), or a
combination thereof. (See also §
1-19-10.500.8(A)).
   (E)   Building square footages will be used to determine the land use
percentages within mixed-use buildings.
   (F)   The County Council may in its sole discretion, deny, reduce, or
increase the size, type, location, and/or mixture of the various land use
components if it determines that the change is appropriate for the site or
overall area of the PUD.
   (G)   As part of Phase II execution, the Planning Commission may approve
minor modifications to individual land use location (such as single-family
detached, duplex, or townhouse), provided that the location of the overall land
use component (residential) within the site has not been modified. Any change
in the amount or percentage mix of commercial and/or residential development of
a PUD project having Phase I approval, must be approved by the County Council
under the provisions of this division.
   (H)   Design requirements: density, setbacks, and height within the PUD
district.
      (1)   Density.
         (a)   Gross density of a proposed PUD development shall comply with
the following table. The gross density may not exceed the maximum density
specified by the County Comprehensive Plan residential land use designation of
the subject property:
 
County Comprehensive Plan Land Use Designation Dwelling Units per Acre
Low Density Residential                        3-6 du/ac
Medium Density Residential                     6-12 du/ac
High Density Residential                       12-20 du/ac
 
         (b)   Where the tract of land receiving the PUD District has 2 or more
residential land use designations, then the density may be calculated as a
weighted average of the density ranges as specified for the residential land
use designations in which the PUD is proposed.
         (c)   Where the tract of land receiving the PUD District has both
residential and natural resource land use designations, the density may be
calculated based on the combined area of the land use designations. (See also §
1-19-10.500.9(B)(2).)
         (d)   The maximum density of the Planned Development District shall be
approved at Phase I by the County Council after review and evaluation of the
following factors:
            1.   Existing and planned availability of public facilities and
utilities.
            2.   Access to existing or planned transportation networks with
consideration that the highest density commercial, employment, and residential
developments should be located near access to major thoroughfares, public
transportation systems, and transit hubs to facilitate smart growth principles
and compact development.
            3.   The physical characteristics of the site proposed for
development with particular emphasis on development constraints which may
restrict achievable density and dwelling type, including natural features such
as:
               a.   FEMA floodplain boundaries, including 25-foot floodplain
buffer;
               b.   Priority forest conservation and forestation areas as
listed under §
1-21-40(B);
               c.   Jurisdictional wetland boundaries and 25-foot buffers;
               d.   Hydrography, including perennial and intermittent stream
and stream body buffer setback;
               e.   Steep slopes (over 25%) associated with hydrological
features and/or erodible soils;
               f.   Nonresidential components (i.e. commercial areas); and
               g.   Roadways and other land proposed to be dedicated for public
purpose.
            4.   The shape of the site proposed for development.
            5.   The design of the proposed development.
            6.   Any other relevant information that may have a bearing on the
achievable density of the proposed development.
         (e)   Planned Development Districts are subject to the MPDU
requirements set forth in this chapter. Density bonus will be determined as
part of the Phase I review process.
      (2)   Setbacks and height. Setbacks and height shall be established by
the Planning Commission at Phase II consistent with the general development
standards as provided in §
1-19-10.500.9, reflecting the proposed development pattern and land use within
the Phase I project concept plan or portion thereof, reflecting the location of
the project within the county with consideration of the existing development
pattern surrounding the proposed development, and consistent with the
appropriate community and corridor plans.
(Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 19-10, 7-16-2019; Bill No. 20-07, 8-4-2020; Bill No. 22-28, 10-
18-2022)
§ 1-19-10.500.7. LAND USE, MIXTURE, AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS WITHIN THE MXD
DISTRICT.
   (A)   Land use permitted within the MXD District. General land use type and
location shall be established by the County Council in concept at Phase I and
specifically by the Planning Commission through site development plan review at
Phase II. Land uses permitted within the MXD District are limited to:
      (1)   Residential. Medium density and high density residential uses
including single family, townhouse, and multifamily. Residential land uses
shall be permitted within the limited industrial and office research industrial
land use designations only as identified within the Comprehensive, Community,
or Corridor Plan.
      (2)   Commercial. Those uses permitted within the General Commercial
Zoning District Except for the following: auction house, lumber yard, mobile
home sales, boat sales and service, farm equipment sales and service,
carpentry, electric, plumbing, welding, printing and upholstering
establishments, fencing/pool/siding contractors, agricultural products
processing, bottling plant, stone monument processing and sales, bus depot,
animal auction sales, and racetrack.
      (3)   Employment. Employment shall be limited to those uses permitted
within the Office Research Industrial Zoning District.
      (4)   Institutional. Institutional uses shall be limited to recreational
and community activities, public services and facilities, health care
facilities, schools, and institutional uses as provided within §
1-19-5.310 Use Table.
      (5)   Uses which are customary, accessory or associated with permitted
uses as provided within this chapter, or those accessory uses specifically
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Land use mixture within the MXD District.
      (1)   Land use mixture within the MXD District shall be established by
the County Council at Phase I in accordance with the following:
Land Use Minimum Percentage of Total Project *Maximum Percentage of Total
                                             Project
Land Use                  Minimum Percentage of      *Maximum Percentage of
                          Total Project              Total Project
Residential               n/a                        25% gross project acreage
Commercial (where project
includes residential      n/a                        25% gross project acreage
component)
Commercial (Where project
does not include          n/a                        45% gross project acreage
residential component)
Combined commercial and                              40% gross project acreage
residential portions of   n/a                        or 50% of the gross
the MXD                                              project acreage ,
                                                     whichever is less
                          20% of total area devoted
                          to commercial and
Open space/green area     employment/industrial uses n/a
                          30% of total area devoted
                          to residential uses
*Maximum percentage of total project is exclusive of FEMA floodplain
boundaries, including 25-foot floodplain buffer, priority forest conservation
and forestation areas as listed under § 1-21-40(B), jurisdictional wetland
boundaries and 25-foot buffers, hydrography, including perennial and
intermittent streams and stream body buffer setback, steep slopes (over 25%)
associated with hydrological features and/or erodible soils.
The remainder of the site shall be used for employment, civic/institutional,
and cultural uses.
 
      (2)   A mixture of residential and commercial/employment land uses shall
be provided within the MXD District where applied to areas reflecting a County
Comprehensive Plan land use designation of Mixed Use Development. The proposed
development shall provide a mixture of land uses consistent with applicable
County Community or Corridor Plans.
      (3)   The County Council may require public parks and recreation
facilities in addition to open space/green area. (See also §
1-19-10.500.8(A).)
      (4)   A reduction of not more than 50% of the open space/green area
requirement may be granted where the County Council finds that open space/green
area requirements are met through the use of low impact development techniques,
environmental site design techniques, open space green area located in close
proximity to the proposed development (to include public park facilities), or a
combination thereof. (See also §
1-19-10.500.8(A)).
   (C)   Building square footages will be used to determine the land use
percentages within mixed-use buildings.
   (D)   The County Council may in its sole discretion, deny, reduce, or
increase the size, type, location, and/or mixture of the various land use
components if the County Council determines that the change is appropriate for
the site or overall area of the MXD and necessary to achieve the purpose and
intent of the MXD District.
   (E)   As part of Phase II execution, the Planning Commission may approve
minor modifications to individual land use location (such as single-family
detached, duplex, or townhouse), provided that the location of the overall land
use component (residential) within the site has not been modified. Any change
in the amount or percentage mix of commercial and/or residential development of
a MXD project having Phase I approval, must be approved by the County Council
as a new Phase I application.
   (F)   Design requirements: density, setbacks, and height within the MXD
District.
      (1)   Density.
         (a)   Gross density within a MXD District including residential
dwelling units shall be established by the County Council at Phase I.
         (b)   The maximum density of the MXD shall be established at Phase I
by the County Council after review and evaluation of the following factors:
            1.   Existing and planned availability of public facilities and
utilities.
            2.   Access to existing or planned transportation networks with
consideration that the highest density commercial, employment, and residential
developments should be located near access to major thoroughfares, public
transportation systems, and transit hubs to facilitate smart growth principles
and compact development.
            3.   The physical characteristics of the site proposed for
development with particular emphasis on development constraints which may
restrict achievable density and dwelling type, including natural features such
as FEMA floodplain boundaries, including 25-foot floodplain buffer, priority
forest conservation and forestation areas as listed under §
1-21-40(B), jurisdictional wetland boundaries and 25-foot buffers, hydrography,
including perennial and intermittent streams and stream body buffer setback,
steep slopes (over 25%) associated with hydrological features and/or erodible
soils.
            4.   The shape of the site proposed for development.
            5.   The design of the proposed development.
            6.   Any other relevant information that may have a bearing on the
achievable density of the proposed development.
         (c)   Planned Development Districts are subject to the MPDU
requirements set forth in this chapter. Density bonus will be determined as
part of the Phase I review process.
         (d)   Where a portion of the tract of land receiving the MXD District
reflects the natural resource land use designation the density may be
calculated based on the combined area of the land use designations. (See also §
1-19-10.500.9(B)(2).)
      (2)   Setbacks and height. Setbacks and height shall be established by
the Planning Commission at Phase II consistent with the general development
standards as provided in §
1-19-10.500.9, reflecting the proposed development pattern and land use within
the Phase I project concept plan or portion thereof, reflecting the location of
the project within the county with consideration of the existing development
pattern surrounding the proposed development, and consistent with the
appropriate community and corridor plans.
(Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 20-07, 8-4-2020)
§ 1-19-10.500.8. PUBLIC FACILITIES AND UTILITIES WITHIN THE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Parks and recreation. Parks and recreation facilities shall be
provided for the residential portion of PUD and MXD developments through a
combination of active and passive amenities as approved by the County Council
in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Parks and recreation facilities may be required in addition to open
space/green area based on an evaluation of existing parks and recreation
facilities or parks and recreation facilities proposed as a portion of the
Planned Development District.
      (2)   Parks and recreation facilities shall be provided at a rate of 726
square feet per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area
      (3)   Those areas containing floodplain, steep slopes, wetlands, flooding
soils, or other similar features may be utilized toward meeting passive
recreation requirements where land disturbance and clearing are minimized.
      (4)   Where public park facilities are required in addition to open
space/green area, the County Council may approve the use of passive recreation
amenities such as floodplain, wetlands, steep slopes, flooding soils or other
similar features in meeting open space/green area requirements.
   (B)   Other public facilities. The County Council may require additional
sites for other public facilities including schools, library services, or a
fire and emergency medical service site to serve the proposed development where
the County Council determines that a need exists based on established county
standards of service.
(Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-10.500.9. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS WITHIN THE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
DISTRICTS.
   The following general development standards shall be met at the time of
Phase II execution unless modified by the Planning Commission as provided in §
1-19-10.500.9(D).
   (A)   Site and building design.
      (1)   Parking, loading, landscaping, lighting, setbacks, and height shall
be provided in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   Land uses shall be integrated so as to provide: bicycle,
pedestrian, transit, and vehicular connections between land use bays; site
design and building placement that facilitates land use interaction rather than
separation; land use location that provides for a transition between land uses
in both design and intensity, rather than segregation of land uses.
      (3)   Pedestrian walkways and crossings shall provide convenient and safe
access linking buildings, parking areas, transit facilities, pedestrian
facilities, and recreation areas.
      (4)   Pedestrian walkways and crossings shall be marked or constructed of
materials to provide a distinction from areas of vehicular movement.
      (5)   Maximum block length within the proposed development and maximum
building footprint of commercial structures (as provided in §
1-19-10.500.6(A)(2) and §
1-19-10.500.7(A)(2)) shall be approved by the Planning Commission reflecting
the overall proposed project development pattern, the location of the project
within the county, and consistency with applicable community and corridor
plans.
      (6)   Buildings shall predominantly be designed and constructed to
include finishes and materials of consistent quality and design on all sides
such as: changes in building plane, windows, doorways, entrances, overhanging
eaves, and shutters. Buildings may not include large expanses of
undifferentiated façades and long plain wall sections.
      (7)   Building design shall reflect the materials and architecture of
traditional villages and towns throughout Frederick County and central Maryland
unless otherwise provided within county community and corridor plans.
      (8)   Buildings shall be designed and oriented in terms of their
relationship to the human scale and shall reflect this relationship through the
inclusion of human-scaled architectural elements such as, but not, limited to:
porches, windows, doors, balconies, terraces, canopies, and other pedestrian
amenities.
      (9)   Buildings shall provide a primary pedestrian entrance onto a
street, square, plaza, or sidewalk.
      (10)   Buildings shall be oriented so that rear entrances and rear
façades face away from roadways, pedestrian and public areas.
      (11)   As many buildings as possible shall be oriented to pedestrian
ways, local public streets, or internal roadways in larger developments.
      (12)   Building placement shall provide for the concentration of service
entrances, mechanical equipment, utilities and non-public facilities (i.e.,
refuse containers or outside storage) away from public access areas.
      (13)   Building and site design shall be oriented to provide safe and
convenient access to public transit facilities in accordance with the Frederick
County transit-friendly design guidelines.
      (14)   Parking shall be predominantly located to the side and/or rear of
buildings.
      (15)   Parking lots may not create long expanses of empty street
frontage.
      (16)   Projects shall be designed to link to existing and planned
transportation networks, incorporate an interconnected street grid, and shall
avoid commercial 'strip' development where vehicular access is achieved
directly to a collector classification roadway or higher.
      (17)   Shared access and interior drives with allowance for
interconnection between properties shall be provided where feasible. The
Planning Commission may require consolidation of multiple access points in
complying with this standard. At the rear of properties access should be
provided by alleyways or parking lot interconnections.
      (18)   To the extent practical, shared and joint use parking shall be
integrated into the overall parking plan to achieve a reduction in on-site
parking and impervious surface.
      (19)   Noise attenuation standards as approved by the Planning Commission
including walls, fences, berms and landscaping, acoustical building materials,
and/or increased setbacks shall be utilized to mitigate negative impacts where
residential development is proposed adjacent to an arterial or freeway/
expressway as identified in the County Comprehensive Plan.
      (20)   Parks, open spaces, plazas, courtyards, green areas, recreation
areas, civic spaces, and community facilities shall be designed and located in
such a way as to maximize their proximity, convenience, and physical
accessibility to the greatest number of potential users in the Planned
Development District. Such amenities shall serve as central organizing features
of the development and shall serve to enhance the pedestrian and bicycling
environment of the proposed development.
      (21)   Existing site structures and features shall be evaluated for the
feasibility of preservation and integration into the proposed development. The
evaluation shall include buildings, sites, structures, or other objects as
listed on or eligible for the National Register of Historic Places, Frederick
County Register of Historic Places, or as listed on the Maryland Inventory of
Historic Properties.
   (B)   Natural features.
      (1)   Insofar as practical, the landscape shall be preserved in its
natural state by:
         (a)   Minimizing tree and soil removal or disturbance;
         (b)   Siting buildings to protect and enhance the relationship between
the buildings and the natural terrain;
         (c)   Retaining existing tree lines, forested areas, and rock
formations reducing visual impacts of development on surrounding properties and
rights-of-way;
         (d)   Establishing and preserving connectivity of and between natural
features.
      (2)   Where the Planned Development District has been applied to a County
Comprehensive Plan land use designation of Natural Resource, the area
designated Natural Resource may not be developed with dwelling units or
commercial/employment structures, and roadways and vehicular crossings shall be
minimized.
   (C)   Public facilities and utilities.
      (1)   The location, design, and extent of public facilities shall be
provided in accordance with county standards and the County Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   Water and sewer. Planned Developments shall be served by publicly
owned community water and sewer.
      (3)   Transportation. The location and design of roads will be in
accordance with the County Comprehensive Plan, county subdivision regulations,
and the County Streets and Roads Design Manual, as amended.
      (4)   Utilities. All utility lines shall be placed underground.
      (5)   Ownership and maintenance.
         (a)   Streets dedicated to public use shall, after acceptance by the
county, be maintained by the county.
         (b)   Streets, alleyways or parking areas not dedicated to public use
or not accepted by the county shall be constructed to established county
standards and shall be maintained by a property owners association, condominium
association, or similar organization.
         (c)   Open space/green area and parks and recreation areas may be
owned and maintained by the county, or by a home owners association,
condominium association or similar organization, subject to the approval of the
Planning Commission and acceptance by the county.
   (D)   Modifications. As part of a Preliminary Plan or Site Development Plan
approval, the Planning Commission may approve modifications to parking,
loading, street design, landscaping, screening, buffering requirements, signage
(excluding billboards) and general development standards as provided in §
1-19-10.500.9(A), in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Modifications to parking, loading, landscaping, screening, and
buffering requirements shall be limited to modifications as provided for within
Article VI: District Regulations.
      (2)   All other modifications may be granted where the applicant or
Planning Commission authorized representative can demonstrate need based on
characteristics of the proposed use, physical site constraints, or other
documentation as approved by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Where a modification has been granted, the Planning Commission may
require alterations to building and site design to minimize negative impacts on
surrounding properties that may result from the modification. The building and
site design modifications may include: location of public access, buffering and
screening, landscaping, lighting, outdoor recreation areas, building location
and orientation.
      (4)   The Planning Commission may approve a modification of §§
1-19-6.300 through
1-19-6.320 for a commercial, non-residential component of a PUD or MXD. The
review and approval shall consider how the plan:
         (a)   Affects pedestrian and vehicular safety and wayfinding;
         (b)   Thematically represents the commercial/employment or community
as a whole;
         (c)   Maintains and enhances the aesthetic environment by reducing
visual clutter along a roadway and minimizing other adverse effects;
         (d)   Compares to the strict adherence of the sign requirement being
modified, provided the overall total amount, type, and height of proposed
signage is not greater than what would otherwise be permitted for the project;
and
         (e)   Furthers other county or state design goals or policies.
(Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 13-25-653, 10-31-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 20-19, 1-19-2021)
§ 1-19-10.500.10. SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS WITHIN THE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Where a continuing care retirement community (CCRC) constitutes an
entire PUD application (CCRC PUD), the tract shall have a minimum lot width of
200 feet and a minimum lot size of 5 acres.
   (B)   If any development or portion thereof requests designation as an age-
restricted community for the purpose of being exempt from the Adequate Public
Facilities Ordinance (APFO) schools test under §
1-20-7(E), this request must be made as part of the applicant's Phase I
application, indicating the number and location of the proposed age-restricted
dwelling units.
   (C)   The Planning Commission and the County Council, in their respective
reviews of the proposed development, shall consider the following criteria to
determine whether the project or portion thereof may be approved for
designation as an age restricted community:
      (1)   Active and passive recreational amenities.
      (2)   Availability, suitability and proximity of the development to
planned support services.
      (3)   The amount of existing and approved age-restricted development in
the county and in proximity to the proposed development.
   (D)   An adaptive reuse project is not required to be designated at Phase I
as an age-restricted community in order to apply for the exemption from the
APFO schools test under §
1-20-7(E).
(Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-19-10.500.11. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENTS (MXD) AND
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD).
   (A)   Mixed-Use Developments (MXD) and Planned Unit Developments (PUD) with
Phase I and Phase II approval as of November 20, 2010:
      (1)    Shall retain existing approvals including the land use intensity
and density rating as approved by the County Council.
      (2)   Amendments to existing Phase I or Phase II approvals that increase
intensity or density shall comply with the provisions of this division.
   (B)   Mixed-Use Developments (MXD) and Planned Unit Developments (PUD) with
Phase I approval but without Phase II approval as of November 20, 2010, shall
comply with the Phase II provisions of this division.
(Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 6. MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT (MH)
§ 1-19-10.600. MOBILE HOME PARK (MH).
§ 1-19-10.600.1. PURPOSE.
   The Mobile Home Park District (MH) is a floating zone established for the
purpose of providing for the development of planned mobile home parks thereby
increasing choices of housing types.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-54, 1-24-1977; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§ 1-19-10.600.2. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   This section provides for the establishment of complete communities
based around the concept of a community of mobile homes.
   (B)   Location of mobile home park district as a floating zone may be
established within areas delineated in the adopted County Comprehensive
Development Plan as low, medium or high density residential.
   (C)   (1)   The minimum tract size for a mobile home park is 10 acres, with
a minimum tract width of 300 feet and green area of 50 foot depth from the
tract property lines. Density shall be determined as follows:
 
Comprehensive Plan Designation Square Footage per Unit
Low Density                    12,000
Medium Density                 8,000
High Density                   4,000
 
      (2)   Density may be increased 10%, provided the cluster concept design
is used as approved by the Planning Commission and 50% of the area gained from
reduced sizes is set aside as green area. Mobile home parks are subject to §
1-19-8.620 through §
1-19-8.620.6.
   (D)   One acre for every 10 acres of the site area will be used for
recreation space. This will not include the area within required setbacks.
   (E)   The minimum distance between individual mobile home units will be 20
feet.
   (F)   Central water and sewerage systems shall be provided in all mobile
home developments. Such systems shall be designed, constructed and maintained
in accordance with state and county laws. Plans for the operation and
maintenance of such systems are to be approved by the county and the State
Health Department. Septic systems are prohibited.
   (G)   All utilities, including but not limited to electric and telephone
lines, shall be placed underground in accordance with rules and procedures
established by the Maryland Public Service Commission.
   (H)   Vehicular access and parking shall be provided in accordance with the
County Design Manual.
   (I)   Phase I procedure for approval will be the same as for zoning map
amendments as established in §§
1-19-3.110.1 through
1-19-3.110.8 of this Code.
   (J)   Phase II will be submission of preliminary and final plat submitted in
accordance with the county subdivision regulations. Final plats will be
recorded and shall constitute final approval of the mobile home park.
(Ord. 77-1-78, § 40-63(B), 1-24-1977; Ord. 77-10-87, 8-22-1977; Ord. 02-26-322,
11-21-2002; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
Cross reference:
   Subdivisions, see
Chapter 1-16
DIVISION 7. RESERVED
§ 1-19-10.700. RESERVED.
DIVISION 8. SOLID WASTE DISTRICT (SW)
§ 1-19-10.800. SOLID WASTE DISTRICT (SW).
   (A)   Solid Waste District (SW) shall be a floating zone which may be
established within Agricultural, Village Center, Highway Service, General
Commercial, Office Research/Industrial, Limited Industrial and General
Industrial Zoning Districts and when having the corresponding Comprehensive
Plan land use designation.
   (B)   The uses permitted in the Solid Waste District shall be as set forth
in §
1-19-5.310. Any use, dealing with solid waste which requires a permit from the
Maryland Department of the Environment not specifically addressed in §
1-19-5.310, will be reviewed under these criteria and may be established only
upon the approval of the County Council.
   (C)   A property owner may file an application which shall consist of the
following:
      (1)   Application stating request;
      (2)   Site plan;
      (3)   Statement of consistency with the County Solid Waste Plan;
      (4)   Documents establishing compliance with all development standards
set forth below;
      (5)   A traffic study establishing that adequate traffic routes are
available;
   (D)   The application shall be filed and processed in the same manner as a
zoning map amendment. The application may be granted if the County Council
finds that the applicant has established that the proposed use is compatible
with neighborhood uses, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the county
and the region in which it is located, and it satisfies the development
standards and criteria set forth in this section and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   Development standards.
      (1)   Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size shall be 10 acres.
      (2)   Location on floodplain prohibited. No portion of the site on which
the solid waste facility is located may be within a designated floodplain.
      (3)   Required setbacks. All activities associated with the use shall be
located a minimum of 150 feet from the property lines.
      (4)   Building height restrictions. The height of principal use equipment
shall not exceed 100 feet from grade; accessory structures shall not exceed 60
feet from grade. Agricultural buildings are exempt from height restrictions.
      (5)   Frontage. The site shall have a minimum of 80 feet frontage on a
public road meeting the collector street standards established in the Master
Highway Plan. Access shall not be provided by use of a panhandle.
      (6)   Lot width. The lot width at the front building line shall be a
minimum of 300 feet.
      (7)   Open space/green areas. All setback areas shall be landscaped and
maintained as green space.
      (8)   Exclusions from setbacks. Fences, railroad access, warning signs,
security/noise barriers, berms and access roads may be located within the
setback areas.
      (9)   Fencing. Fencing shall be required around all solid waste and
accessory activity areas.
      (10)   Lighting. Lighting shall be designed and directed so as not to
adversely impact adjoining properties and shall be specifically approved during
the site plan approval process.
      (11)   Access. Commercial/industrial entrance standards shall be utilized
in the design of any point of access to a public road, including acceleration
and deceleration and bypass lanes as necessary.
   (F)   All activities associated with the solid waste use and all other
activities conducted on the site shall meet all applicable federal, state and
local regulations governing noise, dust, air pollutant emissions, vibrations,
water appropriation and discharge, including those established in §
1-19-7.610 of this chapter as set forth for Limited Industrial (LI) Districts.
(Ord. 91-32-032, 11-19-1991; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
DIVISION 9. INSTITUTIONAL FLOATING ZONING DISTRICT
§ 1-19-10.900. INSTITUTIONAL FLOATING ZONING DISTRICT (I).
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   The Institutional District is a floating zone established to
provide for the location and development of large-scale public and private
institutional uses including public airports, college or universities, private
schools, or public schools in areas with an agricultural/rural or institutional
County Comprehensive Plan land use designation. Institutional uses fulfill the
important function of providing for the educational, health, and social well-
being of residents. However, large institutional facilities, because of their
size, scale, and intensity, may create adverse impacts on surrounding
properties and neighborhoods. These adverse impacts include noise, significant
traffic volumes, and consumption of large areas of land for parking,
infrastructure, and related facilities. Review and siting of these facilities
through a floating zone process will maintain the purpose of the agricultural/
rural areas identified by the County Comprehensive Plan by directing
development to areas contiguous to concentrations of growth rather than where
only services intended for rural and agricultural activities have been
provided, will mitigate or minimize impacts to surrounding properties and
mitigate or avoid traffic congestion which improves pedestrian and roadway
safety.
   (B)   Size and location.
      (1)   The Institutional District may be established where:
         (a)   The tract of land receiving the Institutional District has a
County Comprehensive Plan land use designation of either agricultural/rural or
institutional. The Institutional District may be applied to a County
Comprehensive Plan land use designation of Rural Residential (RurR), Low
Density Residential (LDR), or Natural Resource (NR) where the RurR, LDR, or NR
land use designations are a minor portion of the overall institutional project
or a minor portion of the overall tract(s) receiving the Institutional
District. Those portions of the project having a land use designation of
Natural Resource may only be developed as provided in §
1-19-10.900(G)(5); and
         (b)   The tract of land receiving the Institutional District has
frontage on and direct access to a roadway with at least a collector status, as
designated on the County Comprehensive Plan, and is built to said
classification requirements. The County Council may waive or modify this
requirement where the tract of land receiving the Institutional District is
within 2 miles of an existing grade separated interchange constructed on a
controlled access freeway/expressway or within 2 miles of a proposed grade
separated interchange constructed on a controlled access freeway/ expressway as
shown on the Frederick County Comprehensive Plan; and
         (c)   The tract of land receiving the Institutional District is within
½ mile of a community growth boundary or is contiguous or within a community
growth boundary as designated by the County Comprehensive Plan. For the
purposes of this subsection, a property separated from a community growth
boundary by a transportation or utility right- of-way (whether fee simple
estate or lesser interest in realty) is deemed to be contiguous along the
length of such right-of-way; or
         (d)   Where multiple contiguous parcels of land under one ownership
constitute a project, at least one parcel is within or contiguous to a
community growth boundary as designated on the County Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   The tract of land receiving the Institutional District shall total
no more than 100 acres except where the applicant can demonstrate that the
increased size is required to meet the needs of the proposed development.
   (C)   Approval criteria.
      (1)   Approval or disapproval of a request for the application of the
Institutional Zoning District shall be determined through evaluation of several
criteria to establish whether the proposed project meets the purpose and intent
of the zoning district. In addition to the requirements in §
1-19-3.110.4(A)(1)-(6), the Planning Commission and County Council shall
evaluate the project on the following criteria:
         (a)   The project provides facilities that are planned and located in
accordance with the Frederick County community design guidelines and
development principles while considering the purpose and intent of the
agricultural/rural or institutional land use designation;
         (b)   The proposed use will be compatible with existing or anticipated
surrounding uses in terms of size, building scale and style, intensity,
setbacks, and landscaping, or the proposal provides for mitigation of
differences in appearance or scale through such means as setbacks, screening,
landscaping or other design features. Anticipated surrounding uses shall be
determined based upon existing zoning and land use designations;
         (c)   The project provides a safe and efficient arrangement of land
use, buildings, traffic and pedestrian circulation systems, and infrastructure;
         (d)   The transportation system is adequate to serve the proposed use
in addition to existing uses in the area. Evaluation factors include roadway
capacity and level of service, on-street parking impacts, access requirements,
a traffic management plan, neighborhood impacts, and pedestrian safety;
         (e)   Natural features of the site have been adequately considered and
utilized in the design of the project. Evaluation factors include the
relationship of existing natural features to man-made features both on-site and
in the immediate vicinity;
         (f)   Fire/rescue and law enforcement facilities are adequate to serve
the proposed project within established county standards.
         (g)   If the tract of land receiving the Institutional Floating Zoning
District is designated other than No Planned Service (NPS) on the water and
sewerage master plan then the project will be developed using publicly owned
community water and sewer or a duly approved multi-use system. Those tracts of
land receiving the Institutional Floating Zoning District and reflecting a
designation of NPS shall utilize methods other than publicly owned community
water and sewer meeting the requirements of and receiving approval from the
Maryland Department of the Environment/the Frederick County Health Department.
         (h)   Environmental, geological, and hydrological features of the site
and surrounding area have been adequately considered in the design of the
project.
   (D)   Review and approval procedures.
      (1)   Phase I justification and floating zone reclassification. The
procedure for Phase I approval will be the same as for zoning map amendments as
established in §§
1-19-3.110.1 through
1-19-3.110.6.
      (2)   Phase II execution. The procedure for Phase II approval shall
follow the applicable subdivision or site development plan review process.
Prior to applying for Phase II where publicly owned community water and sewer
are available to serve the proposed project, a classification of W-5, S-5 on
the Frederick County Water and Sewerage Master Plan shall be obtained.
Subdivision shall occur in accordance with county subdivision regulations. Site
development plan review shall occur in accordance with §§
1-19-2.160,
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4.
   (E)   Application.
      (1)   The application submitted must include 15 copies of each of the
following:
         (a)   A map of the applicant's entire holding at a convenient scale;
         (b)   A vicinity map at a scale of 1 inch equals 2,000 feet or more to
the inch, indicating the location of the property with respect to surrounding
property and streets. The map will show all streets and highways within 2,000
feet of the applicant's property;
         (c)   An environmental features map of the property showing the
existing surface of the land and the location of soil types and natural
features such as streams, rock outcrops and wooded areas, at a minimum of 5
foot contour intervals, unless otherwise specified;
         (d)   A generalized overall land use plan at 1" = 100 scale, showing
the type, location, acreage and density of all proposed land uses as well as
the general street layout and circulation pattern;
         (e)   A concept plan at 1" = 50 scale showing the location of all
proposed lot lines; the location, proposed use, size and height of all existing
and proposed buildings; the location of all roads, parking lots, truck loading
areas and access and egress drives; and the location and type of all public,
recreational or cultural facilities and areas;
         (f)   A phasing schedule describing the timing and sequence of
development;
         (g)   A traffic management plan shall be submitted and approved by the
Community Development Division detailing the control and flow of vehicle
traffic during events including emergency access. The plan shall also describe
the responsible parties and necessary steps required for successful
implementation;
      (2)   The applicant shall also submit a justification statement
addressing each of the approval criteria as well as the following:
          (a)   Relationship of uses within the project and with existing uses
in the neighborhood;
         (b)   Long-term implications on local development patterns, facilities
and services;
         (c)   The timing of the construction of the project as it relates to
the provision of facilities and services;
         (d)   Availability and suitability of pedestrian and vehicular access,
and transportation systems;
         (e)   A statement identifying all related incidental accessory uses
and activities associated with the primary use of the property including hours
of operation, frequency of activity, and average number in attendance.
      (3)   The County Council may require that architectural renderings of
buildings, streetscapes or public areas be presented to assure that the
appearance, size and type of building material or other aspects of the design
are in keeping with the purposes and intent of the institutional district. The
County Council may add conditions to its approval of the institutional project
requiring architectural review.
   (F)   Land use. Land uses permitted within the Institutional Zoning District
are limited to the following:
      (1)   Public airports
      (2)   College or university
      (3)   Private school
      (4)   Public school
      (5)   Accessory uses shall be limited to those deemed to be incidental
accessory uses associated with an institutional use as provided within this
chapter (see also §
1-19-10.900(H)(1)(a) and (b), and Article VIII, Division 2. Accessory Uses) or
as approved by the Zoning Administrator.
   (G)   General development standards. The following general development
standards shall be met at the time of Phase II execution unless modified by the
Planning Commission as provided in §
1-19-10.900(G)(6).
      (1)   Setbacks and height.
         (a)   At a minimum setbacks and height limitations shall be as
provided for institutional uses in the Agricultural District in §
1-19-6.100 Design Requirements for Specific Districts.
         (b)   Along common property lines between the proposed development and
an agricultural activity the setback shall be increased to 150 feet to include
a landscaped area as set forth in §
1-19-10.900 (G)(3)(b). If the proposed development meets the definition of
agricultural activity then the increased setback is not required. The Planning
Commission may approve the reuse and location of development in the setback
area if all identified adjacent agricultural activities have permanently ceased
as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   Along common property lines between the proposed development and
a residential use the setback shall be increased to 150 feet.
      (2)   Parking, loading, landscaping, and lighting shall be provided in
accordance with this chapter.
      (3)   Green area.
          (a)   All setback areas, except where otherwise permitted in this
section, shall be landscaped and maintained as green space.
         (b)   As provided for in §
1-19-10.900(G)(1)(b) an increased setback shall be created to reduce conflicts
between agricultural and non-agricultural uses. The setback area shall be
maintained with natural vegetation or planted to emphasize native species
rather than turf grass, creating a vegetative screen with the following minimum
standards:
            1.   Two staggered rows of non-invasive species of trees and shrubs
containing predominantly evergreen foliage;
            2.   Trees shall be a minimum of 6 feet in height at the time of
installation;
            3.    In addition to the required plant materials the setback area
may contain floodplain, stream setbacks, utilities, and environmental site
design techniques to address stormwater management. As otherwise permitted by
this chapter, unpaved parking and passive recreation areas may be located
within the buffer area; however, a minimum setback as provided for
institutional uses in the Agricultural District in §
1-19-6.100 shall be maintained. Where the setback area is utilized to meet
forest resource ordinance requirements a duplication of plant materials is not
required.
      (4)   Natural features. Insofar as practical, the landscape shall be
preserved in its natural state by:
         (a)   Minimizing tree and soil removal or disturbance;
         (b)   Siting buildings to protect and enhance the relationship between
buildings and the natural terrain;
         (c)   Retaining existing tree lines, forest buffers, and rock
formations reducing visual impacts of development on surrounding properties and
rights-of-way.
      (5)   Where the Institutional District has been applied to a County
Comprehensive Plan designation of Natural Resource, the Natural Resource area
may not be developed with additional dwelling units or additional commercial/
employment structures, and roadways and vehicular crossings shall be minimized.
      (6)   As part of the Institutional District Phase II approval, the
Planning Commission may approve modifications to setbacks, height, parking,
loading, landscaping, screening, and buffering requirements, and general
development standards, in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Modifications to parking, loading, landscaping, screening, and
buffering requirements shall be limited to modifications as provided for within
Article VI: District Regulations.
         (b)   All other modifications may be granted where the applicant or
Planning Commission authorized representative can demonstrate need based on
characteristics of the proposed use, physical site constraints, or other
documentation as approved by the Planning Commission.
   (H)   Specific development standards.
      (1)   College or university.
         (a)   A college or university may include related incidental accessory
uses necessary for the operation of the facility or the benefit or convenience
of the residents or guests including but not limited to: administrative
facilities, housing, athletic training facilities, recreational facilities,
support services (bookstore, dining halls, post office, maintenance and storage
facilities), place of worship, cemetery, and related utilities.
         (b)   At the time of Phase I approval additional uses may be
identified and approved based on their direct relationship to primary college
or university activities existing, or planned as part of the current
application. These uses include: conference center (meeting rooms/guest
accommodations), retail establishment, child care center, employment center,
and retirement housing. These uses and related facilities shall be operated in
association with the college/university and function for the use and benefit of
students, faculty, administration and alumni(ae).
(Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 09-22-526, 7-14-2009; Ord. 10-31-566, 12-21-
2010; Ord. 13-25-653, 10-31-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-07,
5-16-2017)
DIVISION 10. OPEN SPACE RECREATION FLOATING ZONING DISTRICT
§ 1-19-10.1000. OPEN SPACE RECREATION FLOATING ZONING DISTRICT (OSR).
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   The Open Space Recreation District is a floating zone established
to provide for the location and development of large-scale recreational uses
including recreational vehicle campgrounds, golf courses, zoo/botanical garden/
arboretums, and fairgrounds in areas with an agricultural/rural County
Comprehensive Plan land use designation. These types of development provide for
active and/or passive recreation adding to the opportunities for outdoor
exercise, appreciation of scenic areas, and enjoyment and access to open space.
As natural resource dependent uses, large recreational developments can consume
large areas of land for parking, infrastructure, and related facilities leading
to adverse impacts on surrounding properties and neighborhoods. Review and
siting of these facilities through a floating zone process will enable the
location of these facilities to areas contiguous to a community growth boundary
to provide a transition between growth areas and existing agricultural uses, to
mitigate or minimize impacts to surrounding properties, mitigate or avoid
traffic congestion which improves pedestrian and roadway safety, and to
maintain the purpose of the agricultural/rural areas identified by the County
Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Size and location.
      (1)   The Open Space Recreation District may be established where:
         (a)   The tract of land receiving the Open Space Recreation District
has a County Comprehensive Plan land use designation of agricultural/rural; and
         (b)   The tract of land receiving the Open Space Recreation District
has frontage on and direct access to a roadway with at least a collector
status, as designated by the County Comprehensive Plan, and is built or will be
upgraded by the applicant to said classification requirements. The County
Council may waive or modify this requirement where the tract of land receiving
the Open Space Recreation District is within two miles of a grade separated
interchange on a controlled access freeway/ expressway; and
         (c)   The tract of land receiving the Open Space Recreation District
is within two miles of a grade separated interchange on a controlled access
freeway/expressway, or the tract of land is within or contiguous to a community
growth boundary as designated on the County Comprehensive Plan. For the
purposes of this subsection, a property separated from a community growth
boundary by a transportation or utility right-of-way (whether fee simple estate
or lesser interest in realty) is deemed to be contiguous along the length of
such right-of-way; or
         (d)   Where multiple contiguous parcels of land under one ownership
constitute a project, at least one parcel is within or contiguous to a
community growth boundary as designated on the County Comprehensive Plan; and
      (2)   The tract of land receiving the Open Space Recreation District
shall have a minimum parcel size of: 10 acres for a recreational vehicle
campground, and a minimum of 25 acres and a maximum of 200 acres for
fairgrounds except where the applicant can demonstrate the increased size is
required to meet the needs of the proposed development.
   (C)   Approval criteria.
      (1)   Approval or disapproval of a request for the application of the
Open Space Recreation Zoning District shall be determined through evaluation of
several criteria to establish whether the proposed project meets the purpose
and intent of the zoning district. In addition to the requirements in §
1-19-3.110.4(A)(1)-(6), the Planning Commission and County Council shall
evaluate the project on the following criteria:
         (a)   The project provides facilities that are planned and located in
accordance with the Frederick County community design guidelines and
development principles while considering the purpose and intent of the
agricultural/rural land use designation;
         (b)   The proposed use will be compatible with existing or anticipated
surrounding uses in terms of size, building scale and style, intensity,
setbacks, and landscaping or the proposal provides for mitigation of
differences in appearance or scale through such means as setbacks, screening,
landscaping or other design features. Anticipated surrounding uses shall be
determined based upon existing zoning and land use designations;
         (c)   The project provides a safe and efficient arrangement of land
use, buildings, traffic and pedestrian circulation systems, and infrastructure;
         (d)   The transportation system is adequate to serve the proposed use
in addition to existing uses in the area. Evaluation factors include roadway
capacity and level of service, on-street parking impacts, access requirements,
neighborhood impacts, and pedestrian safety;
         (e)   Natural features of the site have been adequately considered and
utilized in the design of the project. Evaluation factors include the
relationship of existing natural features to man-made features both on-site and
in the immediate vicinity;
         (f)   Fire/rescue and law enforcement facilities are adequate to serve
the proposed project within established county standards.
         (g)   If the tract of land receiving the Open Space Recreation
Floating Zoning District is designated other than No Planned Service (NPS) on
the water and sewerage master plan then the project will be developed using
publicly owned community water and sewer. Those tracts of land receiving the
Open Space Recreation Floating Zoning District and reflecting a designation of
NPS shall utilize methods other than publicly owned community water and sewer
meeting the requirements of and receiving approval from the Maryland Department
of the Environment/the Frederick County Health Department.
         (h)   Environmental, geological, and hydrological features of the site
and surrounding area have been adequately considered in the design of the
project.
         (i)   When a tract of land for which the Open Space Recreation Zone is
proposed, is located wholly or partly within a Frederick County Priority
Preservation Area (PPA), the project shall in addition to the other
requirements of this section be evaluated to ascertain consistency with the
purpose and intent of the PPA. This evaluation shall include the following
factors: existence of prime farmland soils as identified in the USDA Soil
Survey for Frederick County, existing agricultural easements surrounding the
tract, development potential, and the tract size and location within the PPA.
In the event the approving body determines the project as proposed is
inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the PPA, the approving body may
impose conditions to mitigate the inconsistency or deny the application.
   (D)   Review and approval procedures.
      (1)   Phase I justification and floating zone reclassification. The
procedure for Phase I approval will be the same as for zoning map amendments as
established in §§
1-19-3.110.1 through
1-19-3.110.6.
      (2)   Phase II execution.  The procedure for Phase II approval shall
follow the applicable subdivision or site development plan approval process.
Prior to applying for Phase II where publicly owned community water and sewer
are available to serve the proposed project, a classification of W-5, S-5 on
the Frederick County Water and Sewerage Master Plan shall be obtained.
Subdivision shall occur in accordance with county subdivision regulations. Site
development plan review shall occur in accordance with §§
1-19-2.160,
1-19-3.300 through
1-19-3.300.4 of this chapter.
   (E)   Application.
      (1)   The application submitted must include 15 copies of each of the
following:
         (a)   A map of the applicant's entire holding at a convenient scale.
         (b)   A vicinity map at a scale of 1 inch equals 2,000 feet or more to
the inch, indicating the location of the property with respect to surrounding
property and streets. The map will show all streets and highways within 2,000
feet of the applicant's property.
         (c)   An environmental features map of the property showing the
existing surface of the land and the location of soil types and natural
features such as streams, rock outcrops and wooded areas, at a minimum of 5
foot contour intervals, unless otherwise specified.
         (d)   A generalized overall land use plan at 1" = 100 scale, showing
the type, location, acreage and density of all proposed land uses as well as
the general street layout and circulation pattern.
         (e)   A concept plan at 1" = 50 scale showing the location of all
proposed lot lines; the location, proposed use, size and height of all existing
and proposed buildings; the location of all roads, parking lots, truck loading
areas and access and egress drives; and the location and type of all public,
recreational or cultural facilities and areas.
         (f)   A phasing schedule describing the timing and sequence of
development.
         (g)   Landscape plans submitted by the applicant shall include a
nutrient management plan addressing not only turf areas but also tree, shrub,
and flower beds. The plan shall be prepared by a certified nutrient management
consultant and follow the best management practices as outlined by the
University of Maryland Cooperative Extension Recommendations.
      (2)   The applicant shall submit a justification statement addressing
each of the approval criteria as well as the following:
         (a)   Relationship of uses within the project and with existing uses
in the neighborhood;
         (b)   Long-term implications on local development patterns, facilities
and services;
         (c)   The timing of the construction of the project as it relates to
the provision of facilities and services;
         (d)   Availability and suitability of pedestrian and vehicular access,
and transportation systems;
         (e)   A statement identifying all incidental accessory uses and
activities associated with the primary use of the property including hours of
operation, frequency of activity, and average number in attendance.
      (3)   The County Council may require that architectural renderings of
buildings, streetscapes or public areas be presented to assure that the
appearance, size and type of building material or other aspects of the design
are in keeping with the purposes and intent of the Open Space Recreation
District. The County Council may add conditions to its approval of the open
space recreation project requiring architectural review.
   (F)   Land use. Land uses permitted within the Open Space Recreation Zoning
District are limited to the following:
      (1)   Recreational vehicle campground
      (2)   Golf course
      (3)   Zoo/botanical garden/arboretum
      (4)   Fairground
      (5)   Accessory uses shall be limited to those deemed to be incidental
accessory uses to an open space recreation use as provided within this chapter
(see Article VIII, Division 2. Accessory Uses) or as specifically approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
   (G)   General development standards. The general development standards
provided below shall be met at the time of site development plan review.
      (1)   Setbacks and height.
         (a)   At a minimum setbacks and height limitations shall be as
provided for natural resource uses in the Agricultural District in §
1-19-6.100 Design Requirements for Specific Districts.
         (b)   Along common property lines between the proposed development and
an agricultural activity the setback shall be increased to 150 feet to include
a landscaped area as set forth in §
1-19-10.1000(G)(3)(c). If the proposed development meets the definition of
agricultural activity then the increased setback is not required. The Planning
Commission may approve the reuse and location of development in the setback
area if all identified adjacent agricultural activities have permanently ceased
as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   Along common property lines between the proposed development and
a residential use the setback shall be increased to 150 feet.
      (2)   Transportation.
         (a)   Parking shall not be located within required setback areas,
except where otherwise provided within this section.
         (b)   Parking shall be limited to that number of spaces required by
zoning ordinance. An increase in the number of parking spaces may be granted by
the Planning Commission where the applicant can demonstrate need based on
characteristics of the proposed use, hourly parking demand studies published by
the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), or other documentation as
approved by the Planning Commission. Parking approved beyond that number
required by zoning ordinance shall be constructed of pervious materials.
         (c)   Parking areas required by zoning ordinance shall be landscaped
in accordance with the following minimum standards:
            1.   Parking areas, other than overflow parking, shall be separated
into bays of not more than 10 parking spaces. Between or at the end of each
parking bay there shall be planters of at least 5 feet in width. Each planter
shall contain 1 tree at least 6 feet in height at the time of planting and
groundcover containing at least 2 shrubs for every 100 square feet of landscape
area. Trees within parking area planters shall be deciduous and provide at
least 20% canopy cover at maturity. The Planning Commission may approve
modifications to these standards to accommodate parking area design
requirements associated with a fairground, recreational vehicle campground, or
environmental site design techniques.
         (d)   Environmental site design techniques such as bioretention shall
be utilized as the initial option for stormwater collection of all paved
parking areas.
      (3)   Green area.
         (a)   All setback areas, except where otherwise permitted in this
section, shall be landscaped and maintained as green space.
         (b)   Landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition.
         (c)   An increased setback shall be created to reduce conflicts
between agricultural and non-agricultural uses. The setback area shall be
maintained with natural vegetation or planted to emphasize native species
rather than turf grass, creating a vegetative screen with the following minimum
standards:
            1.   Two staggered rows of non- invasive species of trees and
shrubs containing predominantly evergreen foliage;
            2.   Trees shall be a minimum of 6 feet in height at the time of
installation;
            3.   In addition to the required plant materials the setback area
may contain floodplain, stream setbacks, utilities, and environmental site
design techniques to address stormwater management. As otherwise permitted by
this chapter, unpaved parking and passive recreation areas may be located
within the buffer area; however, a minimum setback as provided for natural
resource uses in the Agricultural District in §
1-19-6.100 shall be maintained. Where the setback area is utilized to meet
forest resource ordinance requirements a duplication of plant materials is not
required.
      (4)   Lighting shall be designed and directed away from adjoining
properties so as not to cause glare or adverse impacts.
      (5)   Natural features. Insofar as practical, the landscape shall be
preserved in its natural state by:
         (a)   Minimizing tree and soil removal or disturbance;
         (b)   Siting buildings to protect and enhance the relationship between
buildings and the natural terrain;
         (c)   Retaining existing tree lines, forest buffers, and rock
formations reducing visual impacts of development on surrounding properties and
rights-of-way.
   (H)   Specific development standards.
      (1)   Fairground.
         (a)   Multiple vehicular entrances and exits shall be provided, and
located at least 400 feet away from any road intersection;
         (b)   A traffic management plan shall be submitted to and approved by
the Community Development Division detailing the control and flow of vehicle
traffic during events, including emergency access. The plan shall also describe
the responsible parties and necessary steps required for successful
implementation;
         (c)   Reasonable hours of operation and number of days per event shall
be approved by the County Council as part of the Phase I approval.
         (d)   Landscaping and screening shall be provided with the intent of
reducing the impact on neighboring properties and enhancing the visual appeal
of the project. All parking areas, other than overflow parking, shall be
screened from adjacent properties and roads with plantings including evergreens
at least 6 feet in height.
      (2)   Recreational vehicle campground.
         (a)   Both tent and recreation vehicles can be accommodated within a
recreational vehicle campground, but the campground shall be designed to
contain a majority of recreational vehicles.
         (b)   Each campground will contain individual site electrical and
water outlets, toilet and shower facilities, and sanitary facilities as
required by the Frederick County Health Department.
         (c)   Accessory commercial and recreational services, if exclusively
used for residents of the campground, are permitted. This may include coin-
operated laundry, grocery, swimming pool, or entertainment as approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
         (d)   Maximum density permitted is 15 campsites per acre and a minimum
of 3,000 square feet per campsite. All campsites will be at least 50 feet from
the property line.
         (e)   The only permitted permanent residential occupancy will be for
the resident owner or manager.
         (f)   One acre for every 10 acres of the site area will be used for
recreation space. This will not include the area within required setbacks.
         (g)   The minimum distance between campsites will be 20 feet.
         (h)   All utilities, including but not limited to electric and
telephone lines, shall be placed underground in accordance with rules and
procedures established by the Maryland Public Service Commission.
(Ord. 09-21-525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 09-22-526, 7-14-2009; Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-
2011; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
DIVISION 11. CRITICAL DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE OVERLAY ZONE
§ 1-19-10.1100. CRITICAL DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE OVERLAY ZONE (CDI-OZ).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone
is created for the purpose of directing Critical Digital Infrastructure
Facilities and Critical Digital Infrastructure Electric Substations to
industrial lands in proximity to data conveyance infrastructure and other
industrial uses, while minimizing impacts to non-compatible uses and allowing
for development of industrial lands not included in the Critical Digital
Infrastructure Overlay Zone for other industrial uses.
   (B)   Establishment of Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone.
      (1)   A Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone may be created by
the County Council, with the boundaries established by ordinance and identified
on the Zoning Map.
      (2)   A Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone shall be established
by the County Council only on lands with a comprehensive plan land use
designation of Limited Industrial (LI) or General Industrial (GI) uses. The
overlay may be established on lots or parcels of land that are designated LI or
GI and which include portions designated Natural Resource (NR), provided that
NR land will not be included for any density calculation and no allowable
overlay uses will be permitted on the NR land.
      (3)   In establishing the area of the Critical Digital Infrastructure
Overlay Zone, the County Council shall consider proximity to schools, colleges
and universities, daycare centers, healthcare facilities, and residential uses.
      (4)   The Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone, as approved by
the County Council, shall include less than 1% of the total land area of the
county.
      (5)   Development of Critical Digital Infrastructure Facilities and
Critical Digital Infrastructure Electric Substations in the Critical Digital
Infrastructure Overlay Zone shall comply with §
1-19-8.402 Critical digital infrastructure facilities and §
1-19-8.403 Critical digital infrastructure electric substations.
      (6)   (a)   Individual zoning map amendments for properties located
within the Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone shall be subject to the
approval criteria in §
1-19-3.110.4;
         (b)   In the event that the County Council approves removal of a
property within the CDI-OZ from the Rural Legacy Area, an individual zoning map
amendment application shall not be accepted or processed until final state
approval of the revised Rural Legacy Area map is received.
   (C)   Principal permitted uses.
      (1)   All principal permitted uses in the underlying zoning district
shall be permitted in the Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone subject
to site development plan approval. Critical Digital Infrastructure Facilities
and Critical Digital Infrastructure Electric Substations shall be a principal
permitted use subject to site development plan approval in the Critical Digital
Infrastructure Overlay Zone only in the LI and GI zoning districts.
   (D)   Special exception uses.  All uses permitted by special exception in
the underlying zoning district shall be permitted by special exception and site
development plan approval in the Critical Digital Infrastructure Overlay Zone.
(Bill No. 25-09, 9-2-2025)
ARTICLE XI: DEFINITIONS (§ 1-19-11.100)
Section
Division 1. Definitions
   
1-19-11.100   Definitions
§ 1-19-11.100. DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this
chapter.
      (1)   The particular will control the general.
      (2)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table, or
illustrative table, the text will control.
      (3)   The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory and not
discretionary. The word "may" is permissive.
      (4)   Words used in the present tense include the future; and words used
in the singular number include the plural; and the plural includes the
singular; words of the masculine gender will include the feminine and the
neuter gender will refer to any gender as required, unless the context plainly
indicates the contrary.
      (5)   A building or structure includes any part thereof.
      (6)   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for, designed for,
intended for, maintained for, or occupied for."
      (7)   The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.
      (8)   Unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different
meaning is intended, a regulation which involves 2 or more items, conditions,
provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and, or," or "either . . .
or," the use of the conjunction is defined as follows.
         (a)   AND. All the connected items, conditions, provisions, and events
apply together and not separately.
         (b)   OR. The connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply
separately or in any combination.
         (c)   EITHER . . . OR. The connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events shall apply separately but not in combination.
      (9)   The word "includes" does not limit a term to the specified
examples, but is intended to extend the term's meaning to all other instances
or circumstances of like kind or character.
      (10)   When a term defined in the county subdivision regulations or the
County Building Code occurs in this chapter, it has the meanings specified in
the subdivision regulations or building code, unless specifically defined in
this chapter.
      (11)   The word "county" means Frederick County, Maryland. The word
"state" means the State of Maryland.
      (12)   The terms "Board of Appeals," "County Council," "County
Executive," "county governing body." "Director of Community Development
Division," "Planning Commission," "County Attorney," "Department of Permits and
Inspections," "County Engineer," "County Zoning Administrator," "health
officer," and "Sediment Control Inspector" mean the respective council, boards
and officers of the county.
      (13)   Throughout this chapter, all words, other than the terms
specifically defined herein, have the meaning inferred from their context in
this chapter or their ordinarily accepted definitions, as defined in Webster's
New Collegiate Dictionary, 1974 Edition.
   (B)   In this chapter the following terms are used as defined unless
otherwise apparent from the context.
      ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. An independent, self-contained dwelling unit
located within a single-family dwelling, or within an accessory structure, or
built as a separate accessory structure, and located on the same lot as a
single- family dwelling. An accessory dwelling unit greater than 1,000 square
feet must be approved in accordance with §
1-19-8.321 of this chapter. An accessory dwelling unit that does not exceed
1,000 square feet must be approved in accordance with §
1-19-8.212 of this chapter. (See also CARETAKER RESIDENCE.)
      ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A subordinate use or structure, which is
located on the same lot as the principal use or building except as outlined in
§
1-19-8.250.1(F) and serves a purpose customarily incidental to the principal
use or building. No accessory structures shall be permitted in designated
floodplain areas.
      ACRE. A measure of land containing 43,560 square feet.
      ADAPTIVE REUSE PROJECT.  Rehabilitation or renovation of existing
obsolescent or historic structure(s) from their original or most recent use to
a new use.
      AGE-RESTRICTED COMMUNITY. A development or portion thereof which has been
designated as an age-restricted community in accordance with §
1-19-10.500.10 of this chapter.
      AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY. Land used exclusively as a bona fide agricultural
operation by the owner or tenant. The use of land for agricultural purposes
includes farming, viticulture (grape production), fish culture, animal and
poultry husbandry, and equine activities. Necessary accessory uses such as
packing, treating, or storing of produce, composting and power generation from
farm animal waste are allowed provided that the operation of the accessory use
is clearly incidental to the agricultural activity. The business of intensive
swine feeding operations, garbage feeding of hogs, fur farms or the raising of
animals for use in medical or other tests or experiments, commercial
slaughtering of livestock, poultry, fish or meat processing is excluded from
this definition.
      AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY, LIMITED. The keeping of farm animals in
residential districts on lots with less than 3 acres. Apiaries are excluded
from this definition. (See also §
1-19-8.325 and §
1-19-8.407.)
      AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS PROCESSING. Processing on the farm of an
agricultural product in the course of preparing it for market. (This definition
excludes agricultural value added processing and farm winery).
      AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE. A structure used solely for the production,
harvesting, storage, raising or drying of agricultural commodities and
livestock; and specifically excludes any structures for human habitation.
Includes barns, silos, storage buildings, garages and other structures
associated with an agricultural use.
      AGRICULTURAL VALUE ADDED PROCESSING. Treatment that changes the form of a
product grown on a farm in order to increase its market value with a minimum of
51% of the processed product being produced on the farm. For purposes of this
use, the term "farm" includes contiguous and noncontiguous parcels within the
county in active agricultural production which are owned or leased by the
processor. AGRICULTURAL VALUE ADDED PROCESSING operations must be located on a
parcel of land that is a minimum of 10 acres in size.
      AGRITOURISM ENTERPRISE. Activities conducted on a farm and offered to the
public or to invited groups for the purpose of education, recreation, or active
involvement in the farm operation. These activities shall be related to
agriculture and shall be accessory to the primary agriculture operation on the
site. This term shall include farm tours, hayrides, corn mazes, seasonal
petting farms, farm museums, guest farm, pumpkin patches, "pick your own" or
"cut your own" produce, classes related to agricultural products or skills,
picnic and party facilities offered in conjunction with the above. No use that
is otherwise identified in §
1-19-5.310 as permitted with site plan approval or by special exception is
permitted as an agritourism enterprise.
      AGRITOURISM ENTERPRISE - FARM-BASED CRAFT BEVERAGE PROMOTIONAL EVENTS.
Activities conducted on, and accessory to, the normal and customary
agricultural use of the farm, offered to the public or invited groups for the
purpose of education, entertainment, and promotion of farm based craft beverage
products. Activities may include, but are not limited to, farm based craft
beverage festivals and multi-brewery promotional events, conducted in
accordance with the conditions contained in the property owner's Maryland
Alcohol Manufacturer License, serving products primarily grown or produced on
the farm.
      The following restrictions apply to these farm-based craft beverage
promotional events:
         (a)   All outdoor amplified music shall end by 9:00 p.m.;
         (b)   Overnight events are prohibited;
         (c)   A one-time Zoning Certificate must be obtained before holding
farm-based craft beverage promotional event(s);
         (d)   Complaints from the community, such as noise ordinance
violations or other actions resulting in violations of county rules and
regulations, may result in the suspension of the Zoning Certificate;
         (e)   Penalties for violations of these restrictions may be imposed in
accordance with §
1-1-9 of the County Code; and
         (f)   Compliance with applicable life safety and Health Department
rules and regulations is required.
      AIRCRAFT LANDING AND STORAGE AREA, PRIVATE. Landing areas or hangars for
storing or maintenance of aircraft, with the principal user being the owner of
the property.
      AIRCRAFT LANDING AND STORAGE AREAS, PRIVATE-COMMERCIAL USE. Landing areas
or hangars for storing or maintenance of aircraft, for use by the property
owner and specific individuals designated by the property owner. The facility
shall not allow flight or storage operations by the general public.
      AIRPORT, PUBLIC. Any publicly owned airport licensed by the State of
Maryland as a public airport, which meets minimum safety and service standards
and is open for use to the general flying public.
      ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE. For the purpose of these regulations,
alteration of a watercourse includes, but is not limited to widening, deepening
or relocating the channel, including excavation or filling of the channel.
Alteration of a watercourse does not include construction of a road, bridge,
culvert, dam, or in-stream pond unless the channel is proposed to be realigned
or relocated as part of such construction.
      AMEND or AMENDMENT. Any repeal, modification, or addition to a
regulation; any new regulation; any change in the number, shape, boundary, or
area of a zone; or any repeal or abolition of any map, part thereof, or
addition thereto.
      ANIMAL HOSPITAL/VETERINARY CLINIC. The use of property by licensed
veterinary practitioners for the care and treatment of the diseases and
injuries of animals and where animals may be boarded during their
convalescence.
      ANIMAL INCINERATOR. A facility for the disposal of animal remains that is
operated as an accessory to an animal hospital or veterinary clinic in the
Agricultural Zoning District and that complies with the special exception
criteria set forth in §
1-19-8.338 of the zoning ordinance or as an accessory to a cemetery/memorial
garden in the Agricultural Zoning District and that complies with §
1-19-8.220.
      ANTIQUE SHOP. The use of property for the selling of items such as works
of art, furniture, or decorative objects that have value and significance
because of factors such as age, rarity, or historical significance.
      APIARY. A collection of 1 or more bee colonies.
      APPROVING BODY. For the purposes of Article VI, Division 7 of this
chapter, the approving body:
         (a)   Shall be the Board of Appeals where a communications tower for
which an application has been submitted is to be located in a zone where
permitted by special exception; or
         (b)   Shall be the Planning Commission where a communications tower
for which an application has been submitted is to be located in a zone where
permitted by right.
      APPROXIMATE FLOODPLAIN. Those portions of land subject to inundation by
the 100-year flood, where no water surface elevations or floodway data have
been provided. A 100-year flood elevation shall be established after
consideration of any flood elevation and floodway data available from federal,
state, or other sources. The approximate floodplain appears on both the flood
insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps and may appear on all
panels as Zone A.
      AQUIFER. Any formation of soil, sand, rock, gravel, limestone, sandstone,
or other material, or any crevice from which underground water is or may be
produced.
      AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated Zone AO on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% annual chance or greater of flooding to an average
depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the
path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident; such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
      ARTISAN AND CRAFT SHOP. The use of property for the preparation, display
or sale of individually crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture,
pottery, leather craft, hand-woven articles, and other articles of artistic
quality, or effect, or handmade workmanship. Examples include candle making,
glass blowing, weaving, pottery making, woodworking, sculpting, painting, and
other associated activities.
      ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A facility that provides housing and supportive
services, supervision, personalized assistance, health related services, or a
combination thereof, to meet the needs of residents who are unable to perform
or who need assistance with the activities of daily living.
      AUCTION HOUSE. A building, area, or areas within a building used for the
public sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or equipment to the highest bidder.
      AUCTION SALES - ANIMALS. A structure or enclosure where farm livestock
are sold by auction.
      AUTOMOBILE FILLING AND SERVICE STATION. Any building, structure or area
of land that is used for the retail sales of motor vehicle fuels, oils and
accessories and where repair service other than paint or body or fender work is
incidental, and which may include a convenience store; and no junked autos or
other vehicles are parked or otherwise stored on the premises. This does not
include truck stops and filling station service facilities.
      AUTOMOBILE REPAIR OR SERVICE SHOP. Any building or lot used for major
automobile repair or body work and may have automobile servicing, including the
sale of fuels, oils, or parts, as an accessory use.
      AUTOMOBILE SALES AND SERVICE CENTER. A lot, parcel or structure used for
the sales and complete servicing of automobiles, including painting, body and
fender repairs.
      AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT. A lot designed or used for the storage or display
for sale of any motor vehicle or any unoccupied trailer, and not used for
repair work or service other than minor incidental repairs to vehicles or
trailers displayed or sold on the premises, and not used for the storage of
whole or parts of dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles.
      AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. See JUNKYARD.
      BARBER AND BEAUTY SHOPS. A retail establishment whose business is cutting
and dressing hair, tattoos, body piercing, nails, and performing related
services.
      BASE FLOOD. The 100-year frequency flood event (having one chance in a
hundred of being equaled or exceeded in any year) as indicated in the Flood
Insurance Study, as amended, the elevation of which is used for regulatory
purposes in this chapter.
      BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The water surface elevation of the base flood in
relation to the datum specified on the county's Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM). In areas of shallow flooding, the base flood elevation is the highest
adjacent natural grade elevation plus the depth number specified in feet on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, or at least 4 feet if the depth number is not
specified.
      BASEMENT. The area within the foundation walls or lower part of a wall or
structure. A basement is one or more floors of a building that are completely
or partially below the ground floor.
      BATTING CAGE/RANGE. A tract of land laid out with an enclosed area
containing pitching machines and batting areas wherein softballs and/or
baseballs are propelled toward a batter. A batting cage/range may include a
snack bar, a pro-shop, and retail sales of batting equipment as accessory uses.
      BED AND BREAKFAST (B&B). An owner- occupied single family detached
dwelling, in which primarily sleeping accommodations are provided for
compensation to transient guests in not more than four guest rooms. A B&B may
include the provision of meals for overnight guests only. A B&B is not a home
occupation. (See COUNTRY INN.)
      BEE COLONY. The bee hive, including bees, combs, honey, and related
equipment.
      BILLBOARD SIGN. A sign used for any activity, person, group of people or
thing not located on the premises upon which the sign is located.
      BIORETENTION. A water quality practice that utilizes landscaping and
soils to treat stormwater runoff by collecting it in shallow depressions before
filtering though a fabricated planting soil media.
      BOARD. The County Board of Appeals.
      BOATS, SALES AND SERVICE. A lot, parcel, or structure used for the sales
and servicing of boats.
      BODYWORK. The practice of therapeutic touching or manipulation of another
person's body by rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping with one's hands or
another part of the body. The term BODYWORK does not apply to:
         (a)   An athletic trainer who:
            1.   Is certified by a nationally recognized athletic trainer
certification agency identified by the Director and works under the supervision
of a physician, while functioning in the athletic trainer's professional
capacity;
            2.   Is employed by an accredited educational institution, while
performing professional duties at that institution; or
            3.   Is employed by a professional sports team, while treating
members of that team.
      BORROW PIT OPERATION. An area from which soil or other unconsolidated
materials are removed to be used, without further processing, as fill for
activities such as landscaping, building construction or street/road
construction and maintenance.
      BOTTLING PLANT.  A facility principally engaged in filling empty
containers with a liquid product. May include production of liquid product or
incidental services to prepare that product for market.
      BUILDING. A structure other than a tent or travel trailer, which has 1 or
more stories and a roof, and is designed primarily for the permanent shelter,
support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.
      BUILDING FOOTPRINT. The area of a lot or site included within the
surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion of a building, exclusive of
courtyards. In the absence of surrounding exterior walls, the building
footprint shall be the area under the horizontal projection of the roof.
      BUILDING LINE. The line beyond which the foundation walls or any enclosed
porch, vestibule or other enclosed portion of a building or structure does not
project. The depth of such line will be no less than depth required for the
particular yard for the district in which the lot is located. The handle of a
panhandle lot will not be considered in determining the location of the
building line.
      BULK PLANT. That portion of a property where flammable or combustible
liquids are received from bulk shipping systems, including tank vessel, pipe
lines, tank car, or tank vehicle; and are stored or blended in bulk for the
purpose of distributing such liquids by bulk shipping systems, including tank
vessels, pipe lines, tank car, tank vehicle or container to retail or wholesale
customers. This definition does not include automobile filling and service
stations or automobile repair and service shops.
      BUS DEPOT. A site or structure where passenger transport vehicles load or
unload passengers. Includes the storage of buses or motor coaches and the
layover of passengers. Does not include repair work or service other than minor
incidental repairs to the passenger buses or coaches.
      BUSINESS OFFICE. Rooms or buildings used as offices, where the business
of a commercial or industrial organization is conducted. Does not include
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES.
      BUSINESS SIGN. A sign used for advertising any commercial activity,
person, group of people or thing located on the same premises as the sign.
      CAMPGROUND, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Land for transient occupancy by camping
in tents, camp trailers, travel trailers, motor homes, or similar movable
temporary sleeping quarters for recreation, educational, or vacation purposes.
      CAMPGROUND, TENT. Land intended for occupancy in tents as temporary
living quarters for recreation, educational, or vacation purposes.
      CANDELA. Unit of luminous intensity.
CANNABIS. The plant cannabis sativa l. and any part of the plant, including all
derivatives, extracts, cannabinoids, isomers, acids, salts, and salts of
isomers, whether growing or not, with a delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
concentration greater than 0.3% on a dry weight basis. CANNABIS includes
cannabis products. CANNABIS does not include hemp or hemp products, as defined
in the MD. Code Ann., Agricultural Article.
      CANNABIS DISPENSARY. An entity licensed by the state that acquires,
possesses, repackages, transports, sells, distributes, or dispenses, cannabis
or cannabis products, including tinctures, aerosols, oils, and ointments,
related supplies, and educational materials for use by qualifying patients,
caregivers, or consumers through a storefront.
      CANNABIS GROWING FACILITY. An entity licensed by the state that
cultivates and packages cannabis and is authorized by the state to provide
cannabis to other cannabis licensees and registered independent testing
laboratories.
      CANNABIS MICRO LICENSE. A license issued by the state in accordance with
§ 36-401(c)(2) of the Alcoholic Beverages Article of the Maryland Annotated
Code, Medical and Adult Use Cannabis Title. A micro license authorizes the
holder of the license:
         (a)   For growers, to operate not more than 10,000 square feet of
indoor canopy or its equivalent;
         (b)   For processors, to process not more than 1,000 pounds of
cannabis per year; and
         (c)   For dispensaries, to operate a delivery service that sells
cannabis or cannabis products without a physical storefront, provided that the
licensee employs not more than 10 employees.
      CANNABIS ON-SITE CONSUMPTION ESTABLISHMENT.  An entity licensed by the
state to distribute cannabis or cannabis products for on-site consumption other
than consumption by smoking indoors.
      CANNABIS PROCESSING FACILITY. An entity licensed by the state that
transforms cannabis into another product or an extract and packages and labels
the cannabis product and is authorized by the state to provide cannabis to
licensed dispensaries and registered independent testing laboratories.
      CARETAKER RESIDENCE in conjunction with a permitted use. An owner or
caretaker occupied independent self-contained dwelling unit on the same lot, or
within the same building, accessory to a permitted use, i.e., owner or
caretaker.
      CARNIVAL or CIRCUS. The temporary use of property for animal displays,
rides, entertainment, traveling shows, exhibitions, or games of skill or
chance.
      CATASTROPHIC EVENT. A fire, explosion, flood, hurricane, tornado, or
other disaster not caused by the property owner or his or her agent.
      CEMETERY/MEMORIAL GARDENS.  Land used for interment of human or animal
remains or cremated remains, including a burial park for earth interments, a
mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, a columbarium for cinerary interment
or a combination thereof.
      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR USE. A permit to legally occupy or use a
building for the intended purpose.
      CHILD CARE CENTER/NURSERY SCHOOL. The use of property which is licensed
by the State of Maryland, as a child care center or nursery school pursuant to
COMAR 13A.09.09.10B, as amended.
      CHIP AND PUTT GOLF COURSE. A tract of land laid out for a par 3 golf
course, improved with tees, greens, fairways and hazards. A chip and putt golf
course may include a snack bar, a pro-shop, and retail sales of golf equipment
as accessory uses.
      CIVIC COMMUNITY CENTER. The use of property for a building which serves a
public function, to be used for cultural, recreational or social activities,
including senior centers, and similar community or government facilities.
      CIVIC SERVICE CLUB. Buildings and facilities used for a social or
recreational function, to which membership is required for participation, not
primarily operated for profit or to render a service that is customarily
carried on as a business. This use includes 4-H, American Legion, Eagles, Elks,
Lions, Ruritan, VFW, and similar clubs.
      CO-HOUSING. A resident planned and managed development consisting of no
more than 35 housing units arranged in a coherent plan and including extensive
common buildings whose floor space comprises at least 10% of the total
individual unit floor space area.
      COLLEGE or UNIVERSITY. An institution for post secondary education,
public or private, offering courses in general, technical, or religious
education.
      COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS. Any liquid, as defined by NFPA 30, that has a
closed-cup flash point at or above 100 degrees F (37.8 C) including but not
limited to: kerosene, motor oil, diesel fuel and fuel oil.
      COMMERCIAL SCHOOL OR EDUCATION PROGRAM. Education or training in
business, technical, trade, commerce, language, or other similar specialty
schools or satellite university or college located in an office-type setting.
      COMMERCIAL SWIMMING POOL. A swimming pool or wading pool, and buildings
necessary or incidental thereto, which are open to the general public and
operated for profit.
      COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA. Any structure or device used to collect or
radiate electromagnetic waves, including directional antennae, microwave dishes
and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional antennae.
      COMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A structure erected to support communications
antennae.
      COMMUNICATIONS TOWER HEIGHT. Shall be measured from the base on which the
tower is mounted to the top of the tower or the antenna, whichever is greater.
      COMMUNITY FIRE AND RESCUE SERVICE. The use of property or buildings which
serve a neighborhood public function for non- governmental fire or rescue
services and associated activities. Government owned fire and rescue services
are included in the category of public buildings and properties.
      COMPOSTING. The process in which organic solid waste is biologically
decomposed under controlled conditions to yield a nuisance-free, humus-like
product.
      COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A composite of mapped and written text,
the purpose of which is to guide the systematic physical development of the
county, and is adopted by the county and includes all changes and additions
thereto made under the provisions of Md. Ann. Code, Land Use Article. The
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN includes a land use plan, a transportation plan,
a community facilities plan, a recreation plan and other attendant facility
plans.
      COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL REHABILITATION FACILITY. Any facility licensed as
a special rehabilitation hospital to provide comprehensive physical
rehabilitation services as defined in the Md. Code Ann., Health General Article
(1990). All activities of the COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL REHABILITATION FACILITY
will be conducted inside of the building envelope and shall not be conducted in
public view. A COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL REHABILITATION FACILITY shall not be used
for the treatment of mental or psychological disorders, alcohol or other drug
dependency problems, or for any problems other than the physical, medical
rehabilitation of the human body.
      CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and comment
as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies
with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to
delineation of special flood hazard areas. A Conditional Letter of Map Revision
Based on Fill (CLOMR-F) is a determination that a parcel of land or proposed
structure that will be elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base
flood if fill is placed on the parcel as proposed or the structure is built as
proposed. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or
Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built
documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA, to revise the
effective FIRM.
      CONDOMINIUM. An ownership arrangement as defined in the Md. Code Ann.,
Real Property Article, Title II.
      CONTAINMENT DEVICE. A device that is designed to contain an unauthorized
release, retain it for cleanup, and prevent released materials from penetrating
into the ground.
      CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY. A building or group of buildings
providing a continuity of residential occupancy and health care for elderly
persons and meeting the standards of the Annotated Code of Maryland for a
facility of this type. The facility includes dwelling units for independent
living, assisted living, skilled nursing care or a combination thereof. The use
may include incidental facilities for the further employment, service, or care
of the residents.
      CONTRACTOR. An individual, firm, or corporation undertaking the execution
of any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, under the terms of
a contract or agreement, including the construction, altering or demolishing of
buildings or other structures; dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating,
or drilling of land; or installing, repairing or maintaining utilities.
      CONTRACTORS, EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS STORAGE YARD. An enclosed or
unenclosed portion of a lot or parcel upon which a construction contractor
maintains its principal office and stores or maintains construction equipment
or other materials customarily used by the business.
      CONVENIENCE STORE. An establishment which sells packaged and/or prepared
foods and beverages and other convenience items for consumption off of the
premises by travelers and highway users.
      CORNER LOT. See LOT TYPES.
      COUNTRY INN. The use of a structure that existed on January 24, 1977, in
which overnight or otherwise temporary lodging and meals are provided in
exchange for compensation, to transient guests in not more than eight guest
rooms, along with one or more of the following services: restaurant, banquet
facility, catering service, and may include meeting rooms.
      COURT. An open, unoccupied area which admits unobstructed light and air,
other than a yard, on the same lot with a group of buildings.
      CRITICAL DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE ELECTRIC SUBSTATION. A high-voltage
electric system facility used to switch generators, equipment, and circuits or
lines in and out of a system, change AC voltages from one level to another, or
change alternating current to direct current or direct current to alternating
current. Critical digital infrastructure electric substations may only be
constructed in conjunction with a critical digital infrastructure facility.
      CRITICAL DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE ELECTRIC SUBSTATION. A high-voltage
electric system facility used to switch generators, equipment, and circuits or
lines in and out of a system, change AC voltages from one level to another, or
change alternating current to direct current or direct current to alternating
current. Critical digital infrastructure electric substations may only be
constructed in conjunction with a critical digital infrastructure facility.
      CRITICAL DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. A facility consisting of one or
more buildings used primarily for the storage, management, processing, and
transmission of digital data, and which houses computer or network equipment,
systems, servers, appliances, and other associated components related to
digital data operations. The facility may also include customary accessory uses
such as an office use, air handlers, power generators and storage, water
cooling and storage facilities, and associated utility infrastructure needed to
support sustained operations of the digital infrastructure.
      DANCE OR MUSIC STUDIO. An establishment where classes in dance, music, or
similar artistic expressions are taught or recorded.
      DAY CARE CENTER. See NURSERY SCHOOL.
      DESIGNATED HERITAGE AREA. An area certified as, or meeting the definition
of a heritage area as defined under the state's Heritage Preservation and
Tourism Areas Act of 1996.
      DETACHED DWELLING. A dwelling which contains only dwelling units and is
surrounded on all sides by yards or other green areas on the same lot.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, dumping extraction,
dredging, grading, paving, storage of materials or equipment, land excavation,
land clearing, land improvement, landfill operation, or any combination
thereof. This term shall also include the subdivision of land as it applies to
existing properties located totally within a designated floodplain.
      DIRECTIONAL OR INFORMATION SIGN. A sign describing the location of a
community institution of a public nature, traffic control devices erected by a
governmental body, or arrows or other graphic display of direction.
      DISTRICT. A portion of the unincorporated territory of the county within
which certain uniform regulations or requirements apply under this chapter.
      DIVISION. The Frederick County Division of Planning and Permitting, and
any successor to this Division.
      DOG RUN, OUTSIDE. An enclosed outdoor area intended for the exercising
and/or containment of dogs and similar animals.
      DRIVE-IN THEATER. An outdoor theater and includes only those areas,
buildings or structures designed and used for the commercial outdoor exhibition
of motion pictures.
      DRIVEWAY. A paved or graveled travelway that provides vehicular access to
a property from the public right-of-way.
      DRY CLEANING AND LAUNDROMAT. Dry cleaning is an establishment or business
maintained for the pickup and delivery of clothing or laundry and may include
incidental maintenance or repair of any laundry or dry-cleaning equipment or
machinery on the premises. Laundromat is an establishment where patrons wash or
dry clothing or other fabrics in machines operated by the patrons.
      DUPLEX DWELLING. Two dwelling units arranged or designed to be located on
abutting and separate lots and separated from each other by a continuous
vertical party wall, without openings from the lowest floor level to the
highest point of the roof which lies along the dividing lot line, and such
dwelling is separated from any other structure by yards or other green areas on
all sides.
      DWELLING. A building or structure, containing 1 or more dwelling units,
and used principally for residential purposes.
      DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single residential unit
that can be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and sanitation.
      DWELLING, ZERO LOT LINE.
         (a)   ZERO LOT LINE. A single-family detached dwelling unit located
with 1 side less than 10 feet from 1 lot line and designed to orient interior
space to the other 3 yards.
         (b)   ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT. A development of single-family
detached units in which 1 or more units are located adjacent to a lot line, but
separated from the nearest structure on another lot. A ZERO LOT LINE
DEVELOPMENT shall allow dwelling units to be located on the property line,
provided that no part of the building shall protrude over the adjoining lot and
provided that 10 foot easements shall be recorded and shown on the record plat
to permit access to the adjacent lot for purposes of maintenance to the side of
a lot's structure.
      ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. FEMA form on which surveyed elevations and other
data pertinent to a property and a building are identified and which must be
completed by a licensed professional land surveyor or a licensed professional
engineer, as specified by the Floodplain Administrator. When used to document
the height above grade of buildings in special flood hazard areas for which
base flood elevation data are not available, the Elevation Certificate shall be
completed in accordance with the instructions issued by FEMA.
      ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR. An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure that is located below an elevated building, is surrounded by walls on
all sides, and is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage, in an area other than a basement area.
      ENVIRONMENTAL SITE DESIGN. Using small scale stormwater management
practices, nonstructural techniques, and better site planning to mimic natural
hydrologic runoff characteristics and minimize the impact of land development
on water resources.
      EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
      EQUINE ACTIVITIES. Equine activities include teaching equestrian skills,
participating in equestrian competitions, exhibitions or other displays of
equestrian skill, as well as the caring for, breeding, boarding, riding, or
training horses. Arenas are permitted in conjunction with an equine activity,
shall not be located in the front yard, and shall be setback 100 feet from all
property lines. Lighting for outdoor arenas shall not exceed 30 feet in height
and is subject to §
1-19-6.500 lighting type and illumination standards.
      ETHANOL. The intoxicating agent in fermented and distilled liquors; used
pure or denatured as a solvent or in medicines and colognes and cleaning
solutions and rocket fuel; and as a renewable clean- burning additive to
gasoline.
      EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion.
      FACILITY FOR FUNCTIONS. A structure or site listed on the Frederick
County Register of Historic Places, which receives a special exception approval
to hold events such as seminars, cultural or social events, or other similar
activities.
      FAIRGROUND. Multiple buildings and accessory structures used in
connection with: temporary indoor or outdoor events including, without
limitation: festivals and exhibitions; fairs (with accompanying entertainment
and amusements); agricultural, horticultural, and animal shows; animal
training, and judging; carnivals; food and beverages; and exhibitor booths and
stands, games, rides, rodeos, and other customary accessory uses.
      FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME. The use of property which is licensed by the
State of Maryland, as a large or small family child care home pursuant to COMAR
13A, as amended. This use is permitted as a home occupation with minor impact.
      FARM. A parcel of land not less than 25 acres in size on which an
agricultural activity, as herein defined, is being actively conducted.
      FARM ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TASTING ROOM, LIMITED. A farm brewery, farm
distillery or farm winery may have 1 accessory structure for the purpose of
tasting and retail sales of alcoholic beverages and spirits that are brewed,
distilled, or produced on the farm in accordance with this chapter. The
structure within which the tasting room is located shall have no more than
1,500 square feet of customer service area devoted to tasting and retail sales
of the farm alcoholic beverages. Calculation of the 1,500 square feet devoted
to tasting and retail sales will be based on the floor area devoted to customer
service, excluding rest rooms, food preparation area, and storage.
      FARM ANIMALS. Those animals ordinarily found on a farm, including but not
limited to: horses, ponies, sheep, goats, bulls, buffalo, cows, steers, rabbits
raised for commercial purposes, turkeys, pigs, ducks, geese, chickens and
guinea hens.
      FARM BREWERY. An establishment for the manufacture of malt liquors, such
as beer and ale, using hops or grains such as barley, wheat, and oats
andproduced on the farm on which the farm brewery is located. A farm brewery
must have a valid Maryland brewery license, and at least a majority of the hops
or one of the primary grains must be produced on the farm.
      FARM BREWERY TASTING ROOM. A farm brewery may have 1 accessory structure
for the purpose of sampling alcoholic beverages brewed at the farm. For retail
sales of brewing products produced on site the farm brewery must have a valid
retail liquor license.
      FARM DISTILLERY.  An establishment for the manufacture of distilled
spirits produced on the farm on which the farm distillery is located. A farm
distillery must have a valid distillery license issued by the state of
Maryland, and at least 1 of the grains/fruits used in the distilled product
must be produced on the farm.
      FARM DISTILLERY TASTING ROOM.  A farm distillery may have 1 accessory
structure for the purpose of sampling alcoholic beverages distilled at the
farm. For retail sales of distillery products produced on site the farm
distillery must have a valid retail liquor license.
      FARM EQUIPMENT SALES OR SERVICE. The use of property for selling,
renting, or repairing agricultural machinery, equipment, and supplies for use
in soil preparation, planting, care and harvesting of crops, and operations and
processes pertaining to farming.
      FARM WINERY. The use of the property for the processing of fruit for the
production of wine or juice on a producing vineyard, orchard or similar
growing area, or a farm. A farm winery must have a minimum of 10 acres, a valid
Maryland wine license and must grow 1 acre of fruit for every 2,000 gallons of
wine or juice produced. For purposes of this use, the term "farm" includes
contiguous and noncontiguous parcels within the county in active agricultural
production which are owned or leased by the processor.
      FARMERS MARKET. A collection of vendors located on a site, with the
permission of the property owner, for the sale of agricultural and
horticultural products grown by the vendors or for the sale of value-added food
products, including baked, canned, or preserved foods, produced by the vendors.
A farmers market may include sales of a limited amount of locally produced
nonagricultural goods, such as artistic and handcrafted wares. A farmers market
may include entertainment. A farmers market shall be held outdoors and may not
have fixed structures. This use does not include a roadside stand, commercial,
or a roadside stand, limited.
      FARM WINERY TASTING ROOM. A farm winery may have 1 accessory structure
for the purpose of wine tasting and retail sales of winery products.
      FEED or GRAIN MILL. The use of property for manufacturing of food or feed
for animals, from ingredients such as grains.
      FEMA FLOODPLAIN. The combined area of the 100-year frequency flood
(including the  floodway and floodway fringe), and approximate floodplain.
      FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS. Any liquid, as defined by NFPA 30, that has a closed-
cup flash point below 100 degrees F (37.8 C) including but not limited to:
unleaded gas, methanol, and ethanol.
      FLOOD. General and temporary conditions of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waters or rapid
unusual accumulation of runoff from any source.
      FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS. Any construction material that is
capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without
sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Note: See NFIP
Technical Bulletin #2, "Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements."]
      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated special flood hazard areas to
indicate the magnitude and nature of flood hazards, to designate applicable
flood zones, and to delineate floodways, if applicable. FIRMs that have been
prepared in digital format or converted to digital format are referred to as
Digital FIRMs (DFIRM).
      FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway information,
and the water surface elevations.
      FLOOD OPENING. A flood opening (non-engineered) is an opening that is
used to meet the prescriptive requirement of 1 square inch of net open area for
every square foot of enclosed area. An engineered flood opening is an opening
that is designed and certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensed
architect as meeting certain performance characteristics, including providing
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; this certification requirement may be
satisfied by an individual certification for a specific structure or issuance
of an Evaluation Report by the ICC Evaluation Service Inc.
      FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus 2
feet freeboard.
      FLOODING SOILS. Those soils with the characteristic of flooding (the
temporary inundation of an area caused by overflowing streams, by runoff from
adjacent slopes, or by tides) as identified in the Soil Survey of Frederick
County, Maryland and the Web Soil Survey, Water Features table, as amended.
      FLOODPLAIN. That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground
surface elevations that are inundated by the base flood.
      FLOODPLAIN VIOLATION. Any construction or development in a special flood
hazard area that is being performed without an issued permit. The failure of a
building, structure, or other development for which a permit is issued to be
fully compliant with these regulations and the conditions of the issued permit.
A building, structure, or other development without the required design
certifications, the Elevation Certificate, or other evidence of compliance
required is presumed to be a violation until such time as the required
documentation is provided
      FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural or nonstructural changes
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to improved property.
      FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. FEMA form that must be completed, signed and
sealed by a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect to certify
that the design of floodproofing and proposed methods of construction are in
accordance with the applicable requirements §
1-19-9.110 of these regulations.
      FLOOD PROTECTION SETBACK. A distance measured perpendicular to the top of
bank of a watercourse that delineates an area to be left undisturbed to
minimize future flood damage and to recognize the potential for bank erosion.
Along nontidal waters of the State, the flood protection setback is:
         (a)   One hundred feet, if the watercourse has special flood hazard
areas shown on the FIRM, except where the setback extends beyond the boundary
of the flood hazard area; or
         (b)   Fifty feet, if the watercourse does not have special flood
hazard areas shown on the FIRM.
      FLOOD ZONE. A designation for areas that are shown on Flood Insurance
Rate Maps:
         (a)   Zone A: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the
1-percent annual chance (100-year) flood; base flood elevations are not
determined.
         (b)   Zone AE and Zone A1-30: Special flood hazard areas subject to
inundation by the 1-percent annual chance (100-year) flood; base flood
elevations are determined; floodways may or may not be determined.
         (c)   Zone AH and Zone AO: Areas of shallow flooding, with flood
depths of 1 to 3 feet (usually areas of ponding or sheet flow on sloping
terrain), with or without BFEs or designated flood depths.
         (d)   Zone B and Zone X (shaded): Areas subject to inundation by the
0.2-percent annual chance (500-year) flood; areas subject to the 1-percent
annual chance (100-year) flood with average depths of less than 1 foot or with
contributing drainage area less than 1 square mile; and areas protected from
the base flood by levees.
         (e)   Zone C and Zone X (unshaded): Areas outside of Zones designated
A, AE, A1-30, AO, VE, V1-30, B, and X (shaded).
         (f)   Zone VE and Zone V1-30: Special flood hazard areas subject to
inundation by the 1% annual chance (100-year) flood and subject to high
velocity wave action.
      FLOODWAY. The channel of a watercourse and adjacent land area required to
discharge the waters of the 100-year flood without increasing the water surface
elevations above existing 100-year flood conditions more than a specified
height.
      FLOODWAY FRINGE. Those portions of land subject to inundation by the 100-
year flood, lying beyond the floodway (where a floodway has been determined) or
in areas where detailed study data, profiles, and 100-year flood elevations
have been established. The floodway fringe appears on the flood boundary and
floodway map and flood insurance rate maps.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af9691cbec4604828c677875c7c627f7b6eb5f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3790.jpg]
 
      FLOOR AREA OF BUILDING. The total number of square feet of floor area in
a building, excluding cellars. All horizontal measurement shall be made between
exterior faces of walls.
      FOOT-CANDLE. Illuminance produced on a surface 1 foot from a uniform
point source of 1 candela.
      FORESTRY. The management of forest and timberlands through selective tree
cutting in accordance with sound forest management practices including
planting, cultivating, harvesting, transporting, and selling timber for
commercial purposes. No use that is otherwise identified in §
1-19-5.310 as permitted with site plan approval or by special exception is
permitted as forestry.
      FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, wave actions,
subsidence, or other unpredictable effects.
      FRONT LOT LINE. A lot line which abuts a road; however the handle of a
panhandle lot is not used to compute the front lot line and in such case the
front lot line is that line determined to be most parallel to a street on which
the lot has frontage.
      FRONT YARD. An open space, unoccupied and unobstructed by any building
extending the full width of the lot equal in depth to the minimum distance
required for such yard for the district in which the lot is located from the
front lot line.
      FULLY SHIELDED FIXTURE. A fixture constructed in such a manner that all
light emitted by the fixture is projected below the horizontal plane through
the fixture.
      FUNERAL HOME. A building or part thereof used for human funeral,
memorial, or celebration of life services. Such building may contain space and
facilities for: (a) embalming and the performance of other services used in the
preparation of a dead body for burial; (b) the performance of autopsies and
other surgical procedures; (c) the storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other
related funeral supplies; (d) the storage of funeral vehicles; (e) facilities
for cremation; or (f) may include accessory space to receive friends and family
in conjunction with funeral services.
      FURNITURE REPAIR. The craft of refurbishing broken or worn furniture. It
may include the preservation or restoration of furniture. Furniture repair
includes accessory space or facilities for woodworking, metalworking, wood
finishing, caning (furniture), woodturning, and upholstery.
      GASOLINE. A volatile mixture of flammable liquid hydrocarbons derived
chiefly from crude petroleum and used principally as a fuel for internal-
combustion engines.
      GENERAL MANUFACTURING. The processing or treatment of raw material or the
creation of products that require additional processing, fabrication, or
assembly for final use.
      GOLF COURSE. A tract of land laid out for at least 9 holes for playing
golf, improved with tees, greens, fairways and hazards. A golf course may
include a clubhouse with restaurant/dining facility, a pro-shop, and retail
sales of golf equipment as accessory uses.
      GOLF DRIVING RANGE. A tract of land laid out for a golf driving range
improved with tee areas and distance markers. A golf driving range may include
a snack bar, a pro-shop, and retail sales of golf equipment as accessory uses.
      GOVERNMENTAL UTILITY. A utility owned by governmental entity.
      GREEN AREA. An area of land associated with and located on the same tract
of land as principal building or group of buildings in relation to which it
serves to provide light and air or scenic, recreational or similar purposes.
GREEN AREAS may include, but not be limited to lawns, decorative plantings,
sidewalks, and walkways, active and passive recreational areas, including
playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, wooded areas and watercourses; but
shall not include loading areas, parking areas or vehicle surfaces or accessory
buildings.
      GROSS ACRE. A commonly referred to measure of gross area. (See GROSS
AREA.)
      GROSS AREA. All the area within a subdivision plan or plat, including
area intended for residential use, steep slopes, local access streets or
alleys, off-street parking spaces, subdivision recreation sites or floodplains.
      GROSS DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per gross acre of a
subdivision or land development inclusive of streets, open spaces or
nonbuildable areas.
      GROSS LEASABLE AREA. The total floor area designated for tenant occupancy
and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and upper floors.
      GROUP HOME, SMALL PRIVATE. A residence that houses not more than 8
individuals who require specialized living arrangements and provides health
services and supervision to those individuals.
      GROUP HOME, LARGE. A residence that admits at least 9 but not more than
16 individuals who require specialized living arrangements and provides health
services and supervision to those individuals.
      GUARDHOUSE. An accessory structure not to exceed 150 square feet in
footprint and 15 feet in height located at the entrance to a property, used for
the sole purpose of providing monitoring and control of access to that
property.
      GUEST FARM. A farm used for temporary rental accommodations of no more
than 4 guest rooms, which may include meals for guests only, for the purpose of
experiencing farm or ranch activities including horseback riding.
      GUEST HOUSE. An accessory detached structure that is used for occupancy
by transient, nonpaying visitors and contains no cooking facilities and covers
no more than 400 square feet of total land area.
      GUNSMITH. A person who holds an appropriate license from the United
States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF), and performs services on
an existing firearm that is not for sale or distribution by the licensee,
devotes time, attention, and labor to repairing or customizing that existing
firearm, making or fitting special barrels, stocks, or trigger mechanisms to an
existing firearm, and returning the existing firearm to the customer after the
work has concluded as a regular course of trade or business. Manufacturing of
firearms is not permitted in conjunction with this use as a HOME OCCUPATION.
      HARDWARE/GARDEN CENTER. The use of property for the retail sales of
various feed and seed products, and basic hardware lines such as plumbing,
heating, and electrical supplies and tools. This use includes the sale of
retail and wholesale products and produce related to the planting, maintaining,
or harvesting of trees, shrubs, plants, grasses or sod, fertilizers, soils,
chemicals, or other nursery goods and related products in small quantity to
consumers including retail sales of power equipment and machinery such as
mowers, trimmers, and other tools and implements.
      HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance, including oil or its by-products,
that:
         (a)   Conveys toxic, lethal, or other injurious effects or which
causes sublethal harmful alterations to plant, animal, or aquatic life;
         (b)   May be injurious to human beings;
         (c)   Persists in the environment; and
         (d)   Any matter identified as a "hazardous waste" by the
environmental protection agency or a "controlled hazardous substance" by the
Maryland Department of the Environment.
      HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The height is measured from the average finished
grade ground level along the side of the building nearest the street to either
the highest point of a flat roof or to the point one-half the distance between
the eaves and the highest point of a pitched roof.
      HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed foundation of a structure.
      HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
         (a)   Individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or determined to be
eligible by the Maryland Historical Trust as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register of Historic Places;
         (b)   Contributing to the historical significance of a National
Register Historic District or a district determined to be eligible by the
Maryland Historical Trust to qualify as a National Registered Historic
District;
         (c)   Individually listed or a contributing resource within a historic
district identified on the Maryland Inventory of Historic Properties; or
         (d)   Individually listed or a contributing resource within a historic
district identified on the Frederick County Register Inventory of Historic
Places maintained by Frederick County whose Historic Preservation program has
been approved by the Maryland Historical Trust and certified by the National
Park Service.
      HOBBY SHOP. The use of property for retail sale of hobby or craft
supplies, toys, artist supplies, artwork, framing services or collector items,
including coins, stamps, autographs, memorabilia, or cards.
      HOME ASSOCIATION. An incorporated, nonprofit organization operating under
recorded land agreements which include the provision that each lot or home
owner in a planned unit or other described land area is automatically a member,
and that each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate
share of the expenses for the organization's activities, including the
maintenance of common property, and that unpaid charges are a lien against the
property.
      HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or business use conducted entirely within
a dwelling or an accessory structure, or both, by a resident of the property,
and which is clearly an incidental residential use of the building, excluding
antique shops in the VC and GC; bed and breakfast; commercial repair or storage
of automobiles, watercraft, or other motor vehicles; commercial stables,
kennels, and nurseries; mortuary establishments; professional offices;
restaurants or tea rooms.
      HORSE TACK AND SADDLERY SHOP. The use of property for retail sale of
tack, or equipment for horses such as saddles or harnesses.
      HOSPITAL. Any institution which receives in-patients and provides
medical, psychological, surgical, or similar service. This definition includes:
general hospitals and special service institutions, including the following
specialties: cardiac, eye, ear, nose and throat, pediatric, orthopedic, skin or
cancer, mental, tuberculosis, chronic disease or obstetrics, sanitariums or
sanatoriums, including those which serve the feeble minded, mental patients,
epileptics, alcoholics, senile, psychotics or drug addicts.
      HOTEL. Any building which contains 5 or more guest rooms and where
lodging or meals are provided for compensation to 5 or more guests. This
definition does not include fraternity or sorority houses, school or college
dormitories, tourist home or motel.
      INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM. A single system of sewers, piping, treatment
tanks, or other facilities which serve only 1 lot and dispose of sewage or
individual waste of a liquid nature, in whole or in part, on or in the soil of
the property or into any waters of this state, or by other methods.
      INDIVIDUAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. A single system of piping, pumps, tanks
or other facilities utilizing a source of ground or surface water to supply
only 1 lot.
      INDOOR SPORTS RECREATION FACILITY. A building primarily operated for the
purpose of providing indoor sports and recreation such as a sports-plex for
soccer, lacrosse, racquet sports, gymnastics, and soft play fitness areas, but
may also include rock climbing, gymnasium, bowling alley, karate studio, laser
tag, paint ball, race track, billiard hall, skating rink, roller rink, batting
cage, swimming pool, or other similar uses. This use may also include
associated outdoor recreation fields.
      INDOOR THEATER. A building designed or used primarily for the commercial
exhibition of motion pictures or commercial stage presentation to the general
public.
      INDUSTRIAL LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING. A building, portion of a building,
or premises used or intended to be used for cleaning fabrics, textiles, wearing
apparel, or articles of any sort by immersion or agitation, in volatile
solvents including, but not by way of limitation, solvents of the petroleum
distillate type, or the chlorinated hydrocarbon type, or the processes
incidental thereto.
      INDUSTRIAL PARK. A tract of land which is subdivided and developed
according to an overall plan for occupancy by a group of industries and is
provided with streets and necessary materials, including paper, rags, scrap
metal, other scrap or utilities.
      INTENSIVE SWINE FARM. A facility, building, tract of land or operation
used for the raising, feeding or care of 250 or more animals of the porcine
species.
      INTERMITTENT STREAM. A stream that has flowing water during certain times
of the year, when groundwater provides water for stream flow. During dry
periods, intermittent streams may not have flowing water. Runoff from
precipitation is a supplemental source of water for stream flow. These streams
are identified through field verification and as approved by the Department.
The most recent county hydrography layer may be used as a guide for the
preliminary establishment of possible watercourses.
      JUNKYARD. Any land or structure which is used for the abandonment, sale,
storage, keeping, collecting or baling of discarded materials, or used for the
abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage, or salvaging or sale of
machinery, including 3 or more vehicles which are not in running condition.
      KENNEL. A facility where 9 or more dogs, cats or other domestic animals
over three months of age are kept, raised, sold, boarded, bred, shown, treated,
or groomed.
      KEROSENE. A flammable hydrocarbon oil usually obtained by distillation of
petroleum and used for a fuel and as a solvent and thinner (as in insecticide
emulsions).
      LABORATORY, RESEARCH, EXPERIMENTAL AND TESTING. Facilities for
biotechnology, scientific study, investigation, testing, or experimentation,
which may include accessory uses of warehousing, manufacturing, or offices.
      LANDFILL, INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Landfill which is designed to accept only
nonhazardous industrial solid wastes generated on the site. The criteria for
determining if a waste is a hazardous waste shall be in accordance with state
and federal guidelines.
      LANDFILL RUBBLE. Landfill which is designed to accept rubble which would
include only land clearing debris, demolition debris, and construction debris
as permitted under state guidelines. No tires or asbestos waste will be
permitted in a rubble landfill.
      LANDFILL, SANITARY. A solid waste acceptance facility operated by a
governmental agency or under contract with a governmental agency permitted
under state sanitation regulations that is designed, installed and operated so
that all types of waste generated by the general public may be accepted except
waste specifically prohibited by state  regulations unless a permit issued
under state regulations allows the specific waste to be accepted.
      LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR. A business principally engaged in the designing,
installing, planting or maintaining of yards, gardens or other grounds offsite
to include the following: landscape installation, care and maintenance
services; lawn care services (i.e., fertilizing, mowing, seeding, sod laying,
spraying); plant, shrub and tree services (i.e., bracing, planting, pruning,
removal, spraying, trimming); seasonal property maintenance services (i.e.,
snow plowing in winter, landscaping during other seasons).
      LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and
establishes that a specific property or structure is not located in a special
flood hazard area.
      LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A Letter of Map Change is an official FEMA
determination, by letter, that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance
Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study.
      LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that
may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway
delineations, and planimetric features. A LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL
(LOMR-F), is a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been
elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer
exposed to flooding associated with the base flood. In order to qualify for
this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance
with the community's floodplain management regulations.
      LIGHT TRESPASS. Light falling outside of the property boundary on which a
light installation is located.
      LIMITED FOOD WASTE COMPOSTING: AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY. The use of property
for the purpose of food waste composting (including associated paper products)
where off-site food waste is imported to the site and processed for use in
conjunction with an agricultural activity as defined in §
1-19-11.100 of the Zoning Ordinance.
      LIMITED FOOD WASTE COMPOSTING: COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. The use of property
for the purpose of commercial food waste composting (including associated paper
products) where off-site food waste is imported to the site, processed, and
sold. The composted product may also be used on the property in conjunction
with an agricultural activity.
      LIMITED FUNERAL ESTABLISHMENT. A funeral establishment licensed by the
Maryland State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors, meeting the
definition of funeral establishment in the Md. Code Ann., Health Occupations
Article, Title 7, Maryland Morticians and Funeral Directors Act, and meeting
the criteria as provided in §
1-19-8.230.1 of the Frederick County Zoning Ordinance. The limited funeral
establishment shall be operated by a licensed mortician as defined by the Md.
Code Ann., Health Occupations Article, Title 7, Maryland Morticians and Funeral
Directors Act.
      LIMITED LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR. A business that is limited in scope
regarding structures, total impervious areas, and employees and is principally
engaged in the designing, installing, planting, or maintaining of yards,
gardens, or other grounds offsite, including landscape installation, care and
maintenance services; lawn care services (i.e., fertilizing, mowing, seeding,
sod laying, spraying); plant, shrub or tree services (i.e., bracing, planting,
pruning, removal, spraying, trimming); and seasonal property maintenance
services (i.e., snow plowing in winter, landscaping during other seasons).
      LIMITED LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR PARKING AND STORAGE. A site used solely for
the parking of licensed commercial vehicles and storage of material and
operational equipment owned by and used in support of a LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR
business.
      LIMITED MANUFACTURING AND ASSEMBLY. The use of previously prepared
materials to make finished products or parts, including processing,
fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, and incidental
storage, sales, or distribution of such products.
      LIMITED WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A single-towered wind energy system that has
a rated nameplate capacity of 50 kilowatts or less; and has a total height of
150 feet or less.
      LINGANORE WATERSHED PROTEC-TION AREA. The area of land shown on the
official Linganore Watershed Protection Area Map, which is maintained in the
offices of the Frederick County Department of Planning and Development Review.
      LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LP-GAS). Any material having a vapor pressure
not exceeding that allowed for commercial propane composed predominately of the
following hydrocarbons, either by themselves or as mixtures: propane,
propylene, butane (normal butane or isobutane) and butylenes.
      LIQUOR STORE. A retailer which sells or offers to sell alcoholic
beverages or related goods.
      LOT. A contiguous area of land separated from other areas of land by
separate description, including a recorded deed, a subdivision plat or record
of survey map, or by metes and bounds, for purpose of sale, lease, transfer of
ownership or separate use.
      LOT AREA. The total horizontal area of a lot as determined by the closure
of the rear, side and front lot lines, but does not include area lying within a
street.
      LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
of a lot.
      LOT OF RECORD. Any lot legally recorded in the land records of the county
as of January 24, 1977; a lot must satisfy all zoning and subdivision
regulations in effect at the time the lot was recorded.
      LOT TYPES. The lots with the following definitions.
         (a)   CORNER LOT. A lot located at the intersection of 2 or more
streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets is considered a corner
lot, if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to
the foremost points of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135
degrees. Where a lot contains 3 front yards the remaining yard shall be
considered a side yard.
         (b)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot with only 1 frontage on a street other than
an alley.
         (c)   OUTLOT. A parcel of land within a subdivision which has been
included on a preliminary and final plat, but not designated as a buildable
lot. Establishment shall only be due to the  necessity of providing for access
to adjoining properties a continuation of appropriate street patterns, or any
other approved governmental use.
         (d)   PANHANDLE LOT. A lot with the appearance of a "frying pan" or
"flag and staff" in which the handle is most often used as the point of access
to a street or road. The "handle," when less than the minimum width for a
building lot in the zoning district in which it is located, is not to be used
in computing the minimum required area or delineating the minimum required
"building envelope." The handle shall not be less at any point than the
required minimum road frontage.
         (e)   THROUGH LOT. A lot (other than a corner lot) with frontage of
more than 1 street other than an alley.
      LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished enclosure, constructed of flood-resistant materials
used solely for parking of vehicles, storage, or building access in an area
other than a basement is not the lowest floor, as long as it is supplied with
water equalizing vents.
      LUMBER YARD. An area used for the storage, distribution, or sale of
finished lumber and lumber products, which may include an accessory use of
fabricating lumber products. Lumber yards may provide for the sale of
associated products including tools and fasteners.
      MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Mobile apparatus specifically designed for
recreational activities and including travel trailers, pickup campers,
motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boat trailers, houseboats or storage
containers used for transporting recreational equipment.
      MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any parcel which has been or is proposed to be
subdivided to create 6 or more lots.
      MANUFACTURED HOME OR BUILDING. A structure, transportable in 1 or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For
floodplain management purposes, the term MANUFACTURED HOME OR BUILDING also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar  vehicles placed on
a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel or contiguous parcels of
land divided into 2 or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
      MARKET VALUE. The price at which a property will change hands between a
willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy
or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. For the
purposes of these regulations, the market value of a building is determined by
a licensed real estate appraiser or the most recent, full phased-in assessment
value of the building (improvement) determined by the Maryland Department of
Assessments and Taxation.
      MASTER HIGHWAY PLAN. The official plan of highways, roads and other ways
adopted by the County Planning Commission and the county governing body in
accordance with Md. Ann. Code, Land Use Article, and includes all subsequent
revisions of the plan.
      MASTER PLAN. See COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
      MDE. The Maryland Department of the Environment.
      MEDICAL OR DENTAL CLINIC. Any building or group of buildings which is
occupied by medical practitioners; related services are permitted for the
purpose of providing health services on an out- patient basis.
      MINERAL EXTRACTION. The excavation or extraction of any solid mineral,
aggregate, or substance of commercial value, whether consolidated or loose,
found in natural deposits on or in the earth, including clay, diatomaceous
earth, gravel, marl, metallic, ores, sand, shell, soil, and stone. The term
does not include extraction of coal.
      MINERAL PROCESSING. The sorting, breaking, beneficiation, storage, or
compounding of mineral resources.
      MINERAL SITE. An area comprising, or comprised of, one or more contiguous
parcels that is zoned Mineral Mining.
      MINIATURE GOLF COURSE. A tract of land laid out for at least 9 holes for
playing miniature golf, improved with tees, putting surfaces, hazards, and
equipment for rental or limited sale. A miniature golf course may include a
snack bar, a pro-shop, and retail sales of golf equipment as accessory uses.
      MINIMUM LOT FRONTAGE. The minimum permissible width of a lot line
abutting a street.
      MINIMUM LOT WIDTH. The minimum permissible width of a lot as measured
horizontally along the front building line.
      MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any parcel which has been subdivided to create 5 or
fewer lots.
      MOBILE HOME. A portable dwelling unit which is designed and built to be
towed on its own chassis, including frame and wheels and to be connected to
utilities. A MOBILE HOME is designed without a permanent foundation for year-
round living. A unit may contain parts that can be combined, folded, collapsed,
or telescoped while towed and expanded later to provide additional cubic
capacity. It  must be listed by the state as a mobile home. This does not
include modular or sectional homes.
      MOBILE HOME PARK. Any site, lot, or parcel which is used for the purpose
of providing accommodations for 2 or more mobile homes as living quarters and
includes all structures, vehicles, accessories and appurtenances used or
intended as equipment in such a park. This definition does not include mobile
homes used as farm tenant houses.
      MODERATELY PRICED DWELLING UNIT PROGRAM (MPDU). A program that creates
affordable housing units as a function of the development process for income
eligible persons by means of an increase in density in a zoning  classification
that allows residential development above the density permitted within the
district only if MPDUs are actually constructed.
      MOTEL. Any group of rooms combined or separate which are used for the
purpose of housing transient guests and each unit of which is provided with its
own toilet, washroom and off-street parking facilities.
      MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A structure or land where truck transported goods
are transferred, or stored pending transfer, and which may include truck
dispatching, parking and servicing (but no retail sales of motor fuels, oils or
accessories) and temporary accommodations for truck drivers.
      MOTORCYCLE HILL CLIMB. The temporary use of the property for a motorcycle
hill climbing event.
      MPDU PROJECT. Any residential development of 25 or more units on public
water and sewer.
      MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A detached building containing 3 or more
dwelling units.
      MULTIPLE-FAMILY GROUP DWELLING. A group of 2 or more multiple-family
dwellings, which occupy 1 lot and have a yard, court or service area in common.
      MUSEUM/GALLERY. A commercial establishment for preserving and exhibiting
artistic, historical, scientific, natural, or man-made objects of interest. A
museum or gallery may include the sale of the objects, memorabilia, crafts or
artwork.
      NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The program authorized by the
U.S. Congress in 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 - 4129. The NFIP makes flood insurance
coverage available in communities that agree to adopt and enforce minimum
regulatory requirements for development in areas prone to flooding (see
definition of SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA).
      NATURAL GAS. A mixture of hydrocarbon gases that occurs with petroleum
deposits, principally methane together with varying quantities of ethane,
propane, butane, and other gases, and is used as a fuel and in the manufacture
of organic compounds.
      NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures, including additions and improvements, and
the placement of manufactured homes, for which the start of construction
commenced on or after June 1, 1978, the initial effective date of the Frederick
County Flood Insurance Rate Map, including any subsequent improvements,
alterations, modifications, and additions to such structures.
      NONCONFORMITY. A lot, structure, or use lawfully existing before the
effective date of any regulation of this chapter, which does not conform to the
current regulations of the district in which it is located.
      NONCONVERSION AGREEMENT. A form signed by the owner to agree not to
convert or modify in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the
permit and these regulations, certain enclosures below the lowest floor of
elevated buildings and certain accessory structures. The form requires the
owner to record it on the property deed to inform future owners of the
restrictions.
      NONGOVERNMENTAL ELECTRIC SUBSTATION. A high-voltage electric system
facility used to switch generators, equipment and circuits or lines in and out
of a system. It also is used to change AC voltages from one level to another,
and/or change alternating current to direct current or direct current to
alternating current. Including without limitation a transmission and
distribution substation served by transmission lines of 500 kv or greater.
      NONGOVERNMENTAL UTILITY. Any utility not owned by a governmental entity.
Including a transmission and distribution substation for supplying electric
service served by transmission lines of less than 500 kv, but excluding Solar
Facility, Commercial.
      NONTIDAL WATERS OF THE STATE. See also WATERS OF THE STATE. As used in
these regulations, NONTIDAL WATERS OF THE STATE refers to any stream or body of
water within the State that is subject to State regulation, including the "100-
year frequency floodplain of free-flowing waters." COMAR 26.17.04.01 states
that "the landward boundaries of any tidal waters shall be deemed coterminous
with the wetlands boundary maps adopted pursuant to Environment Article, § 16-
301, Annotated Code of Maryland." Therefore, the boundary between the tidal and
nontidal waters of the State is the tidal wetlands boundary.
      NRCS. Natural Resources Conservation Service.
      NURSERY RETAIL. The use of property for the planting, maintaining and
harvesting of trees, shrubs, plants, grasses or sod for sale to other
nurseries, landscape contractors, retail outlets. This use includes on-site
public retail sales related to the planting, maintaining, or harvesting of
trees, shrubs, plants, grasses or sod, fertilizers, soils, chemicals, or other
nursery goods and related products in small quantity to consumers.
      NURSERY SCHOOL. A facility operated for the purpose of providing
training, guidance, education or care for 4 or more children, all of whom are
under 7 years of age and separated from their parents or guardians during any
part of the day. This includes kindergartens, day nurseries and day care
centers.
      NURSERY WHOLESALE. The use of property for the planting, maintaining and
harvesting of trees, shrubs, plants, grasses or sod for sale to other
nurseries, landscape contractors or retail outlets.
      NURSING HOME. A facility that provides treatment and nursing care by, or
supervised by, a registered or practical nurse for 2 or more unrelated
individuals suffering from illness, diseases, deformities or injuries who do
not require extensive or intensive care such as normally provided in a general
or other specialized hospital.
      ONE HUNDRED (100) YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD. The Base Flood, having 1 chance
in a 100 (1% chance) of being equaled or exceeded in any year.
      OUTDOOR CLUB. The use of property or a facility operated for
recreational, educational, or social purposes, such as hunting, fishing, or
other similar activity for the exclusive use of members and their guests.
      OUTDOOR SPORTS RECREATION FACILITY. The use of property for outdoor
recreational activities where clearing is minimized including but not limited
to field sports, paintball, laser tag, golf driving range, chip and putt,
miniature golf, batting cage/range, or putting green or any combination
thereof. This use may also include buildings accessory to the primary use of
outdoor sports recreation facility.
      OUTDOOR STAGE THEATER. An open air theatre, including those areas,
buildings, or structures used for the commercial presentation of live stage
presentations.
      OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT. An area where certain additional requirements
are superimposed upon a base zoning district or underlying district and where
the requirements of the base or underlying district may or may not be altered.
      PART SALES AND INSTALLATION. Any building or structure used for the sales
and installation of a variety of mechanical parts for repair.
      PAWN SHOP. Any business that engages in the retail sales of personal
property and that also loans or advances money on deposit of personal property
on condition of selling the same back again to the depositor.
      PERENNIAL STREAM. A stream that has flowing water year-round during a
typical year. The water table is located above the streambed for most of the
year. Groundwater is the primary source of water for stream flow. Runoff from
precipitation is a supplemental source of water for stream flow. These streams
are identified through field verification and as approved by the Department.
The most recent county hydrography layer may be used as a guide for the
preliminary establishment of possible watercourses.
      PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION. Any structure occupying a site for more than 180
days per year.
      PET TRAINING/DAYCARE/GROOMING FACILITY. An establishment which for a fee
provides training, daycare, grooming, trimming, cleaning, and other associated
services to domestic pets such as dogs or cats and which may sell pet supplies
as an incidental use. This term does not include establishments which board
pets overnight. (See KENNEL.)
      PETROLEUM PRODUCTS STORAGE. The storage of: (1) liquefied petroleum gas
as defined in National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 58, as
amended; (2) flammable and combustible liquids products as defined in NFPA
Standard 30, as amended.
      PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO. A facility primarily engaged in photographic
portraits, graphic art, digital art, or video graphic art of a non-obscene
nature.
      PHOTOMETRIC (PHOTOMETRY). Measurement of the intensity of light and
distribution.
      PLACE OF WORSHIP. A facility or building(s) for the primary purpose of
assembly for religious worship. Accessory uses shall be limited to those
customarily associated with a place of worship as provided within this chapter
(see Article VIII. Division 2. Accessory Uses) or as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
      POWER GENERATION, FARM ANIMAL WASTE. Activities conducted on a farm for
operating gas or electric generating facilities from converted farm waste.
      PRINCIPAL HIGHWAY. Any road designated as freeway, expressway or major
arterial on the County Master Highway Plan.
      PRIVATE CLUB. An association for civic, social, cultural, religious,
literary, fraternal, political, recreational, or like activities which is
operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public.
      PRIVATE PARK. A parcel or contiguous parcels containing 100 or more
acres, owned by a non-governmental entity or organization, managed primarily
for environmental conservation, and maintained in a natural landscape
condition. A private park may be open for use by the public, including for uses
consistent with Md. Code Ann., "Natural Resources Art, § 5-1102(A).
      PROCESSING FACILITY. A combination of structures, machinery, or devices
used to reduce or alter the volume, chemical or physical characteristics of
solid waste. For the purpose of these regulations, collection points serving
rural residential areas are not considered to be processing facilities,
provided that solid waste is not transferred from collection vehicles to
another transportation unit. A generator who processes his or her own solid
waste at the site of generation and disposes of the processed solid waste off
the site of generation at a disposal site permitted by the Maryland Department
of the Environment is not considered to be a processing facility.
      PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. Rooms or buildings used as the office of a member of
any recognized profession, including doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants,
engineers, or veterinarians, but not including medical or dental clinics or
veterinary clinics.
      PROPANE. A colorless, flammable gas, C3H8, of the alkane series,
occurring in petroleum and natural gas, used chiefly as a fuel and in organic
synthesis. Also called dimethylmethane.
      PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PROPERTIES. Any building or property used or
controlled for public purposes by a state, federal, or local government agency,
or by a political subdivision of the state within the geographic confines of
Frederick County.
      PUTTING GREEN. A tract of land laid out for golf putting and/or chipping.
A putting green may include a snack bar, pro-shop, and retail sales of golf
equipment as accessory uses.
      RACETRACKS. A facility built for racing of vehicles, boats, athletes, or
animals. A racetrack also may feature grandstands or concourses or other uses
that directly support or are ancillary to the use of the racetrack.
      REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign advertising for sale, lease, rental or
development of any real property or directing attention to the opening of a new
subdivision.
      REAR LOT LINE. The lot line determined to be most parallel to the front
lot line. If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet long or the lot comes to a
point at the rear, the rear lot line is assumed to be a line not less than 10
feet long, which lies wholly within the lot and is parallel to the front lot
line. The rear lot line is parallel to the chord of the arc of said front lot
line.
      REAR YARD. An open space, unoccupied and unobstructed by any building
extending the full  width of the lot equal in depth to the minimum distance
required for such yard for the district in which the lot is located from the
rear lot line.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle built on a single chassis which is 400
square feet or less at the longest horizontal projection, self-propelled or
towable, and designed primarily for temporary living while traveling or camping
and is only occupied when located in an RV park which is approved by the
county. Recreational vehicles must:
         (a)   Have a current valid license plate;
         (b)   Be ready for highway use; and
         (c)    Be occupied for less than 14 consecutive days on a single site.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY. A parcel of land utilized for
storing recreational vehicles as defined within this section.
      RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY. A processing facility at which component
materials of solid waste are recovered for use as raw materials or energy
sources.
         (a)   RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY-SEPARATED RECYCLABLES. A resource
recovery facility accepting only recyclables which have been previously
separated from the municipal solid waste stream.
         (b)   RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY-NON-SEPARATED MATERIALS. A resource
recovery facility accepting anything other than recyclables which have been
previously separated from the municipal solid waste stream.
      RECYCLING PICK-UP AND DISTRIBUTION CENTER. A facility designed for the
collection of recyclable materials and distribution of these items to markets
accepting these items for processing.
      RESTAURANT. An establishment where food and beverages are prepared and
served for onsite consumption, carry out, or delivery.
      ROAD. See STREET.
      ROADSIDE STAND, COMMERCIAL. A use, which may incorporate a structure,
that offers for sale agricultural products, the majority of which are produced
by the owner within the county and within the immediate neighborhood of the
location of the use. This use does not include seasonal pumpkin patches, "pick
your own" or "cut your own" produce or other agritourism enterprise activities
conducted on a farm related to agriculture and accessory to the primary
agriculture operation on the farm. The holder of a Class 8 farm brewery license
under the Annotated Code of Maryland may sell and deliver beer in accordance
with the terms and approvals of that license as an accessory use to the
commercial roadside stand.
      ROADSIDE STAND, LIMITED. The use of no more than 1,500 square feet
devoted to product sales, which may incorporate a structure, for the sale of
agricultural products the majority of which are produced by the owner within
the county and within the immediate neighborhood of the location of the use.
This use does not include seasonal pumpkin patches, "pick your own" or "cut
your own" produce or other agritourism enterprise activities conducted on a
farm related to agriculture and accessory to the primary agriculture operation
on the farm.
      RODEO. The use of property for exhibitions featuring animal riding,
roping, steer wrestling, bull riding or similar sporting events featuring
animals.
      ROOMING HOUSE. See BOARDING-HOUSE.
      RUSTIC RETREAT/CAMP. A facility or land used for outdoor skills
instruction, recreation, temporary lodging, or a retreat for group meetings or
instruction, located in a rural setting which may provide meals, rudimentary
facilities, and recreational amenities of a rural nature for participants
during the period of the retreat or program only.
      SALVAGE YARD. A location where automobile and related materials or parts
are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged, disassembled, or
handled.
      SATELLITE SIMULCAST BETTING.  Pari-mutuel betting at a satellite
simulcast facility on a race that is simulcast from a sending track by a mile
thoroughbred racing licensee, a harness racing licensee, or the State Fair
Society; and transmission of the pari-mutuel information regarding bets at the
satellite simulcast facility to the sending track.
      SATELLITE SIMULCAST BETTING FACILITY.  Construction, conversion,
alteration and/or use of a building or portion of a building to become a venue
for the purpose of conducting satellite simulcast betting in accordance with
the Maryland Racing Commission.
      SATELLITE UNIVERSITY OR COLLEGE. A satellite branch or campus of a
college or university that is physically detached from the main university or
college area that does not include administrative offices and living quarters,
and is smaller than the main campus of an institution.
      SAWMILL. The use of property where logs are debarked and sawn into
dimension lumber. Such operations may include but are not limited to,
processing, drying, finishing, or shipping of lumber, and commercial firewood
processing.
      SCD. Soil Conservation District.
      SCHOOL BUS PARKING. The use of property for the storage and minor
incidental repair of operational school buses for providers currently having
contracts with the Board of Education of Frederick County or nonpublic schools
in Frederick County. This definition does not include individual school bus
drivers that park a school bus at their residence during off hours.
      SCHOOL, PRIVATE. A private educational program for students for the
teaching of children including primary and secondary schools.
      SCHOOL, PUBLIC. An educational program for students approved by the
Maryland State Department of Education for the teaching of children or adults
including elementary and secondary schools, and similar facilities. Charter
schools funded by the state are included in this definition. School bus parking
is permitted as an accessory use.
      SCUBA FACILITY. Any building, structure or area of land and water that is
used for scuba diving education and recreation. A scuba facility may include
facilities for bathrooms, showers, storage of supplies, scuba tank refueling,
and other uses that are customarily incidental to a scuba facility.
      SELF-STORAGE UNITS. A building or group of buildings consisting of
individual, self- contained units leased or rented to individuals,
organizations, or businesses for self-service storage of personal property and
where no commercial transactions are permitted other than the leasing and
rental of the storage units.
      SEWAGE SLUDGE. The accumulated semi-liquid suspension, settled solids or
dried residue of these solids that is deposited from sewage in a municipal
waste water treatment plant, whether or not these solids have undergone
treatment.
      SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Any direct or indirect physical contact between persons
intended to erotically stimulate either person or both persons or is likely to
cause such stimulation. Sexual activity includes intercourse, fellatio,
cunnilingus, anal intercourse, masturbation, or manual stimulation. Any person
who operates a bodywork establishment must not engage in or allow another
person to engage in the performance of any sexual activity with another person
in the establishment.
      SHARED PARKING. A public or private parking area used jointly by two or
more uses through a legal agreement, which results in a reduction in a portion
of the required off-street parking spaces for one or more of those uses.
      SHOOTING RANGE/CLUB - TRAP, SKEET, RIFLE, ARCHERY.  A permanently located
and improved area that is designed and operated for the safe use of trap,
skeet, rifles, archery, pistols, shotguns, black powder or any other similar
sport shooting at targets.
      SHOPPING CENTER. A group of 6 or more retail stores, service
establishments and other similar uses, which are designed as an integrated
unit.
      SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
      SIDE YARD. An open space, unoccupied and unobstructed, any building
extending in from the front building line to the rear building line, equal in
depth to the minimum distance required for such yard for the district in which
the lot is located from the nearest side lot line.
      SIGN. Any structure, or device, in whole or part, which uses symbolic
representations to direct attention, to identify or advertise any activity,
person, group of people or thing. This definition does not include delivery
vehicles used in the operation of the business.
      SIGN, AREA OF. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure
of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color
forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from
the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary supports or
uprights on which such sign from the background against which it is placed;
excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed.
Where a sign has 2 or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in
determining the area of the sign except that where 2 such faces are placed back
to back and are at no point more than 2 feet from one another. Excluding
necessary supports or uprights, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area
of 1 face if the 2 faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face
if the 2 faces are of unequal area. In the case of individual letters placed on
a structure, the entire area based on the stroke of each letter shall be used
in the computation of such sign area.
      SIGN, FREESTANDING OR PYLON. A sign supported by one or more posts,
columns, or other vertical structures or supports, and not attached to or
dependent on support from any building.
      SIGN, MONUMENT. A sign supported primarily by an internal ground-mounted
structural framework, integrated into landscaping, or other solid structural
features but does not include support poles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af9691cbec4604828c677875c7c627f7b6eb5f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4669.png]
 
      SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A detached dwelling designed for or used
exclusively by 1 family.
      SLUDGE AMENDED YARD WASTE. A process whereby sewage sludge and yard waste
are combined to create a compost.
      SLUDGE PIT/SLUDGE HOLDING TANK. A facility designed for the holding of
sewage sludge for a period of time prior to disposal typically constructed in
conjunction with governmental uses.
      SOLAR FACILITY, ACCESSORY. A photovoltaic solar energy system mounted on
a building or on the ground which generates electricity in an amount that does
not exceed 200% of the electric consumption of the principal use.
      SOLAR FACILITY, COMMERCIAL. A photovoltaic solar energy system that
generates electricity in an amount that exceeds 200% of the consumption of the
uses on the parcel upon which it is constructed and the excess electricity is
fed into the electric grid.
      SOLAR FACILITY, COMMUNITY ENERGY GENERATING SYSTEM. A photovoltaic solar
energy system which satisfies the requirements of Public Utilities Article, §
7-306.2 of the Ann. Code of Md.
      SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, sludge or liquid from industrial,
commercial, mining or agricultural operations or from community activities.
      SOLID WASTE COMPOSTING. The process by which organic solid waste is
biologically decomposed under controlled conditions to yield a nuisance-free,
humus-like product. Typically constructed in conjunction with governmental
uses.
      SOLID WASTE GENERATOR. A residential, commercial, industrial or
governmental facility that creates solid waste through a process of providing a
product or service as long as this process does not require solid waste or
components of solid waste as part of the material in the process.
      SPECIAL EXCEPTION. A grant of a specific use that would not be
appropriate generally or  without restriction and is based upon a finding that
certain conditions governing special exceptions as detailed in this chapter
exist and that the use conforms to the Comprehensive Development Plan and is
compatible with the existing neighborhood.
      SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a
1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas
are designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in Flood Insurance
Studies and on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and
A99, and Zones VE and V1-30. The term includes areas shown on other flood maps
that are identified in §
1-19-9.110.
      SPRING WATER HARVESTING OR STORAGE. The use of property for collection,
storage, purification and transportation of spring water.
      START OF CONSTRUCTION.
         (a)   The date the building permit was issued for any development,
including new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that the actual start of construction or improvement was within 180
days of the permit issuance; and
         (b)   The actual START OF CONSTRUCTION is the placement of slab or
footings, piles, columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
actual placement of a manufactured home on the site. For substantial
improvement, the START OF CONSTRUCTION is the first alteration of any
structural part of the building. Permanent construction, as used in this
definition, does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading, and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for basements, footings, piers, foundations, or
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not as part of the main structure.
         (c)   For developments that do not include approval of buildings or
structures where grading is the most significant element to establishing the
new use, such as recreational fields, the final grading associated with the
construction of non-structural improvements.
      STONE MONUMENT PROCESSING. The cutting, shaping, engraving, or finishing
of marble, granite, slate, or other stone.
      STONE MONUMENT SALES. Retail sales of stone or other types of monuments
manufactured offsite.
      STORAGE TANK, GASOLINE. The use of property for an aboveground storage
tank (AST) or container designed for the storage of petroleum products with a
capacity not to exceed 1,100 gallons. This use is prohibited within wellhead
protection areas, see Article IV, §
1-6-50 of the Wellhead Protection Code.
      STREET. The term STREET, ROAD or HIGHWAY means a public way for vehicular
traffic of such width, design, construction and specifications, as the Master
Highway Plan and regulations now require or might hereafter require and is a
public right-of-way which provides primary access to abutting properties. The
term also applies to rights-of- way under county ownership prior to the
enactment of this chapter. The county's highways and streets are classified
according to the Comprehensive Development Plan (Master Highway Plan section).
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the structural members of a
building, including walls, columns, posts, beams, or girders.
      STRUCTURE. A walled and/or roofed building, including but not limited to,
a gas or liquid  storage tank, a building foundation, platform, deck, swimming
pool, bulkhead or greenhouse that is principally above ground and attached to a
permanent site or location.
      SUBDIVIDE. The act of creating a subdivision, as herein defined.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into 2 or
more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, for transfer of ownership or building development of the
land or territory subdivided.
      SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage by any means sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, alteration, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure (less land value) either:
         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   If the structure incurred substantial damage and has been
restored, before the damage occurred. SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT occurs when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. Substantial improvements will be calculated on a
cumulative basis. The minimum repairs needed to correct previously identified
violations of local health, safety or sanitary codes and alterations to
historic structures which do not preclude their continued designation as
historic structures are not considered substantial improvements. The term also
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the
actual repair work performed.
      TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. Any structure completely removed within 180 days
from issuance of the permit.
      TENANT FARMHOUSE. A single-family detached dwelling or a separate
dwelling unit within the principal structure located on a farm.
      TOBACCO STORE. A retailer whose business exclusively or primarily
involves the sale of tobacco products and related goods.
      TOWERS. Include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   LATTICE TOWER. A structure which consists of vertical and
horizontal supports and metal crossed strips or bars to support antennae and
connecting appurtenances. LATTICE TOWERS may be freestanding or supported by
wire guys. (See GUYED TOWER.)
         (b)   MONOPOLE TOWER. A structure which consists of a single
freestanding pole structure to support antennae and connecting appurtenances.
         (c)   GUYED TOWER. Any communications tower using wire guys connecting
above grade portions of a communications tower diagonally with the ground to
provide support for tower, antennae, and connecting appurtenances.
      TOWNHOUSE DWELLING. One of a series of 3 or more attached dwelling units
separated from one another by continuous vertical party walls which are without
openings from lowest level floor to the highest point of the roof.
      TRANSFER STATION. A place or facility where waste materials are taken
from one collection vehicle (for example, compactor trucks) and placed in
another transportation unit (for example, over-the-road tractor-trailers,
railroad gondola cars, barges or ships) for movement to other solid waste
acceptance facilities. For the purpose of these regulations,  collection points
serving rural residential areas are not considered to be transfer stations,
provided that solid waste is not transferred from a collection vehicle to
another transportation unit. The movement or consolidation of a single
generator's solid waste at the site of generation may not be considered to be a
transfer station.
      TRUCK STOP AND FILLING STATION SERVICE FACILITY. A structure or land used
or intended to be used primarily for the sale of fuel for trucks and, usually,
incidental service or repair of trucks; or a group of facilities consisting of
such a use and attendant eating, sleeping, or truck parking. This use is
prohibited in all zoning districts except highway service and general
industrial.
      TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A dwelling which is located on a lot, contains no
more than 2 dwelling units which are arranged 1 above the other or side by
side. No more than 1 family occupies either dwelling unit.
      UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK. An underground storage tank, connected piping,
underground ancillary equipment, and containment system, if any.
      USE. The principal purposes for which a lot or the main building thereon
is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used,
occupied or maintained.
      UTILITY. Any facility erected, constructed, altered or maintained as part
of an integrated system or program designed to furnish necessary services for
the public health, safety or convenience, including water, electric, gas,
communication (cable, wireless, satellite, telephone), steam or sewer.
Facilities include all buildings, structures, and land used to house the
utility and equipment, including facilities for the production of electricity
through solar collection or wind generation, substations for transforming,
boosting or switching purposes; regulators; stationary transformers and other
such devices for supplying electric service at voltages less than 500 kv;
storage yards; and above ground pipelines.
      VARIANCE. A modification of height, lot area or yard regulations in this
chapter which are not contrary to the public interest. A VARIANCE may be
allowed only when conditions peculiar to the property and not caused by the
applicant’s actions would make literal enforcement of the dimensional
requirements of this chapter an unnecessary hardship.
      VETERINARY CLINIC. The use of property for the practice of veterinary
medicine, dentistry, or surgery for animals.
      VILLAGE CENTER GROWTH AREA.  For the purpose of development within the
Village Center Zoning District, growth areas are regional and district
communities as identified in the county's comprehensive development plans as
areas intended for growth and planned for public water and sewer.
      WAREHOUSE. A use engaged in storage or distribution of manufactured
products, supplies, and equipment.
      WATERBODY. Intermittent and perennial streams, rivers, lakes and ponds,
but excluding stormwater management ponds. See §
1-19-9.400.
      WATERCOURSE. Natural or once naturally flowing (perennially or
intermittently) water including rivers, streams, and creeks. Includes natural
waterways that have, are, or have been channelized, but does not include man-
made channels, ditches, and underground drainage and sewage systems.
      WATERS OF THE STATE. Waters of the State include:
         (a)   Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of the
State subject to its jurisdiction;
         (b)   That portion of the Atlantic Ocean within the boundaries of the
State;
         (c)   The Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries;
         (d)   All ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, public ditches, tax ditches,
and public drainage systems within the State, other than those designed and
used to collect, convey, or dispose of sanitary sewage; and
         (e)   The floodplain of free-flowing waters determined by MDE on the
basis of the 100-year flood frequency.
      WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA (WHPA). That land area overlying the aquifer
which contributes water to a municipal or community water supply well or spring
under the permitted withdrawal rate (average annual) and average annual
recharge conditions that can be anticipated based on historical data. It is
bounded and may be influenced by the ground water divides which result from
pumping the well and by the contact of the aquifer with less permeable geologic
boundaries. In all cases, the wellhead protection area shall extend upgradient
to its point of intersection with prevailing hydrogeologic boundaries (a ground
water flow divide, a contact with geologic formations, or a recharge boundary),
or be limited by time-of-travel. The wellhead protection area shall be
delineated by MDE and mapped as a result of source water assessment reports.
      WET SOILS. Soils set forth in the "Soils Interpretation and Water
Features Report" as extracted from the Frederick County, Maryland Soils Survey
Supplement Text and Tables published by the Frederick County Soil Conservation
District (issued May 1985 or as amended).
      WETLAND. Any land which is: (1) considered private wetland or state
wetland pursuant to Title 9, Wetland and Riparian Rights, Natural Resources
Article, Annotated Code of Maryland; or (2) defined as wetland under the
procedures described in the "Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands" by the Federal Interagency Committee for Wetland
Delineation, 1989, as amended.
      WHOLESALING. The selling or distributing of merchandise to retailers, to
professional businesses, to other wholesalers, or acting as agents or brokers
and buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such individuals or
companies.
      WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. Equipment that converts and stores or transfers
energy from the wind into electricity or other usable forms of energy. This
equipment includes any base, vane, blade, foundation, generator, alternator,
tower, transformer, tail, wire, inverter, batteries, guy wire or other
component used in the system.
      WIND ENERGY SYSTEM TOTAL HEIGHT. The vertical distance from ground level
to the tip of a wind generator vane or blade when the tip is at its highest
point.
      WIND GENERATOR. Blades and associated mechanical and electrical
conversion components mounted on top of the tower.
      WIND TOWER. The monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that supports
a wind generator.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af9691cbec4604828c677875c7c627f7b6eb5f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3793.jpg]
 
      WOOD WASTE RECYCLING FACILITY, LIMITED. A facility that accepts natural
wood waste such as stumps, tree limbs, and yard waste. A limited wood waste
recycling facility produces a variety of products from this waste including
mulch and compost, for retail sales.
      WOOD WASTE RECYCLING FACILITY, UNLIMITED. A facility that accepts natural
wood waste such as stumps, tree limbs, processed wood products, and yard waste.
A wood waste recycling facility produces a variety of products from this waste
including mulch and compost, for retail sales. For the purposes of this
definition processed wood products is wood waste that includes cutoff,
untreated pieces of lumber.
      WOODWORKING. A business principally engaged in the act, process, or
occupation of working  wood (and use of customary incidental or accessory
materials) into a useful or desired form by using a combination of specialized
machinery, artisanal and handcrafted means to create, recondition, repair or
repurpose custom products that may include, furniture, sculptures, cabinets,
signs or other custom mill work pieces.
      YARD STORAGE. The use of property for the storage, stockpiling, or
safekeeping of any equipment, products or materials (in usable condition) which
are not being specifically displayed as merchandise or for the purpose of
outdoor sales display.
      ZONE. An area within which structures and land are subject to identical
regulations which permit or prohibit certain uses. The ZONE also establishes
other requirements, including yards and other open space, lot areas, and
building height limits.
      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The chief administrative officer in charge of
zoning administration within the Department of Planning and Development Review.
      ZONING MAP. The zoning maps of the county, together with all amendments
thereto subsequently adopted.
      ZOO/BOTANICAL GARDEN/ ARBORETUM. A public or private facility for the
exhibition and observation of animal and plant displays.
(Ord. 77-1-78, 1-24-1977; Ord. 79-19-145, 8-7-1979; Ord. 80-24-176, 8-26-1980;
Ord. 80-31-183, 10-7-1980; Ord. 81-13-203, 5-26-1981; Ord. 81-29-219, 9-29-
1981; Ord. 82-19-263, 9-7-1982; Ord. 86-37-414, 8-26-1986; Ord. 89-1-532, 1-3-
1989; Ord. 89-2-533, 1-3-1989; Ord. 89-41-572, 6-6-1989; Ord. 89-42-573, 6-6-
1989; Ord. 89-51-582, 8-15-1989; Ord. 90-30-628, 6-19-1990; Ord. 90-44-642, 11-
20-1990; Ord. 90-46-644, 11-20-1990; Ord. 91-13-013, 6-4-1991; Ord. 91-32-032,
11-19-1991; Ord. 92-04-039, 2-18-1992; Ord. 92-19-054, 8-8-1992; Ord. 92-22-
057, 10-6-1992; Ord. 92-23-058, 10-6-1992; Ord. 93-19-083, 9-13-1993; Ord. 94-
28-123, 12-8-1994; Ord. 96-17-169, 8-6-1996; Ord. 99-02-229, 3-16-1999; Ord.
99-14-241, 11-23-1999; Ord. 00-28-270, 9-7-2000; Ord. 03-03-326, 3-4-2003; Ord.
03-09-322, 11-21-2002; Ord. 05-25-386, 9-27-2005; Ord. 05-29-390, 10-25-2005;
Ord. 06-24-420, 6-20-2006; Ord. 06-42-438, 11-30-2006; Ord. 07-16-456, 5-15-
2007; Ord. 07-21-461, 6-12-2007; Ord. 07-24-464, 7-10-2007; Ord. 07-27-467, 6-
19-2007; Ord. 07-29-469, 9-4-2007; Ord. 07-31-471, 10-15-2007; Ord. 07-32-472,
7-17-2007; Ord. 07-34-474, 11-6-2007; Ord. 08-21-497, 8-5-2008; Ord. 08-26-502,
10-14-2008; Ord. 09-05-509, 2-17-2009; Ord. 09-11-515, 4-28-2009; Ord. 09-21-
525, 6-4-2009; Ord. 09-27-531, 11-3-2009; Ord. 10-01-536, 1-19-2010; Ord. 10-
20-555, 8-24-2010; Ord. 10-31-566, 12-21-2010; Ord. 11-06-572, 5-17-2011; Ord.
11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 12-08-603, 4-17-2012; Ord. 12-23-618, 9-6-2012;
Ord. 13-25-653, 10-31-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Ord. 14-26-681, 11-20-
2014; Bill No. 17-04, 5-2-2017; Bill No. 17-07, 5-16-2017; Bill No. 18-10, 5-1-
2018; Bill No. 18-16, 8-21-2018; Bill No. 18-22, 10-16-2018; Bill No. 18-24,
10-16-2018; Bill No. 18-27, 10-23-2018; Bill No. 19-09, 8-20-2019; Bill No. 19-
16, 12-17-2019; Bill No. 20-10, 7-21-2020; Bill No. 20-07, 8-4-2020; Bill No.
20-15, 9-29-2020; Bill No. 22-03, 3-1-2022; Bill No. 22-05, 3-15-2022; Bill No.
22-12, 7-26-2022; Bill No. 22-24, 10-25-2022; Bill No. 22-28, 10-18-2022; Bill
No. 23-08, 5-23-2023; Bill No. 23-15, 8-8-2023 Bill No. 23-20, 11-21-2023; Bill
No. 23-21, 11-21-2023; Bill No. 24-07, 6-18-2024; Bill No. 24-15, 10-15-2024;
Bill No. 24-17, 11-19-2024)
Cross-references:
   Subdivisions, see
Chapter 1-16
   Building Code, see , §
1-6-16 et seq.
CHAPTER 1-20: ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-20-1 — 1-20-19)
Section
   
1-20-1   Title
   
1-20-2   Authority
   
1-20-3   Jurisdiction
   
1-20-4   Intent
   
1-20-5   Definitions
   
1-20-6   General requirements
   
1-20-7   Exemptions
   
1-20-8   Approval of subdivisions, site plans
   
1-20-9   Reserved
   
1-20-10   Conditional approval
   
1-20-11   Developer option
   
1-20-12   Escrow accounts for contributions to road improvements for limited
impact developments
Cross references:
   Buildings, see
Chapter 1-6;
   Planning and development, see
Chapter 1-13;
   Subdivision regulations, see
Chapter 1-16;
   Zoning ordinance, see
Chapter 1-19
Editor’s note:
   This article was adopted by Ord. 91-28-028, passed 10-15-1991, and was
amended by Ord. 95-06-130, passed 5-16-1995, and by Ord. 98-03-205, passed 3-
17-1998.
Statutory reference:
   Adequate public facilities, see Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article Title 7,
Subtitle 1
§ 1-20-1. TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Adequate Public Facilities
Ordinance of Frederick County, Maryland.”
((Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-20-2. AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is established in accordance with the provisions of Md. Code
Ann., Land Use Article.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-20-3. JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all unincorporated lands
within the territorial limits of the county.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 09-28-532, 11-16-2009; Ord. 11-02-568, 3-1-
2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-20-4. INTENT.
   This chapter is adopted with the intent that new residential, commercial,
industrial and other development take place in accordance with the Frederick
County Comprehensive Plan and the Capital Improvements Program and to ensure
that adequate public facilities and services are reasonably available
concurrent with new development so that orderly development and growth can
occur. Provision of adequate facilities will take place in cooperation with
municipalities, especially when facilities are affected by new development
which falls under the requirements of this chapter. Development and adoption of
municipal APF ordinances that correspond to this chapter is strongly
recommended. For the purposes of this chapter, public facilities shall include
road, water, sewerage, and school facilities.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 09-20-524, 7-7-2009; Ord. 11-21-587, 9-6-2011;
Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-20-5. DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The following rules of construction shall apply to the text of the
chapter.
      (1)   The particular will control the general.
      (2)   The words “shall” and “will” are always mandatory and not
discretionary. The word “may” is permissive.
      (3)   Words used in the present tense include the future; and words used
in the singular number include the plural; and the plural includes the
singular; words of the masculine gender will include the feminine and the
neuter gender will refer to any gender as required, unless the context plainly
indicates the contrary.
      (4)   A building or structure includes any part thereof.
      (5)   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for, designed for,
intended for, maintained for, or occupied for.”
      (6)   The word person includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.
      (7)   Unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different
meaning is intended, a regulation which involves 2 or more items, conditions,
provisions, or events connected by the conjunction “and, or,” or “either ...
or,” the use of the conjunction is defined as follows:
         (a)   AND. All the connected items, conditions, provisions, and events
apply together and not separately.
         (b)   OR. The connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply
separately or in any combination.
         (c)   EITHER ... OR. The connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events shall apply separately but not in combination.
      (8)   The word “includes” does not limit a term to the specified
examples, but is intended to extend the term’s meaning to all other instances
or circumstances of like kind or character.
      (9)   When a term defined in the county subdivision regulations, zoning
ordinance, or the county building code occurs in this chapter, it has the
meanings specified in the subdivision regulations, zoning ordinance or building
code, unless specifically defined in this chapter.
      (10)   The word “county” means Frederick County, Maryland. The word
“state” means the State of Maryland.
      (11)   Throughout this chapter, all words, other than the terms
specifically defined herein, have the meaning inferred from their context in
this chapter or their ordinarily accepted definitions.
   (B)   In this chapter, the following terms are used as defined unless
otherwise apparent from the context.
      ADAPTIVE REUSE PROJECT.  Rehabilitation or renovation of existing
obsolescent or historic structure(s) from their original or most recent use to
a new use.
      ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES (APF). Those public facilities included in the
context of this chapter which meet established minimum standards as further
specified herein.
      ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITY LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING. A letter from the
Planning Commission to the developer which sets forth all terms, conditions and
restrictions which must be satisfied for a finding of adequacy.
      AGE-RESTRICTED COMMUNITY. A development or portion thereof which has been
designated as an age-restricted community in accordance with §
1-19-10.500.10 of the Zoning Ordinance.
      AMEND or AMENDMENT. Any repeal, modification, or addition to a
regulation; any new regulation.
      APFO TEST DATE. The later of: (1) the date of plan submission, or (2) the
first date upon which all necessary APFO documentation and materials have been
submitted.
      APPROVED DEVELOPMENT. For testing adequacy of schools under §
1-20-61(C)(2), an approved development consists of 50 dwelling units or more,
with existing APFO (or equivalent) approval, and is located in the same
attendance area(s) as the proposed development.
      AT ONE LOCATION. All adjacent land of the applicant if:
         (1)   The property lines are contiguous at any point; or
         (2)   The property lines are separated only by a public or private
street, road, highway or utility right-of-way, or other public or private
right-of- way at any point except for an approved plat of public taking; or
         (3)   The property lines are separated only by other land of the
applicant which is not subject to this chapter at the time of any permit, site
plan, development or subdivision application by the applicant.
      BACKGROUND ENROLLMENT GROWTH. The average annual impact of equated
student enrollment changes during the preceding 3 years in the school
attendance areas serving the proposed development with appropriate adjustments
made in the determination by the Frederick County Public Schools to eliminate
student enrollment changes caused solely by school redistricting.
      CAPITAL BUDGET. The current and first year of the approved CIP.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (CIP). An annual document adopted by the
county indicating county capital projects having funding approval for the
current fiscal year and those capital projects which are currently planned for
the following 5 year period, including the proposed means of financing the
same.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A composite of mapped and written text, the purpose
of which is to guide the physical development of the county, and is adopted by
the county and includes all changes and additions thereto made under the
provisions of Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article.
      CONSOLIDATED TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM (CTP). An annual document prepared by
the Maryland Department of Transportation and approved by the Maryland General
Assembly indicating state transportation projects which have funding approval
for the current fiscal year and those projects which are planned for the
following 5 year period.
      DEVELOPER. An individual, partnership, corporation (or agent thereof), or
other entities that undertakes the responsibility for any or all of the
activities covered by this chapter and Chapters
1-16 and
1-19, particularly the designing of a subdivision plat or site development plan
showing the layout of the land and the public improvements involved therein. In
as much as the subdivision plat is merely a necessary means to the end of
assuring a satisfactory development, the term DEVELOPER is intended to include
the term SUBDIVIDER, even though the personnel involved in successive stages of
the project may differ.
      DEVELOPER-FUNDED. Improvements or facilities which are:
         (a)   Required to be provided or funded by a developer as a condition
of APFO approval; and
         (b)   Guaranteed by cash escrow, letter of credit, or other form of
guarantee acceptable to the County Attorney.
      DEVELOPMENT. The area of land which is subject to preliminary plan, site
plan or Phase II plan approval, or expansion of existing use and which is
subject to subdivision, site plan or Phase II plan review.
      DIVISION. The Frederick County Division of Planning and Permitting, and
any successor to this Division.
      FEE-IN-LIEU. A cash payment made to an agency in an amount approximately
equal to the cost of providing a service or constructing an improvement for the
purpose of having the service or improvement provided or constructed by others.
      FINAL PLAT. The final map, drawing or chart upon which the subdivider’s
plan of subdivision is presented to the Planning Commission or county staff for
approval and which, if approved, will be submitted for recording among the land
records for Frederick County.
      FREEWAY AND EXPRESSWAY MAINLINE. The through travel lanes not involved
with interchanging or intersecting movements on fully or partially access
controlled highways, such as the interstate highways, US 340, and US 15.
      GOVERNMENT PROJECTS. Any building, structure, or alteration thereof paid
for and used by the local, state or federal government entities.
      GUIDELINES. County adopted guidelines titled "Guidelines for the
Preparation of Traffic Impact Analyses for Development Applications."
      HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS. Housing intended for, and occupied by, older
persons in accordance with the provisions of 42 U.S.C. § 3607(b)(2), as
amended.
      INTERSECTION. The at-grade crossing of roadways usually controlled by a
traffic signal, stop or yield signs or a roundabout.
      LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS). A standardized index of relative service provided
by a transportation network element ranging from "A" to "F" with "A"
representing free, unobstructed flow and "F" representing a forced flow beyond
the capacity of the transportation network element, or in the case of
intersections a measurement of delay where "A" represents the least delay and
"F" the most, as defined in the "Highway Capacity Manual" published by the
Transportation Research Board.
      LIMITED IMPACT DEVELOPMENT. A development that is projected (by the
approved TIA) to lower the level of service (LOS) of a roadway by not more than
30% of one LOS and does not result in an LOS of "E" or "F".
      LOT. A contiguous area of land separated from other areas of land by
separate description (including a recorded deed, a subdivision plat or record
of survey map, or by metes and bounds) for purpose of sale, lease, transfer of
ownership or separate use.
      LOT OF RECORD. Any lot legally recorded in the land records of the county
which has been the subject of subdivision approval.
      MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any original parcel which has been or is proposed to
be subdivided to create 6 or more lots.
      MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any original parcel which has been or is proposed to
be subdivided to create 5 or fewer lots.
      MORATORIUM. A moratorium or other legislation adopted by the county
preventing the recordation of plats or halting a development because of
inadequate school, road, water or sewer capacity.
      MXD. The Mixed Use Development Floating Zone established in §
1-19-10.500 of the Frederick County Code.
      ORIGINAL PARCEL. Shall have the meaning set forth in §
1-16-3(B) of this code.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A floating zoning district approved by
the county which allows a variety of uses and dwelling unit types in accordance
with an approved plan and schedule of improvements as established in §
1-19-10.500 of the Frederick County Code.
      PRELIMINARY PLAN. The preliminary drawings and supplementary materials
indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the
Planning Commission for its consideration.
      PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY. A unit dedicated to providing immediate and
direct emergency response to fire, medical service, crime, and other community
safety needs.
      PUBLIC SCHOOL FACILITY EXPENDITURES. Include capital costs in connection
with the construction of public school facilities, including planning, design,
engineering, land acquisition, legal, appraisal and other costs related to
financing and development, costs of compliance with purchasing procedures and
applicable administrative and legal requirements, and all other costs necessary
or incidental to provision of public school facilities.
      PUBLIC WORKS AGREEMENT. A contract between the developer and the county
to complete the necessary improvements in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications by a given date.
      RESUBDIVISION. A further division of a previously recorded lot or lots to
create additional lots.
      ROADS. Public rights-of-way recognized and maintained by the state,
county or municipality, including, but not limited to, pavement, drainage,
traffic control devices, bridges, and culverts.
      SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION FEE. A monetary fee, calculated as provided in §
1-20-62(E).
      SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN (SITE PLAN). The plan indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, structures, paved areas, walkways, vegetative
cover, landscaping and screening within a site proposed for development which
is to be submitted to the Planning Commission and/or staff for approval prior
to the release of building permits on the site.
      STATE RATED CAPACITY (SRC). The maximum number of students, as determined
by the state, that can be reasonably accommodated in a school facility without
significantly hampering delivery of the given educational program.
      STRUCTURAL ADEQUACY. Determination by county DPW design engineers that
the pavement cross-section (or bridge design) is of sufficient depth and design
to carry the increased  traffic volume generated by the proposed development,
including the heavy construction vehicles which will be present, without
causing undue failure of the infrastructure.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into 2 or
more lots, parcels, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development. It
includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the
process of resubdividing or to the land or territory subdivided.
      TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA). A report which assesses the traffic impact
of a development proposal for testing road adequacy.
      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The administrative officer in charge of zoning
administration within the Community Development Division.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 02-04-300, 3-5-2002; Ord. 03-13-336, 9-2-2003;
Ord. 06-04-400, 1-17-2006; Ord. 07-21-461, 6-12-2007; Ord. 07-26-466, 8-7-2007;
Ord. 08-20-496, 7-17-2008; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-19-523, 7-7-
2009; Ord. 09-20-524, 7-7-2009; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-17-583, 7-
19-2011; Ord. 11-18-584, 7-19-2011; Ord. 11-21-587, 9-6-2011; Ord. 11-25-591,
10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-17, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-20-6. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In planning and developing any subdivision or any development, the
developer shall comply with the general principles set forth in this chapter
for the provision of adequate facilities; and in every case the developer shall
observe the procedure outlined in this chapter.
   (B)   A developer shall not avoid the intent of this chapter by submitting
piecemeal applications for preliminary plats or site plans. However a developer
may seek approval of only a portion of the subdivision or development, provided
that the impact from all previously approved preliminaries or site plans from
that development shall be considered during the APF review of each subsequent
portion of the development.
   (C)   Except as provided in §
1-20-7, all parcels must receive APFO approval prior to site plan subdivision,
or Phase II approval.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 09-20-524, 7-7-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-20-7. EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Minor residential subdivisions and public safety facilities are not
subject to the requirements of this chapter. Except as specifically provided in
this section, all other applications for development, whether for county or
municipal facilities, or private sector projects, are required to obtain APFO
approval.
   (B)   The first 5 lots from an original parcel created by resubdivisions
occurring after December 1, 1991.
   (C)   Developments that meet the requirements of this chapter at the time of
preliminary subdivision approval do not have to comply with the provisions of
this chapter at the time of site plan approval.
   (D)   Any project which qualifies as “housing for older persons” defined in
§
1-20-5 hereof, and which meets the following criteria shall be exempt from the
school adequacy requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   If the proposed project is a PUD or MXD that is not an adaptive
reuse project, all or a portion of the project must have been designated as an
Age-Restricted Community at Phase I in accordance with §
1-19-10.500.10 of the Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   The proposed project must comply with the minimum age restriction,
as stated in the Fair Housing Act requirements for housing for older persons,
and thereby maintain an exemption from the prohibition against familial status
discrimination, such that children will be excluded as residents.
      (3)   The zoning certificate, site plan and subdivision approvals shall
require occupancy of each residential unit:
         (a)   Solely by persons age 62 and older; or
         (b)   By at least one person age 55 or older, provided that the
following criteria are met:
            1.   At least 80% of the occupied units are occupied by at least
one person who is 55 years of age or older; and
            2.   The housing facility or community publishes and adheres to
policies and procedures that demonstrate the intent required under this
subparagraph (b); and
            3.   The housing facility or community complies with rules issued
by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development for verification of
occupancy, as set forth in the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607 et seq.
      (4)   The proposed project shall be located in an area that will be
served by both public water and sewer within a designated growth area and shall
not be located within an area to be served by well or septic.
      (5)   The construction and development of the project must include a full
program of amenities and other activities for older persons. At a minimum, the
amenities must include:
         (a)   A trail system, walking paths, and sidewalks for pedestrian
accessibility;
         (b)   A clubhouse/multi-purpose building(s) or equivalent space sized
at 20 square feet for every dwelling unit. A minimum of 1,500 sq. ft. must be
provided. The maximum square footage required shall be 20,000 square feet;
         (c)   Active recreational open space (for the purpose of providing
amenities, including but not limited to, a swimming pool, tennis courts, chip
and putt course, bocce courts, horseshoe pits, and/or similar active
recreational amenities at a rate of 1/3 acre per 100 dwelling units. A minimum
of 1 acre must be provided. A single large-scale amenity, such as a golf
course, may not be proposed as the sole means to satisfy this requirement. Only
the physical structure (i.e. footprint) of the clubhouse/multi-purpose building
(s), not the parking area(s), will be considered in determining the area of
active recreational open space;
         (d)   Passive recreational space, including but not limited to, picnic
areas, gazebos, pocket parks and/or other similar passive recreational
amenities; and
         (e)   An appropriate phasing schedule in each phase of development to
meet the needs of the residents.
      (6)   If the age-restricted community is an adaptive reuse of an existing
structure or structures, or if, due to unusual circumstances of shape and
topography or other physical features or conditions of the development, or
because of the nature of adjacent developments, or due to the existence of
resources that will be shared with adjacent developments, extraordinary
hardship will result from strict compliance with the requirements set forth in
subsections (F)(5)(a) through (F)(5)(d) of this section, the Planning
Commission may grant a modification of these requirements. The applicant must
submit a justification statement with its request for the modification,
together with evidence that the development meets the requirements stated above
for the requested modification. However, the Planning Commission may not grant
a modification that will have the effect of substantially altering or
nullifying the intent and purpose of this section. In granting modifications,
the Planning Commission may require such conditions as are deemed necessary by
the Planning Commission in its sole judgment.
      (7)   Prior to granting APFO approval for the project, the County
Planning Commission must review and approve the proposed restrictive covenants
applicable to the project to ensure that the project is limited exclusively to
housing for older persons as specified under subsection (F)(3) above, and
excludes secondary school-aged or younger children from residency. These
covenants must require that appropriate enforcement mechanisms be in place to
enforce the age restriction and also ensure compliance with the requirements to
qualify as housing for older persons under the Fair Housing Act. The
restrictive covenants must also provide that any subsequent revisions or
modifications of the covenants pertaining to age limits for occupancy shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for approval prior to recordation. These
revisions or modifications will require the re-approval of the Phase II plan,
site plan, zoning certificate, and subdivision plat(s), as necessary.
      (8)   Prior to recordation of subdivision plats and issuance of building
permits or the zoning certificate for the project, the restrictive covenants
described above in subsection (F)(7) must be recorded in the county land
records.
      (9)   Before any revision or modification to the project at any time in
the future, whether the project is built out and occupied or not, which has the
effect of removing or substantially modifying the age restriction for
residents, the project must first comply with the schools adequacy requirements
under this chapter.
      (10)   Any project approved under this section shall meet the
requirements of the sections of this chapter requiring that roads, public water
and sewerage facilities be adequate.
      (11)   "Appropriate enforcement mechanisms" as used in this section means
that the restrictive covenants for the project require the homeowners
association or similar entity, through a property management agent, to enforce
the age restrictions and ensure compliance with the requirements to qualify as
housing for older persons under the Fair Housing Act such that secondary
school-aged or younger children will be excluded as residents. If more than 1
homeowners association or similar entity is established for the project, then
the homeowners association or similar entity governing the housing for older
persons project shall have the primary responsibility for enforcing the age
restrictions and ensuring compliance with the requirements to qualify as
housing for older persons under the Fair Housing Act such that secondary
school-aged or younger children shall be excluded as residents.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 02-04-300, 3-5-2002; Ord. 07-04-444, 2-20-
2007; Ord. 07-21-461, 6-12-2007; Ord. 07-26-466, 8-7-2007; Ord. 08-02-478, 1-8-
2008; Ord. 08-20-496, 7-17-2008; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-20-524, 7-
7-2009; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-17-583, 7-19-2011; Ord. 11-25-591,
10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-17, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-20-8. APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISIONS, SITE PLANS.
   (A)   All major residential subdivisions, major and minor commercial/
industrial subdivisions, site plans, Planned Unit Development (PUD) and Mixed
Use Development (MXD) Phase II plans, and revised subdivision, PUD and MXD
Phase II or site plans resulting in an increase in density or intensity of use,
received for approval, reapproval or extension by the Planning Commission shall
meet the requirements set forth herein prior to preliminary plan or site plan
approval except as provided for in §
1-20-7.
   (B)   Subdivision plats or site plans that do not meet the requirements for
adequate public facilities in Articles III-VI herein shall not be granted
preliminary subdivision or site plan approval by the Planning Commission. A
conditional approval as allowed for in §
1-20-10 may be granted, provided no final approval shall be granted or lots
recorded until the conditions set forth in the conditional approval have been
satisfied.
   (C)   Prior to the signing of a preliminary plan or site plan, an adequate
public facilities letter of understanding shall be agreed to and signed by the
Planning Commission and the developer.
   (D)   Approval of adequate public facilities as set forth in this chapter
shall be valid from the date of the meeting at which approval of the
preliminary subdivision or site plan approval is first granted by the Planning
Commission for the following time period as long as the preliminary plan or
site plan approval remains valid.
      (1)   Residential subdivisions.    
      6-50 units         3 years
      51-100 units         4 years
      101-250 units         6 years
      251-500 units         8 years
      501 +units      10 years
      (2)   Nonresidential subdivisions (building square footage).
      0-230,000 square feet          5 years
      230,001-560,000 square feet   6 years
      560,001-1,100,000 square feet    8 years
      1,100,001 + square feet       10 years
      (3)   Nonresidential site plans. For as long as the site plan approval
remains valid.
      (4)   At the request of the developer, for residential subdivisions with
50 or fewer dwelling units, the Planning Commission may grant APFO approval for
a time period less than that shown above, when the decreased approval period
can be justified by the developer.
      (5)   If a developer is seeking concurrent subdivision and site plan
approval, the APFO testing shall be required as part of the subdivision
approval. Notes shall be placed on both documents specifying approved use(s).
   (E)   At the request of, and upon submission of adequate justification by,
the developer, the Planning Commission may extend the approval of adequate
public facilities beyond the time frame provided in division (D) above if the
Commission finds:
      (1)   All conditions of approval are being met; and
      (2)   All unrecorded lots or unbuilt site plan structures meet the
requirements for adequate school, road, water and sewerage capacity; or
capacity is vested for improvements constructed for roads (§
1-20-31(F), water (§
1-20-41(E)), or sewer (§
1-20-51(E)).
   (F)   The Planning Commission may grant APFO approval for time frames beyond
those specified in division (D) if preexisting conditions of rezoning or other
required phasing limitations, such as those provided in subsections (L) and (M)
below, warrant such action.
   (G)   If the preliminary plan or site plan approval expires or is voided
prior to the recording of all lots, the unrecorded lots or in the case of site
plans, unconstructed portion of the development, shall meet the requirements of
this chapter prior to again obtaining preliminary subdivision or site plan
approval.
   (H)   A developer seeking preliminary subdivision or site plan approval of a
development must comply with the county subdivision regulations and zoning
ordinance.
   (I)   Prior to recordation of final plats all Health Department and county
requirements must be met.
   (J)   For all developments which were exempt from this chapter or for which
APFO approval was granted, the subdivision lots must be recorded, or where no
subdivision is required, substantial construction pursuant to the site plan
must be commenced in order to remain exempt from future APFO testing.
   (K)   (1)   The developer may request that the time of approval for adequate
public facilities for a development be extended if a moratorium has been
imposed.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall grant the extension if the developer
establishes each of the following:
         (a)   The county imposed a moratorium;
         (b)   The development had APFO approval at the time the moratorium was
imposed;
         (c)   The Division of Water and Sewer Utilities certifies that water
and sewer capacity is adequate to serve the development or such portion as
required.
      (3)   The duration of the extension of the time of the APFO approval
shall be the longer of:
         (a)   The length of time remaining for the APFO approval at the time
the moratorium was imposed; or
         (b)   One year.
      (4)   Retesting of public facilities, other than water or sewer
facilities, shall not be required.
      (5)   The developer must make this request within six months after the
moratorium expires.
   (L)   A phasing plan indicating the density and rate of development in
accordance with the availability of adequate public facilities may also be
approved as part of the MXD plan or PUD Phase II approval or reapproval.
   (M)   All PUDs with existing Phase II approval as of December 1, 1991, will
be required to meet the requirements of this chapter prior to preliminary plan
or site plan approval or reapproval. A phasing plan indicating the density and
rate of development in accordance with the availability of adequate public
facilities shall also be approved as part of the preliminary plan or site plan
approval.
   (N)   For all developments which include a combination of residential and
nonresidential uses, the duration of the adequate public facilities approval
shall be the longer of the time periods found in subsections (D)(1) and (D)(2),
as applicable.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 00-19-261, 7-11-2000; Ord. 02-05-301, 3-5-
2002; Ord. 03-13-336, 9-2-2003; Ord. 09-19-523, 7-7-2009; Ord. 09-20-524, 7-7-
2009; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-21-587, 9-6-2011; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-
27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-17, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-20-9. RESERVED.
§ 1-20-10. CONDITIONAL APPROVAL.
   (A)   Conditional site plan, or preliminary plan, approval may be granted to
a development that does not have adequate public facilities at the time of
Planning Commission consideration, provided that the developer agrees to
provide the necessary improvements to make the facility adequate as allowed for
in §
1-20-11. If the developer improvements will not result in adequate capacity,
conditional approval shall not be granted, and preliminary plan and site plan
approval shall be denied.
   (B)   If any conditions of a Phase II or preliminary plat approval have not
been met, approval shall not be granted to a final subdivision plat.
   (C)   If conditional site plan approval has been granted, a building permit
shall not be issued until the conditions have been satisfied and the public
facilities have been determined to be adequate.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 00-19-261, 7-11-2000; Ord. 06-08-404, 4-4-
2006; Ord. 09-20-524, 7-7-2009; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-
27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-17, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-20-11. DEVELOPER OPTION.
   A developer shall have the option to: (1) provide the public facility
improvements necessary to support the proposed development and to ensure
adequacy of public facilities set forth in this chapter; or (2) wait for public
facilities to become adequate by improvements made pursuant to the CIP or other
sources. A county, state or municipal agency may participate in the
improvements.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-18-584, 7-19-
2011; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-09,
8-30-2016)
§ 1-20-12. ESCROW ACCOUNTS FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO ROAD IMPROVEMENTS FOR LIMITED
IMPACT DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   In lieu of either providing the public facility improvements or
waiting for public facilities to become adequate as provided in §
1-20-11, the developer of a limited impact development shall have the option of
contributing money to an escrow account as set forth in this section, provided
the Planning Commission determines that the developer has fulfilled each of the
requirements of this section for such contribution.
   (B)   The amount of money the developer shall be required to place in the
escrow account (whether the escrow account is established or to be established)
for its limited impact development shall be the proportionate share of the
costs attributable to that limited impact development of making the road
improvements required to satisfy the roads adequacy requirements in §
1-20-31 for that limited impact development. This proportionate share shall be
based on an equitable allocation of traffic trips in the peak hour, and in the
critical direction or movement, that the proposed limited impact development is
estimated to cause, when measured against and accounting for the additional
capacity that the proposed road improvement will create. In arriving at the
equitable allocation for that limited impact development, the Planning
Commission shall consider the traffic impact of the limited impact development
as it relates to the entire road improvement being proposed. The Planning
Commission shall determine the equitable allocation based on the procedures
outlined in the Guidelines.
   (C)   The limited impact development applicant may request that the proposed
road improvement be designed or re-designed to create more new capacity than
that which is required for that limited impact development to satisfy the
adequacy requirements in §
1-20-31, if the Planning Commission determines that the road link or
intersection to be improved by the road improvement will require greater
improvement to accommodate other additional future development in the area
consistent with the County Comprehensive Plan.
   (D)   Once a road improvement is approved for a particular road link or
intersection and an escrow account is established, subsequent development
applications for limited impact developments shall either: (i) contribute its
equitable allocation of the approved road improvement to that escrow account,
until such time that the account is closed by the county; or (ii) build the
approved road improvement.
   (E)   The Planning Commission shall approve the escrow account contribution
request for a limited impact development if the Planning Commission determines
(based on the approved TIA and the Guidelines) that it would not be equitable
to impose the entire cost of the required road improvements on that limited
impact development because it would not have a substantial adverse impact on
traffic.
   (F)   The Planning Commission may approve a fee-in-lieu escrow account
contribution request, as determined by the state or county, which shall not be
subject to proportionate share requirements, if the constructed improvements
necessary to establish adequacy are practically infeasible due to circumstances
beyond the control of the applicant but which may be feasible if constructed as
a public or a public-developer partnership project. The applicant shall provide
justification for the request and the proposed fee-in-lieu payment shall be
consistent with the scope of the project, but not less than 5 percent of the
estimated cost of the improvements.
   (G)   The Planning Commission may disapprove the escrow account contribution
request for a limited impact development which will impact a roadway by between
15% and 30% of one level of service, if the Planning Commission determines that
50% or more of the escrow account funds, including the limited impact
development applicant's proportionate share, have been accumulated in an escrow
account for that road improvement. In determining whether a development has a
limited impact, the Planning Commission shall consider the general requirement
in §
1-20-6(B) that the developer not avoid the intent of this chapter by submitting
piecemeal applications and may deny an escrow request for a piecemeal
application.
   (H)   Once an escrow account is established, any non-exempt developer
generating more than 5 trips during the peak hour of the adjacent street, as
defined in §
1-20-5, having an impact on the road improvement project shall be required to
pay its proportionate share into the escrow account or, if applicable, make the
road improvements as provided in §
1-20-11 to gain adequate public facilities approval to allow development to
proceed.
   (I)   The escrow account shall be maintained by the county in an interest
bearing account and shall be used solely for road improvements benefitting the
property as determined by the county. While in most cases the escrow payments
will be explicitly allocated to specific improvements at certain locations,
escrow funds may be reallocated for any transportation improvements within the
same link or intersection, as outlined in the Guidelines, so long as the
transportation improvements provide an identifiable benefit to the roadway
links or intersections affected by that development. If, after 10 years from
the date of the first escrow account contribution, the county determines that
there is no reasonable probability of implementing the transportation
improvements described above in the next 6 years, the escrow account may be
closed. The funds in the escrow account may be transferred to another escrow
account within the same planning region, at the discretion of the Planning
Commission, for the purpose of constructing other unbuilt escrow account
projects. If the money paid into an escrow account for road improvements
exceeds actual costs, the applicant may seek a refund. Any application for
refund must be filed with the Director of Finance within 1 year of the time at
which the funds become available for refund.
   (J)   If the Planning Commission approves an escrow fund for road
improvements under this section and the development meets all other
requirements under this chapter, then the Planning Commission shall grant APFO
approval to the development.
   (K)   If a developer constructs road improvements for which an escrow
account has been established pursuant to this section, the funds in the escrow
account shall not be transferred to any other improvement and shall be made
available to the developer to defray the construction costs of the improvements
minus that developer's proportionate share of the improvement in a manner
outlined in the Guidelines.
   (L)   A county, state or municipal government agency may participate in the
construction of or reimbursement for road improvements for which an escrow
account has been established.
(Ord. 95-06-130, 5-16-1995; Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 08-03-479, 1-8-
2008; Ord. 09-20-524, 7-7-2009; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-21-587, 9-6-
2011; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-17,
10-25-2022)
§§ 1-20-13 – 1-20-19. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: ADMINISTRATION (§§ 1-20-20 — 1-20-29)
Section
   
1-20-20   Administrative agency/determination of adequacy
   
1-20-21   Referral to other agencies/public comment
   
1-20-22   Appeals
   
1-20-23   Amendments
   
1-20-24   Fees
§ 1-20-20. ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY /DETERMINATION OF ADEQUACY.
   (A)   The Adequate Public Facilities Ordinance shall be administered by the
Division. All applications, maps, and documents related to the provisions of
this chapter shall be submitted to the Division which will review all
information and present the relevant information and its recommendations to the
Planning Commission.
   (B)   Final determination of adequacy shall be the responsibility of the
Planning Commission.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 09-20-524, 7-7-2009; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-
2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 12-04-599, 2-21-2012; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-10, 9-6-2016; Bill No. 22-17, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-20-21. REFERRAL TO OTHER AGENCIES/PUBLIC COMMENT.
   (A)   The Division may refer the subdivision, site development, and PUD and
MXD Phase II plans to any county agency or any other agency it deems
appropriate for its review, comments and/or recommendations pertaining to the
adequacy of public facilities; and these recommendations shall be considered by
the Planning Commission in making its decision. Where a development impacts
municipal facilities, that municipality shall be referred a copy of the
subdivision or site development plan for review and comment.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall accept public comments and consider
these comments as part of the record in its decision making process.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 09-20-524, 7-7-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 22-17, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-20-22. APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any action of the Planning Commission pursuant
to this chapter may appeal to the Circuit Court pursuant to Maryland Rules,
Title 7, Chapter 200. The decision of the Circuit Court may be appealed to the
Court of Special Appeals, or, upon certiorari, to the Court of Appeals of
Maryland in accordance with Maryland Rules.
   (B)   The county may file a responsive pleading and be a party to or take an
appeal to the Circuit Court of the county, to the Court of Special Appeals of
Maryland, or, upon certiorari, to the Court of Appeals of Maryland of any
decision made under this chapter.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-20-23. AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The county governing body may amend the provisions of this chapter
through its legislative process if the amendment will be in the best interest
of the citizens of the county and consistent with the general intent of this
chapter.
   (B)   The proposed legislation shall be referred to the Division and all
municipalities within the county having adequate public facility ordinances for
review and comment. The comments received from the municipalities shall be
referred to the Planning Commission, County Executive and County Council for
consideration.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
legislation and shall submit its recommendations to the County Executive and
County Council as soon as practicable after the public hearing.
   (D)   The County Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
legislation and shall render a decision after the public hearing.
   (E)   Notice of the time and place of the Planning Commission and initial
County Council public hearing, together with a summary of the proposed
amendment, shall be published in at least 1 newspaper of general circulation in
the county once each week for 2 successive weeks, with the first such
publication of notice appearing at least 14 days prior to the hearing.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 07-08-448, § 6, 4-3-2007; Ord. 09-20-524, 7-7-
2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-17, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-20-24. FEES.
   The county governing body shall have the authority to establish by
resolution fees for APF related services specified in this chapter, but in no
event shall the fee charged be more than the costs incurred by the county.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§§ 1-20-25 – 1-20-29. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: ROADS (§§ 1-20-30 — 1-20-39)
Section
   
1-20-30   Thresholds
   
1-20-31   Determination of adequacy
§ 1-20-30. THRESHOLDS.
   (A)   Except where an APFO escrow account (§
1-20-12 (H)) has already been established, this article does not apply to
developments which are expected to generate 50 or less total vehicle trips
during the highest daily peak hour of the adjacent street traffic, as defined
by the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE)
"Trip Generation Manual," or the Frederick County Guidelines for the use
category determined by the Division. Site generated trips are the sum of all
peak hour traffic trips in and out of the proposed site.
   (B)   In determining whether a proposed development exceeds the thresholds
described in §
1-20-30(A), all land at one location within the county under common ownership
or control by a developer shall be included. A developer shall not purposefully
avoid the intent of this section by submitting piecemeal applications for
preliminary plans or site plans. However, a developer may seek approval of only
a portion of a subdivision or development, even if the site would generate less
trips than the thresholds in this section, provided that upon seeking approval
of the remaining subdivision or development which generates trips greater than
the thresholds, including that approved previously under this subsection, the
development shall comply with the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 09-20-524, 7-7-2009; Ord. 11-21-587, 9-6-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 22-17, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-20-31. DETERMINATION OF ADEQUACY.
   (A)   If a development application meets or exceeds the thresholds outlined
in §
1-20-30, a traffic impact analysis (TIA) shall be prepared, and the Planning
Commission shall determine if the road adequacy requirements of this chapter
have been or will be met. The portion of existing road(s) required to be
adequate shall be determined by the Division, based on the completed and signed
Notice of Intent to Develop (NID), as required in the guidelines, and either a
pre-study conference or documented correspondence between the county and the
developer. The Division shall use the guidelines to adopt a reasonable study
area based on sound traffic engineering knowledge of the site and the
surrounding area. Upon finalization of the study area or scope, the Division
shall make this documentation available to the public on the county website.
Any disputes regarding study area or scope, whether raised prior to or after
the adoption of a study area, shall be resolved by the Planning Commission.
      (1)   All freeway and expressway mainlines and the uninterrupted flow
portion of ramps shall be exempt from the requirements herein.
      (2)   All other roads and intersections in the county shall be subject to
the requirements herein.
   (B)   Review of the TIA shall be the responsibility of the Division or its
designee. The Division will determine if the TIA adequately and accurately
examines the existing roads and intersections within the identified study area
or scope and determine if the TIA meets the provisions of this chapter, the
Guidelines, and the policies of the Division. Upon acceptance of the TIA, the
Division shall provide the completed documentation to the Planning Commission
and make a copy available to the public on the county website.
   (C)   The TIA shall be prepared for the design hours, which are defined as
the peak hours which will be most affected by the proposed development; i.e.,
any combination of a.m., mid-day, p.m., evening, weekend peak hour of the
adjacent street, or peak hour of the generation by the land use as determined
by the Division. The TIA shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Vehicle trip generation by the proposed development and traffic
expected to be generated by approved development in the study area as outlined
in the guidelines and as determined by the Division. The latest edition of the
ITE "Trip Generation Manual" shall be used unless specifically applicable rates
are identified in or permitted by the guidelines;
      (2)   LOS capacity analysis of all required roadway corridors,
intersections and links for existing conditions and specified intermediate and
future conditions with and without the proposed development as delineated in
the guidelines;
      (3)   In cases where traffic safety is identified as an issue by the
County, Sheriff's Office, or Maryland Department of Transportation State
Highway Administration (MDOT SHA), reported traffic crashes for the last 3
years for which data is available;
      (4)   Transportation improvements currently fully funded for construction
in the most recent CIP or CTP by or before the year of expected completion of
the project or project phase, assuming the project buildout criteria in §
1-20-8;
      (5)   Other improvements approved and permitted by the county, state or a
municipality, or under construction, with a certification by that agency that
construction is likely to be completed concurrent with the opening of the
development project; and
      (6)   Any other information that may reasonably be required by the
Division to effectively evaluate the road network or application.
   (D)   All TIAs shall use the analysis procedures and methodologies set forth
in the guidelines.
   (E)   Using methodologies specified in the guidelines, the following level
of service criteria shall be met to determine road adequacy.
      (1)   For developments which are expected to generate greater than 100
total vehicle trips during the highest daily peak hour of the adjacent street
traffic, then:
         (a)   Signalized intersections and roundabouts will be considered
adequate if a LOS "D" or better is maintained.
         (b)   All other roadway links, unsignalized intersections and
corridors, when required by the Division, based on sound traffic engineering
principles, will be considered adequate if a LOS "D" or better is maintained,
or mitigation is provided in accordance with the guidelines.
      (2)   For developments which are expected to generate 100 or fewer total
vehicle trips during the highest daily peak hour of the adjacent street
traffic, then:
         (a)   Signalized intersections and roundabouts located within
designated growth boundaries in the County Comprehensive Plan will be
considered adequate if a LOS "E" or better is maintained.
         (b)   Signalized Intersections and roundabouts located outside of
these growth areas shall be considered adequate if a LOS "D" or better is
maintained.
         (c)   All other roadway and ramp links, unsignalized intersections and
corridors when required by the Division, based on sound traffic engineering
principles, shall be determined to be acceptable if a LOS "D" or better is
maintained or mitigation is provided in accordance with the guidelines.
      (3)   Upon sufficient justification by the applicant, the Planning
Commission may modify the mitigation standard specified in paragraph (1) above,
and apply the standard specified in paragraph (2). In making such decision, the
Planning Commission must determine that the following criteria have been met:
         (a)   Regularly scheduled public transportation is available in the
immediate area impacted by the proposed development; and
         (b)   The proposed location of the development is within designated
growth boundaries in the County Comprehensive Plan.
      (4)   For land uses resulting in seasonal or irregularly scheduled
special events or activities, which will generate relatively large amounts of
traffic, generally not impacting the peak hour of the adjacent streets,
adequacy may be determined by review of a traffic management plan (TMP), if
required by the Division. The projected number of vehicle trips for each
special event, the classification and character of the roads which will be
utilized to transport vehicles to and from the event, and the number of days
per year the event will be held, shall be considered. The TMP shall be in
accordance with the guidelines and supplement the specific standards set forth
in subsections (B) and (C) above, as determined by the Planning Commission. In
the event the facility would also contain permanent regular uses, in addition
to special events, the regular peak period uses of the facility must be
reviewed and comply with all parts of this article.
   (F)   Master plan bicycle and/or pedestrian facilities, as well as any
sidewalks, shall be constructed or improved if these facilities are either non-
existent or deemed inadequate by the Division. The Planning Commission may
approve a fee-in-lieu of an improvement if justified by the Developer.
   (G)   If the road facilities are determined to be inadequate to accommodate
the traffic flow projected by the TIA, the preliminary plan or site plan
approval shall be denied, except as provided for in §
1-20-10.
   (H)   Transportation facilities necessary to mitigate inadequacies shall be
determined by the Planning Commission after reviewing the entire record,
including the TIA, TMP, safety considerations, sight distance, horizontal
curvature, vertical grades, roadway section, structural adequacy of roads and
bridges, bike and pedestrian needs, and MDOT SHA comments; and improvements,
when justified to support or complement the development, or mitigate its
impacts, may be provided by the developer as prescribed in §
1-20-12.
   (I)   A development shall be responsible only for the construction of
roadway improvements that mitigate those trips that will be generated by the
development.
   (J)   If the development provides full mitigation (construction or fair
share contribution to escrow accounts as required under the LOU or DRRA) of
APFO road improvements for a development within the APFO approval period, the
APFO road approval shall be vested for the capacity created by the improvements
and shall not be subject to further APFO roadway testing unless there is an
increase in site trips or a significant redistribution of site traffic because
of a change in land use or increase in site density, as defined in the
guidelines.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 01-13-287, 6, 6-12-2001; Ord. 06-04-400, 1-17-
2006; Ord. 08-03-479, 1-8-2008; Ord. 09-20-524, 7-7-2009; Ord. 11-21-587, 9-6-
2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 22-17, 10-25-2022)
§§ 1-20-32 – 1-20-39. RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY (§§ 1-20-40 — 1-20-49)
Section
   
1-20-40   Thresholds
   
1-20-41   Determination of adequacy
§ 1-20-40. THRESHOLDS.
   This article does not apply to any development served by individual private
wells.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-20-41. DETERMINATION OF ADEQUACY.
   (A)   A public or private community water system shall be considered
adequate if, given existing connections, future connections from buildings
under construction, recorded lots for which allocations have been made and
multi-year tap agreements:
      (1)   The source facilities, storage tanks and local pumping stations
have sufficient available capacity to provide maximum day demand to the
proposed development and meet peak hour demand in addition to fire flow; and
      (2)   The distribution system is capable of providing normal required
pressure as well as minimal residual pressure to the proposed development. It
should be noted that water taps are not guaranteed for the project until such
taps are purchased or a multi- year tap agreement has been executed between the
county and developer.
   (B)   A public or private community water system may also be considered
adequate if improvements to or construction of facilities necessary to comply
with standards established in subsection (A) are scheduled in the first 2 years
of the CIP. However, where improvements to or construction of facilities
necessary to comply with subsection (A) are in the first 2 years of the CIP and
are developer-funded, no other proposed development may utilize the capacity
created by the developer-funded improvements or facilities to determine
adequacy under this article until the improvements or facilities are completed,
subject to subsection (E) of this section. If only a portion of the
improvements or facilities in the first 2 years of the CIP are developer-
funded, that portion of the improvements or facilities may not be used to
determine adequacy of any other proposed developments until the improvements or
facilities are completed, subject to subsection (E).
   (C)   If a public or private water system is found to be inadequate, site
plan, PUD or MXD Phase II or preliminary subdivision approval shall be denied
except as provided for in §
1-20-10.
   (D)   Improvements necessary to meet the standards herein shall be
determined by the Planning Commission and may be provided by the developer as
allowed for in §
1-20-11.
   (E)   Upon completion of construction of APFO public or private community
water improvements for a development, the APFO water approval shall be vested
for the capacity created by the improvements and shall not be subject to
further APFO water testing unless the density or intensity of the development
increases.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 00-19-261, 7-11-2000; Ord. 06-04-400, 1-17-
2006; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§§ 1-20-42 – 1-20-49. RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: SEWERAGE FACILITIES (§§ 1-20-50 — 1-20-59)
Section
   
1-20-50   Thresholds
   
1-20-51   Determination of adequacy
§ 1-20-50. THRESHOLDS.
   This article does not apply to development served by private septic systems.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-20-51. DETERMINATION OF ADEQUACY.
   (A)   The sewerage system shall be considered adequate if, given existing
connections, future connections from buildings under construction, recorded
lots for which allocations have been made and multi-year tap agreements, the
systems designed to serve the proposed development are sufficient to
accommodate ultimate peak flows. It should be noted that sewer taps are not
guaranteed for the project until such taps are purchased or a multi-year tap
agreement has been executed between the county and developer.
   (B)   The sewerage system may also be considered adequate if improvements to
or construction of facilities necessary to comply with standards established in
subsection (A) are scheduled in the first 2 years of the CIP. However, where
improvements to or construction of facilities necessary to comply with
subsection (A) are in the first 2 years of the CIP and are developer-funded, no
other development may utilize the capacity created by the new or improved
facilities to determine adequacy under this article until the improvements or
facilities are completed, subject to subsection (E) of this section. If only a
portion of the improvements or facilities in the first 2 years of the CIP are
developer-funded, then that portion of the improvements or facilities may not
be used by any other development to determine adequacy under this article until
the improvements or facilities are completed, subject to subsection (E).
   (C)   If a sewerage system is found to be inadequate, site plan, PUD or MXD
Phase II or preliminary subdivision approval shall be denied except as provided
for in §
1-20-10.
   (D)   Improvements necessary to meet the standards herein shall be
determined by the Planning Commission and may be provided by the developer as
allowed for in §
1-20-11.
   (E)   Upon completion of construction of APFO sewerage system improvements
for a development, the APFO sewerage approval shall be vested for the capacity
created by the improvements and shall not be subject to further APFO sewerage
system testing unless the density or intensity of the development increases.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 00-19-261, 7-11-2000; Ord. 06-04-400, 1-17-
2006; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014)
§§ 1-20-52 – 1-20-59. RESERVED.
ARTICLE VI: SCHOOLS (§§ 1-20-60 — 1-20-62)
Section
   
1-20-60   Thresholds
   
1-20-61   Determination of adequacy
   
1-20-62   School construction fee option
§ 1-20-60. THRESHOLDS.
   This article applies only to residential development.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 06-04-400, 1-17-2006; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-20-61. DETERMINATION OF ADEQUACY.
   (A)   Scope. All public elementary, middle and high schools serving the
proposed subdivision shall be adequate.
   (B)   APFO test data.
      (1)   The Frederick County Public Schools will publish actual enrollment
data for the last school day of September, December, March and June and the
state rated capacity for each elementary and secondary school. Adequacy of
every elementary, middle and high school serving the proposed development shall
be determined as of the APFO test date, using the most recent quarterly
enrollment data published by the Frederick County Public Schools. If approval
has not been received from the Planning Commission within 6 months of the APFO
test date, the most recent quarterly school enrollment data must be utilized by
the Commission for APFO review unless a delay occurs not attributable to the
applicant.
      (2)   Pupil generation rates shall be determined using the formulas
adopted by the Frederick County Public Schools and shall reflect the
characteristics of the school attendance area within which the proposed
development is located. Pupil yield from the proposed development shall be pro-
rated over the number of years for which APFO approval is sought. State rated
capacities and pupil generation rates approved for use by the Frederick County
Public Schools shall be used in all calculations.
   (C)   Adequacy testing. Schools shall be considered adequate if the
enrollment for each school serving the development is less than 100% of state-
rated capacity during the entire period for which APFO approval is granted by
the Planning Commission. School adequacy shall be determined based on:
      (1)   Background enrollment growth, extrapolated over the number of years
for which APFO approval is requested;
      (2)   Projected enrollment growth, including pupils anticipated to be
generated by "approved developments", as defined in §
1-20-5(B);
      (3)   Pupils anticipated to be generated by the proposed development
using pupil generation rates adopted by the Frederick County Public Schools;
      (4)   Actual capacity expected to be provided by new schools and school
additions scheduled for construction in the first 2 years of the CIP (provided
that the CIP project and the proposed development are located within the same
school attendance boundaries, including areas where redistricting boundaries
have been approved) after taking the factors listed above in (C)(1), (2) and
(3) into account; and
      (5)   Other enrollment data, trends and factors, including phasing in of
new school capacity, that may impact the capacity of the schools serving the
proposed development, as determined by the BOE or its designee.
   (D)   Procedure. County staff shall send a written request to the BOE or its
designee, requesting a school adequacy test, and specifying: (1) the number of
years for which the development should be tested; (2) the number and types of
residential units to be tested; and (3) data concerning the approved
developments in the school attendance areas that should be factored into the
test. The BOE or its designee shall forward its school adequacy test results to
county staff for presentation to the Planning Commission. After consideration
of the school adequacy test results at a public meeting, the Planning
Commission shall determine whether the proposed development meets the school
adequacy requirements in this Article VI.
   (E)   Request to redistrict. If a school is not adequate as defined in §
1-20-61(C) and an adjoining school district at the same level is at least 20%
below state rated capacity, then the applicant may request the Frederick County
Board of Education (BOE) to determine the viability of redistricting to
accommodate the new development. If the BOE determines that redistricting is a
viable alternative, and the BOE approves a specific redistricting plan that
would result in all the schools serving the proposed development meeting the
standards established in §
1-20-61(C), then the schools shall be considered adequate.
   (F)   Denial. If a school is not adequate and the BOE has not approved a
specific redistricting plan that would result in the school meeting the
standards established in §
1-20-61(C), then the preliminary subdivision, PUD or MXD Phase II or site plan
approval shall be denied, except as allowed for in §
1-20-10.
   (G)   Mitigation. Improvements necessary to meet the standards herein shall
be determined by the Planning Commission and may be provided by the developer
as allowed for in §
1-20-11.
   (H)   New school or addition. If a new school or school addition is required
to be wholly or partially funded by a developer in order for a proposed
development to obtain APFO approval under §
1-20-11 of this article, and if the new school or school addition is approved
by the BOE:
      (1)   The portion of the school capacity funded by the developer and
required for APFO approval for the development may not be utilized by any other
development to obtain APFO approval until the expiration of the APFO approval
period for the development that funded the school improvements.
      (2)   Upon the completion of construction of the new school or school
addition, the development that funded the school improvements shall not be
subject to further APFO testing for the school level at which the developer-
funded improvements were provided (elementary, middle or high school) unless
the density or intensity of the development increases.
   (I)   School renovations.
      (1)   For the purposes of determining adequacy under this section, the
available capacity of a school which is completely or partially closed for
renovation shall be the percentage of the school state- rated capacity
available and certified for use by the Board of Education or designated FCPS
staff. One hundred percent of the available state-rated capacity of the school
under renovation shall be considered to be available 6 months prior to the
expected renovation completion date as certified by the Board of Education or
designated FCPS facilities staff.
   (2)   For the purposes of determining adequacy under this section, the
available capacity of a school which is being utilized to serve students from
another school which is under renovation shall be the percentage of the school
state-rated capacity available and certified for use by the Board of Education
or designated FCPS staff. One hundred percent of the available state-rated
capacity of the school shall be considered to be available 6 months prior to
the expected renovation completion date as certified by the Board of Education
or designated FCPS facilities staff.
   (J)   Multifamily residential developments.
      (1)   A multifamily residential development may retain its APFO school
adequacy approval if the multifamily residential development satisfies both of
the following requirements:
         (a)   The Planning Commission has previously granted both site plan
and APFO approvals for the multifamily residential development; and
         (b)   Prior to expiration of APFO approval, the developer has recorded
in the land records a plat of the multifamily residential development property
that includes a note indicating the following information, on which the
Planning Commission approval was based:
            (i)   The number and type of multifamily dwelling units approved,
and
            (ii)   The total number of students projected to be generated by
the multifamily residential development.
      (2)   The County Attorney's office must approve the language of the plat
note described in subsection (J)(1)(b) prior to plat recordation.
      (3)   The Planning Commission may approve a change in the number and type
of multifamily dwelling units, so long as the total number of students
projected to be generated by the revised multifamily residential development
does not exceed the total number of students stated in the plat note described
in subsection (J)(1)(b).
      (4)   Recordation of a plat in accordance with this subsection shall not
prevent site plan expiration.
(Ord. 98-03-205, 3-17-1998; Ord. 00-19-261, 7-11-2000; Ord. 06-04-400, 1-17-
2006; Ord. 08-14-490, 6-3-2008; Ord. 09-19-523, 7-7-2009; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-
2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-20-62 SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION FEE OPTION.
   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply only to those developments
approved to use the school construction fee option, as documented by an APFO
Letter of Understanding or development rights and responsibilities agreement
(DRRA) fully executed by the developer and the county on or prior to July 20,
2016. No new developments may choose to use the school construction fee option
after July 20, 2016.
   (B)   School construction fees shall be paid in addition to, and not in lieu
of, public school development impact fees under
Chapter 1-22 of the Frederick County Code.
   (C)   If a development has not entered into a DRRA with the county but was
approved to use the school construction fee option prior to July 20, 2016 by a
fully executed APFO Letter of Understanding, and if that APFO Letter of
Understanding has expired, the development may apply for APFO re-testing and
mitigate school capacity by using the school construction fee option, provided
that all of the following requirements are met as of the APFO Test Date:
      (1)   The total size of the development is equal to or less than 60
dwelling units;
      (2)   More than 50% of the dwelling units in the development are built
out and have certificates of occupancy;
      (3)   The total number of projected students upon re-testing does not
exceed ten, including all school levels;
      (4)   No school serving or proposed to serve the development exceeds 120%
of State Rated Capacity, taking into account actual capacity expected to be
provided by new schools and school additions scheduled for construction in the
first two years of the CIP;
      (5)   All public roads in the development have been built to county
standards and accepted by the county for public maintenance; and
      (6)   All unplatted lots remaining in the development must be included in
the APFO re-testing in accordance with this subsection. A development may not
submit piecemeal applications for re-testing portions of an uncompleted
development.
   (D)   The APFO Letter of Understanding and any DRRA for the development
shall incorporate provisions for payment of the school construction fees.
   (E)   School construction fees due to the county shall be listed on the
Department of Permits and Inspections fee schedule.
   (F)   School construction fees shall be paid at the time of recording of
subdivision plats for each unit, except for multi-family units, which shall be
paid not later than the time of building permit application. The school
construction fees to be applied to each residential unit shall be the fees in
effect at the time of plat recordation or building permit application.
   (G)   Annual adjustment. On July 1, 2021, and on July 1 of each year
thereafter in which the school construction fee is in effect, the amount of the
school construction fee per dwelling unit and school level, shall be adjusted
annually as follows:
      (1)   On or before January 15, 2021, and on or before January 15 of each
year thereafter, the county executive shall provide to the County Council a
report which proposes an annual adjustment to the school construction fee. The
adjustment shall be calculated by taking into account the most recent data from
the State of Maryland School Construction Cost Index. For purposes of this
calculation, the "State of Maryland School Construction Cost Index" shall be
the statewide per-square-foot school building and site development cost as
established and adjusted annually by the State of Maryland interagency
committee on school construction.
         (a)   The annual adjustment to the school construction fee may also
include changes to other factors and data components in the fee calculations.
         (b)   A component of the fee calculation is the pupil yield rate,
which is the average number of pupils expected to be generated per housing unit
type and school level. Whenever possible, the pupil yield rates used in the fee
calculation shall be the pupil yield rates calculated for the developments
currently paying the school construction mitigation fee. Otherwise, the pupil
yield rates used in the fee calculation shall be the pupil yield rates
calculated for developments of similar location and composition.
      (2)   The proposed annual adjustment shall take effect on July 1, the
first day of the fiscal year immediately following receipt of the report,
unless the County Council enacts a bill that takes effect on or before June 30
of the same year as the report, to change or maintain the current school
construction fee.
   (H)   School Construction Fee Account.
      (1)   A School Construction Fee Account is hereby established.
      (2)   All school construction fees that the county collects shall be
deposited into the School Construction Fee Account.
      (3)   The School Construction Fee Account shall be interest bearing.
      (4)   All interest earned on monies deposited to this account shall be
credited to and shall be considered funds of the account.
      (5)   The county shall establish and implement necessary accounting
controls to ensure that the school construction fee funds are properly
deposited, accounted for, and appropriated in accordance with this chapter, and
any other applicable legal requirements.
      (6)   The county may appropriate funds from the School Construction Fee
Account for:
         (a)   Public school facility expenditures as defined in §
1-20-5(B), and
         (b)   The payment of principal, interest and other financing costs on
contracts, bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the
county or other applicable local governmental entities to finance public school
facility expenditures.
      (7)   The Finance Division shall document each appropriation from the
School Construction Fee Account.
   (I)   The payment of the school construction fee or the obligation to pay
the school construction fee under the terms of an APFO Letter of Understanding
or DRRA shall not satisfy the public school adequacy requirement for any other
development served by the same school or schools as the proposed development.
   (J)   Upon payment of all school construction fees applicable to the
proposed development, the development shall not be subject to further testing
for school adequacy under the APFO for the duration of the APFO approval period
under the DRRA or APFO Letter of Understanding, unless the density or intensity
of the development increases.
(Ord. 11-18-584, 7-19-2011; Ord. 12-14-609, 6-19-2012; Ord. 14-15-670, 9-23-
2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-05, 4-5-2016; Bill No. 16-09, 8-
30-2016; Bill No. 20-16, 12-15-2020; Bill No. 21-03, 5-18-2021)
CHAPTER 1-21: FOREST RESOURCES
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 1-21-1 — 1-21-19)
Section
   
1-21-1   Title
   
1-21-2   Authority
   
1-21-3   Jurisdiction
   
1-21-4   Intent
   
1-21-5   Definitions
   
1-21-6   Applicability and general requirements
   
1-21-7   Exemptions
   
1-21-8   Declaration of intent
   
1-21-9   Frederick County Forest Conservation Technical Manual
   
1-21-10   Protective agreements
§ 1-21-1. TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Forest Resource Ordinance of
Frederick County, Maryland.” The acronym “FRO” may be used to refer to the
forest resource ordinance.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-2. AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is established in accordance with the provisions of Md. Code
Ann., Natural Resources Article, § 5-1603. The requirements of this chapter are
supplementary to other laws and regulations in Frederick County. Where this
chapter or any portion thereof imposes a greater restriction than is imposed by
other regulations, the provision of this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-21-3. JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all unincorporated lands
within the territorial limits of the county and within the corporate limits of
those municipalities that have assigned their obligations to Frederick County
in accordance with Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources Article, § 5-1603.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-4. INTENT.
   This chapter is adopted with the intent that new development in the county
take place in such a way that the conservation, protection and planting of
trees to produce forested areas will help accomplish the following:
   (A)   Stabilization of soil by the prevention of erosion and sedimentation;
   (B)   Reduction of stormwater runoff and the potential damage it may create;
   (C)   Removal of pollutants from the air and water and assistance in the
generation of oxygen;
   (D)   Creation of buffers and screens against noise pollution;
   (E)   Control of drainage and restoration of denuded soil subsequent to
construction or grading;
   (F)   Creation of protected environments for birds and other wildlife;
   (G)   Sustainable production of timber and other forest products resulting
in an economic benefit derived from woodland products;
   (H)   Creation of shade and shelter for people, thus mitigating heat
islands;
   (I)   Protection and enhancement of property values;
   (J)   Conservation and enhancement of the county’s physical and aesthetic
appearance; and
   (K)   Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens
of Frederick County.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-5. DEFINITIONS.
   AFFORESTATION. The establishment of forest cover on an area from which it
has always or very long been absent, or the planting of open areas that are not
presently in forest cover.
   AFFORESTATION THRESHOLD. The percentage of a net tract area up to which
establishment of forest is required if the existing forest area is less than
the threshold, as determined by the land use category.
   AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY. Farming activities, including plowing, tillage,
cropping, installation of best management practices, seeding, cultivating, and
harvesting for production of food and fiber products (except commercial logging
and timber harvesting operations), the grazing and raising of livestock,
aquaculture, sod production, orchards, nursery, and other products cultivated
as part of a recognized commercial enterprise.
   AGRICULTURAL AND RESOURCE AREAS. Areas within Frederick County zoned
Resource Conservation or Agriculture.
   APPLICANT. A person who is applying for subdivision, or site plan, or
project plan approval; or a grading or sediment and erosion control permit; or
who has received approval of a forest stand delineation or forest conservation
plan, and who has ownership interests in the property.
   APPROVED FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN. A document:
      (1)   Approved by the Department of Natural Resources Project forester
assigned to the county in which the property is located; and
      (2)   That operates as a protective agreement for forest conservation as
described in Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources Article, § 5-1607(E).
   BASAL AREA. The total cross-sectional area of trees per unit area, which may
be measured using a plotless method such as “basal-area-factor-prism,” or may
be calculated from the “diameter-at breast- height” measurements of all trees
within a plot.
   CALIPER. The diameter of a tree measured at 2 inches above the root collar.
   CHAMPION TREE. The largest tree of its species within the United States, the
state, county, or municipality, as listed in an established register of big
trees.
   CLEAR-CUT. A timber harvest operation that results in the complete or nearly
complete removal of trees from a forested area, leaving the stumps and root
mass intact.
   CLEARING. The complete removal of trees from a forested area, including the
removal of stumps and part or all of the root mass.
   COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL AREAS. Areas within Frederick County zoned Village
Center, Commercial, Highway Services, General Commercial, Office Research
Industrial, Limited Industrial or General Industrial.
   COMMERCIAL LOGGING OR TIMBER HARVESTING OPERATIONS. The cutting and removing
of tree stems from a site for purposes other than personal use of the owner,
leaving the root mass intact.
   CONSERVATION THRESHOLD. The percentage of the net tract area at which the
reforestation requirement changes from a ratio of one- quarter acre planted for
every 1 acre removed, to a ratio of 2 acres planted for every 1 acre removed,
which varies by the land use category.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY COUNCIL. County Council of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY EXECUTIVE. County Executive of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY GOVERNING BODY. County Council and County Executive of Frederick
County, Maryland.
   CRITICAL HABITAT FOR ENDANGERED SPECIES. A habitat occupied by an endangered
species as determined or listed under Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources Article,
§§ 4-2A-04 and 10-2A-04.
   CRITICAL HABITAT AREA. A critical habitat for endangered species and its
surrounding protection area. A critical habitat area shall:
      (1)   Be likely to contribute to the long-term survival of the species;
      (2)   Be likely to be occupied by the species for the foreseeable future;
and
      (3)   Constitute habitat of the species that is considered critical under
Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources Article, §§ 4-2A-04 and 10-2A-06.
   CUTTING. The felling of a tree or trees above the root collar, leaving the
stump and root mass intact.
   DECLARATION OF INTENT. A signed and notarized statement by a landowner
certifying that the activity on the subject property:
      (1)   Is for purposes exempted under this chapter or Md. Code Ann.,
Natural Resources Article, §§ 5-1601 through 5-1612; and
      (2)   Will not circumvent the requirements of this chapter or Md. Code
Ann., Natural Resources Article, §§ 5-103 and 5-1601 through 5-1612.
   DEPARTMENT. The Frederick County Division of Planning and Permitting, and
any successor to this division.
   DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES. The Maryland State Department of Natural
Resources.
   DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.
      (1)   Any subdivision, including agricultural-zoned remainders of less
than 25 acres; or
      (2)   When no subdivision is proposed, the area of grading and
construction activities occurring on 1 or more contiguous tracts under the
ownership or control of the same person, that together comprise 40,000 square
feet or greater, or a site plan having a net tract area 40,000 square feet or
greater, or a site plan that generates a forest mitigation requirement of 250
square feet or greater.
   DEVELOPMENT PROJECT COMPLETION.
      (1)   The release of the financial guarantee for the development project,
if required;
      (2)   Acceptance of the project streets, utilities and public services by
the county; or
      (3)   Designation by the Department that a particular stage of a staged
development project has been completed.
   FLOODPLAIN. All those areas described in the Frederick County Zoning
Ordinance, §
1-19-9.100, as amended, including the 100 year floodplain.
   FOREST. A biological community dominated by trees and other woody plants
covering a land area of 10,000 square feet or greater, and not less than 35
feet in width.
      (1)   FOREST includes:
         (a)   Areas that have at least 100 trees per acre with at least 50% of
those trees having a 2 inch or greater diameter at 4.5 feet above the ground;
and
         (b)   Areas that have been cut, but not cleared.
      (2)   Forest does not include orchards or active Christmas tree farms.
   FOREST CONSERVATION. The retention of existing forest or the creation of new
forest at the levels set by the county.
   FOREST CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT. An agreement as stated in the
Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property Article, § 8-211.
   FOREST CONSERVATION PLAN. A plan that has been approved by the Department
pursuant to Articles III and IV of this chapter and that follows specification
and standards in the TECHNICAL MANUAL.
   FOREST COVER. The area of a site meeting the definition of FOREST.
   FOREST IMPROVEMENTS. All requirements for protecting, planting, maintaining,
and enhancing forest, trees, and shrubs as shown on an approved FOREST
CONSERVATION PLAN.
   FOREST IMPROVEMENTS AND PROTECTION AGREEMENT (FIPA). The management
agreement associated with forest improvements required under Md. Code Ann.,
Natural Resources Article, § 5-1605.
   FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN. A plan establishing best conservation and management
practices for a landowner in development of the resource values of forested
property.
   FOREST STAND DELINEATION. The forest data for a development project that
utilizes methodology for evaluating the existing vegetation as provided in the
TECHNICAL MANUAL.
   FORESTATION. AFFORESTATION or REFORESTATION, as defined in this section.
   FORESTED SLOPE. An area meeting the definition of forest and growing on an
area with a slope of 25% or more and covering an area of at least 10,000 square
feet.
   FREDERICK COUNTY FOREST CONSERVATION TECHNICAL MANUAL. The State Forest
Conservation Technical Manual, Third Edition, 1997, as it may be amended.
   GROWING SEASON. The period of consecutive frost-free days as stated in the
current soil survey for Frederick County, published by the National Cooperative
Soil Survey Program, 16 U.S.C. 590(a)-(f).
   HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL AREAS. Areas within Frederick County zoned R-3, R-
5, R-8, R-12, R-16, or Mobile Home Park.
   HYDROLOGICALLY-SENSITIVE AREAS. All floodplain area described in the
Frederick County Zoning Ordinance, §
1-19-9.100, as amended, which includes 100 year floodplain and wetlands; any
perennial or intermittent stream; any field-identified spring discharge points;
any bodies of standing water; or any of the buffers described in §
1-19-9.110 of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
   INSTITUTIONAL USE AREA. Schools, colleges and universities, military
installations, transportation facilities, utility and sewer projects,
government offices and facilities, golf courses, recreation areas, parks,
churches, or cemeteries that are permitted in various zoning districts.
   INTERMITTENT STREAM. A stream that has flowing water during certain times of
the year, when groundwater provides water for stream flow. During dry periods,
intermittent streams may not have flowing water. Runoff from precipitation is a
supplemental source of water for stream flow. These streams are identified
through field verification and as approved by the Department. The most recent
county hydrography layer may be used as a guide for the preliminary
establishment of possible watercourses.
   LANDSCAPING PLAN. A plan:
      (1)   Drawn to scale, showing dimensions and details for reforesting an
area at least 35 feet wide and covering 2,500 square feet or greater in size;
      (2)   Using native or indigenous plants when appropriate; and
      (3)   That is made part of an approved forest conservation plan.
   LICENSED FORESTER. A person licensed to practice forestry in the State of
Maryland under Md. Code Ann., Title 7 of the Business Occupations and
Professions Article.
   LINEAR PROJECT. A project whose configuration is elongated with nearly
parallel sides and used to transport a utility product or public service not
otherwise contained in an application for subdivision, such as electricity,
gas, water, sewer,  communications, trains, and vehicles. LINEAR PROJECTS may
traverse fee simple properties through defined boundaries or through easement
rights.
   LOCAL AGENCY. Each unit in the executive branch of the county or municipal
government, including the Community Development Division.
   LOT. A parcel of land, where the boundaries have been established by deed
descriptions or established as a result of a previous addition or subdivision
of a larger parcel, and that will not be the subject of further subdivision, as
defined by Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources Article, § 5-1601 and this chapter
without an approved forest stand delineation and forest conservation plan.
   MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL AREAS. Areas within Frederick County zoned R-1 or
areas within Agriculture or Resource Conservation cluster developments.
   MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT. Areas within Frederick County zoned Planned Unit
Development (PUD) or Mixed Use Development (MXD).
   MODIFICATION. Relief from this chapter; it does not mean a zoning variance.
   NATURAL REGENERATION. The natural establishment of trees and other
vegetation with at least 400 woody, free-to-grow seedlings per acre, which are
capable of reaching a height of at least 20 feet at maturity.
   NET TRACT AREA. The total area of a tract or development project, including
both forested and nonforested areas, to the nearest one one-hundredth acre,
reduced by the following areas:
      (1)   Rights-of-way established for public roads and public utilities
existing prior to the effective date of this chapter;
      (2)   Permanent, surface water bodies;
      (3)   Floodplain that is not to be developed may also be exempted, at the
discretion of the applicant; and
      (4)   In Agriculture and Resource Conservation zones, and as provided in
§
1-21-41(C)(2), the areas of land use that will not be changed or intensified in
land use.
   NONHAZARDOUS TREE. A tree that is not considered unsafe due to 1 of the
following:
      (1)   A combination of a structural defect and a target:
         (a)   A structural defect that predisposes the tree to failure, in
whole, or in part, including, but not limited to: large basal cavity, trunk
rot, cracks, breaks, splits, unusual branching structure, improper pruning and
top-heavy conditions;
         (b)   A target, such as a structure, road, walkway, campsite or other
area where human occupation or pedestrian activity is likely to occur;
      (2)   Interference with routine activities of people or built structures,
such as, but not limited to, obstructing motorists’ vision, raising sidewalks,
attracting lightning, and disrupting utilities.
   NONTIDAL WETLANDS.
      (1)   An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal conditions
does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
      (2)   An area considered a nontidal wetland in accordance with the
publication known as the “Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands,” published in 1987 and as may be amended and
interpreted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
   OFF-SITE. Areas outside of the net tract area or the development project.
   ON-SITE. The area within the net tract area or the development project.
   PERENNIAL STREAM. A stream that has flowing water year-round during a
typical year. The water table is located above the streambed for most of the
year. Groundwater is the primary source of water for stream flow. Runoff from
precipitation is a supplemental source of water for stream flow. These streams
are identified through field verification and as approved by the Department.
The most recent county hydrography layer may be used as a guide for the
preliminary establishment of possible watercourses.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a building or grading permit has been issued.
   PERSON. The federal government, the state, a county, municipal corporation,
or other political subdivision of the state, or any of their units, or an
individual, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator, fiduciary, or
representative of any kind, or any partnership, firm, association, public or
private corporation, or any of their affiliates, or any other entity.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. Areas within Frederick County zoned Planned Unit
Development (PUD) or Mixed Use Development (MXD).
   PRIORITY AREAS. Areas listed in §
1-21-40(B)(1), that are most highly valued for conservation or forestation, and
that take precedence over other areas for conservation or forestation purposes.
   PRIORITY FUNDING AREA. An area designated as a priority funding area under
Md. Code Ann., Finance and Procurement Article, § 5-7B-02 .
   PROJECT PLAN. A construction, grading or sediment control activity on an
area of 40,000 square feet or greater by a local agency.
   PUBLIC UTILITY.
      (1)   The transmission lines and the electric generating stations
licensed under Md. Code Ann., Public Utilities Article, §§ 7-204, 7-205, 7-207,
and 7-208; and
      (2)   Water, sewer, electric, gas, and telephone service lines.
   REFORESTATION. The planting of trees and/or shrubs to replace forest that
has been or is proposed
to be removed; the creation of a biological community dominated by trees and
other woody plants containing at least 100 trees per acre with at least 50% of
those trees having the potential of attaining a 2 inch or greater diameter
measured at 4.5 feet above the ground, within 7 years; and includes landscaping
of areas under an approved landscaping plan establishing a forest at least 35
feet wide and covering 2,500 square feet of area.
   REGULATED ACTIVITY. Any of the following activities:
      (1)   Subdivision;
      (2)   Site plan development;
      (3)   Grading;
      (4)   An activity that requires a sediment and erosion control permit; or
      (5)   Project plan of a local agency.
   RETENTION. The deliberate holding and protecting of existing trees, shrubs
or plants on the site according to established standards as provided in the
TECHNICAL MANUAL.
   SEDIMENT CONTROL PERMIT. The authorization of an activity regulated under a
sediment control plan as provided in Md. Code Ann., Environment Article, Title
4.
   SEEDLING. An unbranched woody plant, less than 24 inches in height and
having a caliper of less than one-half inch.
   SELECTIVE CLEARING. The careful and planned removal of trees, shrubs, and
plants using specific standards and protection measures under an approved
FOREST CONSERVATION PLAN.
   SITE PLAN. A development plan as defined in and required by the Frederick
County Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 1-19.
   SPECIMEN TREE. A tree having diameter measured at 4.5 feet above the ground
of:
      (1)   Thirty inches or greater; or
      (2)   Seventy-five percent of the diameter of the current state, county,
or municipal champion tree of that species as designated by the Department of
Natural Resources, or the county, or the applicable municipality.
   STANDARD FOREST DENSITY. A forest that has at least 100 trees per acre with
at least 50% of those trees having a 2 inch or greater diameter at 4.5 feet
above the ground.
   STREAM BUFFER. All lands lying within 50 feet, measured from the top of each
normal bank of a perennial or intermittent stream.
   STREAM RESTORATION PROJECT. An activity that:
      (1)   Is designed to stabilize stream banks or enhance stream function or
habitat located within an existing stream, waterway, or floodplain;
      (2)   Avoids and minimizes impacts to forests and provides for replanting
on-site a number of trees that is equivalent to the number removed by the
project;
      (3)   May be performed under a municipal separate storm sewer system
permit, a watershed implementation plan growth offset, or another plan
administered by the state or local government to achieve or maintain water
quality standards; and
      (4)   Is not performed to satisfy stormwater management, wetlands
mitigation, or any other regulatory requirement associated with proposed
development activity.
   SUBDIVISION. A division of a parcel of land into 2 or more lots or parcels,
including agricultural- zoned remainders less than 25 acres, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, sale, lease, or
development.
   TECHNICAL MANUAL. The State Forest Conservation Technical Manual, Third
Edition, 1997, as it may be amended, and other specifications and standards of
performance as provided in this chapter and in supporting documents issued by
the department.
   TIMBER HARVESTING. A tree-cutting operation affecting 1 or more acres of
forest or developed woodland within a 1 year interval that disturbs 5,000
square feet or more of forest floor; does not include grubbing and clearing of
root mass.
   TRACT. Property subject to an application for a grading or sediment and
erosion control permit or a site plan or subdivision approval. Within a Planned
Unit Development or Mixed Use Development project, TRACT means the entire land
area subject to a planned unit development, which may be divided into smaller,
staged projects with a defined point of completion for each stage.
   TREE. A large, woody plant having 1 or several self-supporting stems or
trunks and numerous branches that reach a height of at least 20 feet at
maturity.
   TREE SAVE AREA. Areas described in §
1-21-44(A)(2).
   WHIP. An unbranched woody plant greater than 24 inches in height and having
a caliper of less than 1 inch.
   WORKSHEET. The official set of data calculated to the nearest one-hundredth
acre, defining the size of the net tract area together with the required forest
calculations prepared in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-
2008; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 13-18-646, 9-
26-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-17, 2-28-2018; Bill No. 20-08,
7-21-2020)
§ 1-21-6. APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as provided in §
1-21-7, this chapter applies to property for which an application is being made
for:
   (A)   A subdivision;
   (B)   A grading or sediment and erosion control permit for an area
comprising 40,000 square feet or greater;
   (C)   A public utility development project not exempt under §
1-21-7 that clears 40,000 square feet or more of forest;
   (D)   A site plan development project with a net tract area 40,000 square
feet or greater; or
   (E)   A site plan development project with a net tract area less than 40,000
square feet that generates a forest mitigation requirement of 250 square feet
or greater; or
   (F)   Construction of a single-family house on a single lot of record as of
December 31, 1992, if the activity results in the clearing or grading of 20,000
square feet or greater of forest.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 08-22-498, 8-6-
2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-17, 2-28-2018)
§ 1-21-7. EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to:
   (A)   Construction activities under Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources
Article, § 5-103 (highway construction);
   (B)   Commercial logging and timber harvesting operations, including
harvesting conducted subject to the forest conservation and management program
under Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property Article, § 8-211, on land that:
      (1)   Will not be the subject of application for a subdivision, site
plan, or grading or sediment and erosion control permit for development within
5 years after the logging or harvesting operation; and
      (2)   Is the subject of a declaration of intent approved by the
Department on a form approved by the Department;
   (C)   Agricultural activities not resulting in a change in land use
category, including agricultural support buildings and other related structures
built using accepted best management practices; however, a person engaging in
an agricultural activity clearing 40,000 square feet or more of forest within a
1 year period, who wishes to receive an agricultural exemption, shall file a
declaration of intent with the Department that shall include:
      (1)   A statement that the landowner, their agent, successors or assigns
will practice agriculture on that tract for 5 years from the date of the
declaration; and
      (2)   A scaled sketch map or aerial photograph of the tract that shows
the area to be cleared;
   (D)   The cutting or clearing of public utility rights-of-way or land for
electric generating stations pursuant to Md. Code Ann., Public Utilities
Article, §§ 7-204, 7-205, 7-207, and 7-208; provided that:
      (1)   Required certificates of public convenience and necessity have been
issued in accordance with Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources Article, § 5-1603
(F); and
      (2)   Cutting or clearing of the forest is conducted to minimize the loss
of forest;
   (E)   Routine maintenance of public utility rights- of-way;
   (F)   Construction of a single-family house on a single lot of record as of
December 31, 1992, of any size, if the activity:
      (1)   Does not result in the clearing or grading of 20,000 square feet or
greater of forest;
      (2)   Does not result in the clearing or grading of a forest that is
subject to the requirements of a previous forest conservation plan prepared
under this chapter;
      (3)   Is the subject of a declaration of intent approved by the
Department; provided however, if the lot has less than 20,000 square feet of
forest, then the declaration of intent is not required; and
      (4)   Is not being done pursuant to a site plan or subdivision plat;
   (G)   Strip or deep mining of coal regulated under Md. Code Ann.,
Environment Article, Title 15, Subtitle 5 or 6;
   (H)   Noncoal surface mining regulated under Md. Code Ann., Environment
Article, Title 15, Subtitle 8;
   (I)   Activities required for the purpose of constructing a dwelling unit
intended for the use of the owner; or a child of the owner, in any zoning
district if the activity:
      (1)   Does not result in the clearing or grading of more than 20,000
square feet of forest; and
      (2)   Is the subject of a declaration of intent approved by the
Department;
   (J)   A real estate transfer to provide a security, leasehold, or other
legal or equitable interest, including a transfer of title, of a portion of a
lot or parcel, if:
      (1)   The transfer does not involve a change in land use, or new
development or redevelopment, with associated land-disturbing activities; and
      (2)   A declaration of intent is approved by the Department;
   (K)   Non-commercial selective cutting of individual trees or other plant
material in order to reduce susceptibility to pests or disease, to eliminate
dead, dying or hazardous trees, or to eliminate non- native, invasive plant
species or to accomplish non- commercial timber stand improvement according to
the prescriptions of a forest management plan prepared by a licensed forester.
   (L)   Any stream restoration project for which the applicant for a grading
or sediment control permit has executed a binding maintenance agreement of at
least 5 years with the affected property owner. The activity must meet the
following criteria:
      (1)   Is designed to stabilize stream banks or enhance stream function or
habitat located within an existing stream, waterway, or floodplain;
      (2)   Avoids and minimizes impacts to forests and provides for replanting
on-site a number of trees that is equivalent to the number removed by the
project;
      (3)   May be performed under a municipal separate storm sewer system
permit, a watershed implementation plan growth offset, or another plan
administered by the state or local government to achieve or maintain water
quality standards; and
      (4)   Is not performed to satisfy stormwater management, wetlands
mitigation, or any other regulatory requirement associated with proposed
development activity.
   (M)   Maintenance or retrofitting of a stormwater management structure that
may include clearing of vegetation or removal and trimming of trees, so long as
the maintenance or retrofitting is within the original limits of disturbance
for construction of the existing structure, or within any maintenance easement
for access to the structure.
   (N)   Previously developed areas covered by impervious surface and located
in priority funding areas at the time of the application for subdivision plan,
grading, or sediment control permit approval.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 09-26-530, 9-29-
2009; Ord. 13-18-646, 9-26-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-8. DECLARATION OF INTENT. 
   (A)   In general.
      (1)   The purpose of the declaration of intent is to verify that the
proposed activity is exempt under Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources Article, §§
5-103 and 5-1601 through 5-1612 and this chapter, and to bind the applicant to
the conditions agreed therein.
      (2)   A person seeking an exemption under §
1-21-7(B), (C), (F), (I), or (L) of this chapter shall file a declaration of
intent with the Department.
      (3)   The declaration of intent shall be approved by the Department and
shall be effective for 5 years.
   (B)   Multiple exempted activities. The existence of a declaration of intent
does not preclude another exempted activity on the property subject to a
declaration of intent, if the activity:
      (1)   Does not conflict with the purpose of any existing declaration of
intent; and
      (2)   Complies with the applicable requirements for an exempted activity.
   (C)   Violations. If a regulated activity on the area covered by the
declaration of intent occurs within 5 years of the effective date of the
declaration of intent:
      (1)   There shall be an immediate loss of exemption; and
      (2)   There may be a noncompliance action taken by the Department, as
appropriate, under this chapter.
   (D)   Allowable regulated activities. An applicant may apply for a regulated
activity on that area of the property not covered under the declaration of
intent if the requirements of this chapter are satisfied.
   (E)   Required mitigations for violations. The Department may require a
person failing to file a declaration of intent or found in noncompliance with a
declaration of intent to:
      (1)   Meet the retention and forestation requirements established in
Articles III and IV of this chapter;
      (2)   Pay a noncompliance fee of up to $1 per square foot of forest cut
or cleared contrary to the declaration of intent;
      (3)   Be subject to other enforcement actions appropriate under Md. Code
Ann., Natural Resources Article, §§ 5-1601 through 5-1612 and this chapter; or
      (4)   File a declaration of intent with the Department.
   (F)   Knowing violations. In its determination of appropriate enforcement
action, the Department may consider whether failure to file a declaration of
intent by a person required to file is a knowing violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-9. FREDERICK COUNTY FOREST CONSERVATION TECHNICAL MANUAL.
   (A)   Designation. The State Forest Conservation Manual, Third Edition,
1997, as it may be amended, shall serve as the Frederick County Forest
Conservation Technical Manual, hereafter referred to as “Technical Manual.”
   (B)   Purpose. The technical manual shall be used to establish
specifications and standards of performance required in preparing and
implementing forest stand delineations and forest conservation plans required
by this chapter. In the case of disagreement between the technical manual and
this chapter, the terms of this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-10. PROTECTIVE AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Short term protective agreement.
      (1)   The applicant shall execute a Forest Improvements and Protection
Agreement (“FIPA”) that guarantees completion of the forest improvements shown
in the final forest conservation plan.
      (2)   The applicant shall be subject to a FIPA for a period of not less
than 2 complete growing seasons for projects that contain only existing forest,
or 1" or 2" caliper tree plantings. The applicant shall be subject to a FIPA
for a period of not less than 3 complete growing seasons for projects that
contain any seedling, whip, tubling or 1-5 gallon container plantings, or any
natural regeneration areas.
      (3)   The applicant shall provide and keep in effect a financial
guarantee for the entire effective period of the FIPA, as provided in §
1-21-25. Release of the guarantee shall be as described in §
1-21-25.
      (4)   The FIPA shall comply with COMAR 08.19.05.01.
      (5)   The FIPA shall be submitted on a form prepared by the Department.
   (B)   Long term protective agreements.
      (1)   For all forest shown as “retention” in order to satisfy
conservation requirements described in §
1-21-40, and for all planting areas shown as forestation in order to satisfy
either §
1-21-41 (afforestation) or §
1-21-42 (reforestation), an applicant shall be required to subject these areas
to a perpetual forest deed of easement, otherwise known as “Forest Resource
Deed of Easement/Maintenance Covenants and Agreement.”
      (2)   The grantee shall be Frederick County, Maryland, or in the case of
incorporated towns, a municipal governing body, as determined by the respective
town.
      (3)   The areas of forest subject to deed protection shall be described
by a graphic metes and bounds by a licensed Maryland surveyor.
      (4)   The deed shall include use restrictions prepared by the Department,
known as “Forest Resource Inspection and Maintenance Covenants and Agreement.”
      (5)   The deed shall comply with COMAR 08.19.05.02.
      (6)   A title opinion letter shall accompany submission of the deed of
easement described in subsection (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   Forest conservation and management agreements. In addition to a long
term protective agreement as described in subsection (B) of this section,
application for a forest conservation and management agreement (“FCMA”) through
the Department of Natural Resources is encouraged for all private owners of FRO
easement areas 5 acres or greater, who wish to use the area for productive
woodland purposes under an approved management plan. The FCMA would be subject
to the benefits and obligations provided in Md. Code Ann., Tax-Property
Article, § 8-211 and COMAR 08.07.03.03.
(Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-17, 2-28-
2018)
§§ 1-21-11 – 1-21-19. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: ADMINISTRATION (§§ 1-21-20 — 1-21-29)
Section
   
1-21-20   Administrative agencies designated
   
1-21-21   Modifications
   
1-21-22   Amendments
   
1-21-23   Review fees
   
1-21-24   Fee-in-lieu-program
   
1-21-25   Guarantees for forest improvements
   
1-21-26   Annual report
   
1-21-27   Biennial review by the Maryland Department of Natural Resources
   
1-21-28   Penalties and enforcement
   
1-21-29   Forest banking program
§ 1-21-20. ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES DESIGNATED.
   (A)   Division of Planning and Permitting ("Department").
      (1)   The review of all required plan submissions shall be administered
by the Frederick County Division of Planning and Permitting (“Department”). The
Department shall also administer the fee-in-lieu program and the forest banking
program.
      (2)   All applications, maps, and documents relative to plan submissions
subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be submitted to the Department,
which will have a fully qualified professional either on staff or under
contract to review all information and to present the relevant information and
the Department’s recommendations to the Frederick County Planning Commission.
      (3)   The Department may refer the subdivision plan, site or development
plan or grading or sediment and erosion control permit to any county agency or
any other agency it deems appropriate for their review, comments or
recommendations pertaining to the forest resources. These recommendations shall
be considered by the Planning Commission in making its decision.
      (4)   The Department inspectors shall administer all required financial
guarantees and any Forest Improvement and Protection Agreements (FIPAs)
required by this chapter. A Department inspector will administer field checks
of all required forest improvements and may issue penalties and citations for
noncompliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Frederick County Planning Commission.
      (1)   Approval of the preliminary and final forest conservation plans
shall rest with the Frederick County Planning Commission (“FCPC”). The
Department may also approve these plans as agents of the FCPC, in the case of
minor subdivisions, final plats, site plans, and grading or sediment and
erosion control permits.
      (2)   The FCPC shall accept county agency and public comments and
consider these comments as part of the record and its decision making process.
   (C)   Treasurer’s office and Department of Finance. Any funds collected or
held under this chapter shall be deposited with the Treasurer for Frederick
County and accounted for by the Department of Finance.
   (D)   County Attorney’s office. The County Attorney’s office shall review
for legal sufficiency all:
      (1)   Protective agreements described in §
1-21-10; and
      (2)   All legal agreements described in §
1-21-29.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 17-17, 2-28-2018)
§ 1-21-21. MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Modification requests. A person may submit a request to the Frederick
County Planning Commission (FCPC) for a modification from this chapter or the
requirements of Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources Article, §§ 5-1601 through 5-
1612, if the person demonstrates that enforcement would result in unwarranted
hardship to the person.
   (B)   Required information. An applicant for a modification shall:
      (1)   Describe the special conditions peculiar to the property that would
cause the unwarranted hardship;
      (2)   Describe how enforcement of these rules will deprive the landowner
of rights commonly enjoyed by others in similar areas;
      (3)   Verify that the granting of the modification will not confer on the
landowner a special privilege that would be denied to other applicants;
      (4)   Verify that the modification request is not based on conditions or
circumstances that are the result of actions by the applicant;
      (5)   Verify that the request does not arise from a condition relating to
land or building use, either permitted or nonconforming, on a neighboring
property; and
      (6)   Verify that the granting of a modification will not adversely
affect water quality.
   (C)   Modification approval. The FCPC must make a finding that the applicant
has met the requirements in subsection (B) of this section and that enforcement
would cause the applicant unwarranted hardship before the FCPC may approve any
modification.
   (D)   State of Maryland notice. Notice of a request for a modification shall
be given to the Maryland State Department of Natural Resources (“Department of
Natural Resources”) within 15 days of receipt of a request and prior to the
FCPC’s consideration of the request. The Department of Natural Resources shall
also be notified of the hearing date, place and time.
   (E)   State authority. There is established by this chapter the right and
authority of the Department of Natural Resources to initiate or intervene in an
administrative, judicial or other original proceeding or appeal in the state
concerning an approval of a modification under Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources
Article, §§ 5-1601 through 5-1612 or this chapter.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-22. AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Amendment authority. The county governing body may amend the
provisions of this chapter if the county governing body determines that any
such amendment will be in the best interest of the citizens of the county and
consistent with the general intent of this chapter and Md. Code Ann., Natural
Resources Article, §§ 5-1601 through 5-1612. Proposals for an amendment may be
initiated by the county governing body.
   (B)   Amendment procedures. Proposed amendments shall be filed with the
Department for review and comment. The Department comments shall be referred to
the Planning Commission and county governing body for their consideration. The
Planning Commission shall meet in public session on the proposed amendments and
shall submit its recommendations or comments to the county governing body. The
County Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment and shall
render a decision within 60 days of the public hearing, unless such time is
extended by an official resolution adopted by the County Council.
   (C)   Appropriate notice. Notice of the time and place of the public
hearing, together with a summary of the proposed amendment shall be published
in at least 1 newspaper of general circulation in the county once each week for
2 successive weeks, with the first such publication of notice appearing at
least 14 days prior to the hearing.
   (D)   State authority. All amendments to this chapter are subject to the
approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-08-448, § 7, 4-3-2007; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-
19-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-23. REVIEW FEES.
   The county governing body shall have the authority to establish by
resolution fees for services related to the implementation of this chapter, but
in no event shall the fee charged be more than the costs incurred by the
county.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-24. FEE-IN-LIEU PROGRAM.
   (A)   Creation and administration. There is hereby created a Frederick
County Forest Conservation Fund that shall be referred to as “fee-in- lieu
program,” and which shall accept payments known as “fee-in-lieu payments.” The
Department shall administer the fee-in-lieu program.
   (B)   Application. An applicant required by §§
1-21-41 or
1-21-42 of this chapter to conduct forestation may make a payment to the fee-
in-lieu program in an amount established by resolution of the county per square
foot of the area of required planting upon determination by the Department,
based on the applicant’s demonstration, that forestation or forest mitigation
cannot reasonably be accomplished by the applicant on-site or off-site, as
provided in §
1-21-40.
   (C)   Timing of payment. Money contributed in lieu of forestation under this
section shall be paid prior to the release of building, grading, or sediment
and erosion control permits, or prior to recordation of subdivision plats,
whichever is earlier.
   (D)   Expenditure of fees.
      (1)   The county shall expend or encumber the fee-in-lieu money in
accordance with subsection (2) and (3) below.
      (2)   Money contributed under this section:
         (a)   May be used for forestation, including site identification,
acquisition, preparation, and maintenance; for maintenance of existing forests
that are protected by a long term protective agreement as defined in this
chapter; and for achieving urban canopy goals;
         (b)   Shall be deposited in a separate fee-in-lieu account; and
         (c)   Shall not revert to the General Fund and shall not be used to
administer the forest banking program, but may be used to purchase forest
banking credits.
      (3)   Sites for forestation using fee-in-lieu money will be sought in the
county and watershed in which the original project is located. If this cannot
be reasonably achieved, the monies may be used to accomplish forestation
anywhere in the county or the state or to buy forest banking credits.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 09-26-530, 9-29-2009; Ord. 11-19-585, 7-28-
2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-17, 2-28-2018)
§ 1-21-25. GUARANTEES FOR FOREST IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Required guarantees. Persons required to conduct forest improvements
and maintenance thereof under this chapter shall furnish to the Department for
its approval a cost estimate (plus 15% contingency) for the completion of the
required improvements under the Forest Improvement and Protection Agreement
(FIPA). If the cost estimate equals or exceeds $1,000, the applicant shall
provide to the county a financial guarantee in the form of a cash escrow, an
irrevocable letter of credit, or other surety approved by the County Executive
and the County Attorney’s office. The guarantee shall be retained by the county
to assure that the forest improvements under the FIPA are conducted and
maintained in accordance with this chapter and the approved final forest
conservation plan.
   (B)   Return of guarantees.
      (1)   To be eligible for partial or full return or release of financial
guarantees, a substantial amount of living seedlings/trees must exist in forest
easement areas for the duration of the FIPA maintenance period. The
determination of "substantial amount of living seedlings/trees" shall be made
by Department inspectors, with consideration of the stocking and survival rates
prescribed in §
1-21-43(D) and (E). The seedlings/trees must meet or exceed the standards of
the technical manual, or this chapter, whichever applies.
      (2)   For development projects requiring a 2-year FIPA (per §
1-21-10) the following provisions shall apply:
         (a)   For projects requiring only protective fencing and/or signage,
but no forestation; and for which the required improvements have been erected
by the applicant and approved by Department inspectors, 50% of the financial
guarantee may be returned or released upon approval by the Department
inspectors. If the protective features remain in good repair for the duration
of the forest improvements and protection agreement (FIPA), the remaining 50%
shall be returned or released when the applicant has fulfilled all of the
requirements of the FIPA.
         (b)   For projects requiring 1" or 2" caliper tree planting, 50% of
the financial guarantee may be returned or released after 1 complete growing
season if the conditions of §
1-21-25(B)(1) are met. If after 2 complete growing seasons the conditions of §
1-21-25(B)(1) are met, the balance of the guarantee shall be returned.
      (3)   For development projects requiring a 3-year FIPA (per §
1-21-10):
         (a)   If after 1 complete growing season the required forestation or
regeneration area meets the conditions of §
1-21-25(B)(1), 25% of the amount of any guarantee that has been posted shall be
returned or released;
         (b)   If after 2 complete growing seasons the forestation or
regeneration area meets the conditions of §
1-21-25(B)(1), an additional 25% of the guarantee shall be returned or
released;
         (c)   If after 3 complete growing seasons the forestation or
regeneration area meets the conditions of §
1-21-25(B)(1) the balance of the guarantee shall be returned or released.
      (4)   For projects containing existing forest retention, forestation, or
a combination of retention and forestation, 50% of the financial guarantee
requirement for tree planting, fencing, and signage may be waived if the
following conditions are met prior to the submittal of the required protective
agreements outlined in §
1-21-10;
         (a)   Tree planting, fencing, and signage is installed in accordance
with the approved forest conservation plan, and
         (b)   The installation of trees, fencing, and signage is inspected and
approved by the Department inspectors, and
         (c)   A copy of the inspection report is supplied with the submittal
of the protective agreements outlined in §
1-21-10.
      (5)   For projects utilizing the 50% reduction outlined in subsection (4)
above;
         (a)   For development projects requiring a 2-year FIPA (per §
1-21-10), the financial guarantee shall be returned or released when the
applicant has fulfilled all of the requirements of the FIPA. Partial releases
during the FIPA period are not permitted.
         (b)   For development projects requiring a 3-year FIPA (per §
1-21-10) the financial guarantee shall be returned or released when the
applicant has fulfilled all of the requirements of the FIPA. Partial releases
during the FIPA period are not permitted.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 11-19-585, 7-28-
2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-26. ANNUAL REPORT.
   On or before March 1 of each year, the Department shall submit to the
Department of Natural Resources a report on the previous year’s actions under
this chapter containing the following data:
   (A)   Number, location, and type of projects subject to the provisions of
this chapter;
   (B)   Amount and location of acres cleared, conserved, and planted in
connection with all development projects;
   (C)   Amount of forestation fees and noncompliance penalties collected and
expended;
   (D)   Forest mitigation bank data, as follows:
      (1)   Size and location of bank sites approved;
      (2)   Number of acres debited from each bank site; and
      (3)   List of bank sites inspected; and
   (E)   Costs of administering the Forest Resource Ordinance, including the
fee-in-lieu program.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-27. BIENNIAL REVIEW BY THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES.
   The Department shall submit the necessary documentation to comply with COMAR
08.19.02.04.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-28. PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Noncompliance penalties under this chapter.
      (1)   A person found to be in noncompliance with this chapter, the
associated forest conservation plan, the long-term protective agreement, or the
FIPA shall be assessed by the Department inspectors a penalty in an amount
established by resolution of the county governing body per square foot of the
area found to be in noncompliance with required forest conservation or
planting.
      (2)   Money collected under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be
deposited in the fee-in-lieu program and may be used by the county for purposes
related to implementing forest improvements.
   (B)   Violations. In addition to the provisions under subsection (A), a
person who violates any provision of this chapter is liable for a penalty not
exceeding $1,000 per violation, which may be recovered in a civil action
brought by the Department.
   (C)   Duration of violation. Each day a violation continues is a separate
violation.
   (D)   Complaints. The Department inspectors shall receive complaints and
initiate enforcement procedures when violations are confirmed. Any complaint
received shall be acted upon routinely within 3 days, and the complainant shall
be notified of any action or proposed action routinely within 7 days of receipt
of the complaint.
   (E)   Procedure for investigation.
      (1)   When a Department inspector determines that a violation of the
approved plan has occurred, the inspector shall notify the on-site personnel or
the permittee in writing of the violation, describe the required corrective
action and the time period in which to have the violation corrected.
      (2)   If the violation persists after the date specified for corrective
action in the notice of violation, the Department inspector shall stop work on
that site. The Department inspector shall determine the extent to which work is
stopped, which may include all work on the site except that work necessary to
correct the violation.
      (3)   If reasonable efforts to correct the violation are not undertaken
by the permittee, the Department inspector shall refer the violation for legal
action.
      (4)   The Department inspector may deny the issuance of any permits to an
applicant when it determines that the applicant is not in compliance with the
provisions of a building or grading permit or approved erosion and sediment
control plan.
      (5)   Any step in the enforcement process may be taken at any time,
depending upon the severity of the violation.
      (6)   If a person is working without a permit, the Department inspector
shall stop work on the site except activity necessary to provide erosion and
sediment control.
   (F)   Civil infractions.
      (1)   Pursuant to the authority provided in §§
2-2-28 and
2-2-29 of the Frederick County Code, any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is a civil offense and shall be called a civil infraction. If,
after investigation, a civil infraction is believed to exist, the Director of
the Department or an authorized agent shall deliver a citation or a warning to
the property owner and other person or persons responsible for the infraction.
If the person is unable to be located personally, the Director of the
Department or the authorized agent may post the citation or warning in a
conspicuous place on the property and mail a copy of same by registered mail to
the person, which shall be sufficient for delivery under this section.
      (2)   The citation or warning, as provided in this section, shall be in
writing and shall contain the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the person charged (or warned);
         (b)   The nature of the violation;
         (c)   The location of the violation;
         (d)   The date(s) of the violation;
         (e)   The amount of the fine assessed (or possibility of assessment);
         (f)   The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid (or
violation corrected, if applicable);
         (g)   The person’s right to stand trial for the violation (if
applicable); and
         (h)   A certification by the Director of the Department or the
authorized agent attesting to the truth of the matters set forth.
      (3)   Whenever an alleged or possible civil infraction comes to the
attention of the Director of the Department, the procedure to be followed is:
         (a)   That the Director or the agent will investigate whether an
infraction has occurred; and
         (b)   That, if the Director or the agent reasonably finds that an
infraction has occurred, the Director will issue a warning to the person or
persons responsible in the form and manner as outlined in this section, with a
time stated of no more than 10 days to correct the infraction and to prevent
future infractions.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-21-29. FOREST BANKING PROGRAM.
   (A)   Creation and purpose.
      (1)   In general. The Frederick County Forest Banking Program allows a
person to create new forest areas or designate certain existing forest areas to
be held in reserve (or “banked”), in order to be used to meet future
forestation requirements imposed on regulated activities by this chapter.
      (2)   Definitions.
         EXISTING FOREST. Forest that:
            1.   Meets or exceeds the definition of “standard forest density”
provided in §
1-21-5 when the forest banking applicant submits a forest conservation plan; or
            2.   Met or exceeded the standard forest density at any time in the
5 years prior to the submission of the forest conservation plan, and that was
subject to either an agricultural or a commercial forestry declaration of
intent.
         NEW FOREST. Forest newly created on land that does not meet the
definition of “standard forest density” at the time the forest banking
applicant submits a forest conservation plan, and that was not the subject of
forest cutting subject to either  an agriculture or commercial forestry
declaration of intent within the last 5 years.
   (B)   Forest banking areas. Only the following target areas may be admitted
into the forest banking program:
      (1)   New or existing forests that provide buffers for streams, creeks,
floodplains, wetlands or other hydrologically-sensitive areas on lands that
either are zoned Agriculture or in the judgment of the Department are primarily
in bona fide agricultural use, as defined by the Frederick County Zoning
Ordinance,
Chapter 1-19. The extent of the forest buffers acceptable for inclusion in the
forest banking program shall be the largest allowed by the following, unless
otherwise approved by the Department for reasons pertaining to ecological
benefit or improvement:
         (a)   Where floodplain(s) exist, forest buffers shall be limited to 25
feet outside of the floodplain(s).
         (b)   Where no floodplain(s) exist, forest buffers shall be limited to
100 feet in width on each side of a stream bank.
         (c)   Where moderate slopes of 15% or more are immediately adjacent to
hydrologically- sensitive area(s), forest buffers shall be limited to the
extent of the steep slopes within the area that is 200 feet in width on each
side of a stream bank or hydrologically-sensitive area.
         (d)   Where steep slopes of 25% or more are immediately adjacent to
hydrologically- sensitive area(s), forest buffers shall be limited to the
extent of the steep slopes within the area that is 500 feet in width on each
side of a stream bank or hydrologically-sensitive area.
      (2)   Existing forest that is critical habitat for threatened or
endangered plant or sedentary animal species. Determination of the presence of
threatened or endangered species shall be made by the Department of Natural
Resources.
      (3)   Other areas that are:
         (a)   Water re-charge zones for municipal or county public water
supplies as designated by bona fide hydrological studies, or are listed in §
1-21-40(B) of this chapter;
         (b)   Not owned by a municipality or other local, state or federal
governmental entity;
         (c)   Not otherwise substantially protected by either this chapter or
the Frederick County Zoning Ordinance requirements; and
         (d)   Of such significance that loss of forest or the lack of creation
of forests on such areas would cause a deleterious effect on the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens.
      (4)   For all areas covered under subsection (B)(3), the first 50 acres
shall be credited at a 1:2.5 ratio, as described in subsection (E) of this
section. For all areas that exceed 50 acres, the mitigation ratio shall be 1:4,
meaning that for every 1 acre of required forestation, 4 acres of off-site,
existing forest must be protected and conserved. In no case shall the total
acres of such an application exceed 200 acres.
      (5)   All applications under this subsection (B) shall provide
substantial protection of substantially all of the target areas on a parcel or
a set of contiguous parcels owned by the applicant, unless otherwise approved
by the Department or the Planning Commission for reasons pertaining to
ecological benefit or improvement, other hydrological protection measures
implemented by other governmental programs, accommodation of existing farm
buildings and residences, or drinking water access for grazing animals. The
requirements of "substantial protection" shall be determined by the Department.
Applications that offer protection of only unserviceable or unusable areas for
inclusion in the banking program, but omit other substantial target areas, such
as stream buffers, within a subject parcel or set of contiguous parcels owned
by the applicant, shall not be accepted into the banking program.
   (C)   Administration. The Department shall administer the forest banking
program, review for approval all forest conservation plans, and keep records of
all forest banking sites and any transfers of forest bank credits from one
person to another. The Department shall review and have the authority to
approve all credit transfers for compliance with forest banking area
requirements. The Department shall perform all site inspections as required
herein, and as described in §
1-21-20, and shall administer required financial guarantees associated with
approved forest conservation plans.
   (D)   Conditions of approval. For a potential forest banking site to be
accepted into the Frederick County Forest Banking Program, all the conditions
set forth below must be satisfied.
      (1)   Forest conservation plan. The forest banking applicant shall submit
a forest conservation plan for review and approval by the Department.
      (2)   Standards and specifications.
         (a)   To create “new forest,” the applicant must follow forestation
specifications and standards provided in the technical manual or this chapter,
including (but not limited to) species selection, control of exotic species,
and stocking/survival ratios.
         (b)   For approval of “existing forest,” the applicant must
demonstrate that the forest ecosystem is in a healthy condition, or provide
remedial measures to bring the forest into a healthy condition, such as
providing eradication measures to control invasive, exotic species.
      (3)   Legal documents and financial guarantees. The applicant shall
execute and submit to the Department all necessary documents and financial
guarantees as follows:
         (a)   A long-term protective agreement, as described in §
1-21-10;
         (b)   A short-term protective agreement (a Forest Improvements and
Protection Agreement (FIPA)), as described in §
1-21-10 and any associated, required financial guarantee, as described in §
1-21-25; and
         (c)   A forest banking agreement that describes the rights and
obligations of the banking applicant with regard to the forest easement credit
transfers.
      (4)   Site inspection. Before the Department approves a transfer or use
of forest banking credits, the Department shall verify from the Department
inspector’s site review that the conditions of the approved final forest
conservation plan have been met with regard to establishment of protective
features and planting specifications; and that any:
         (a)   “Existing forest” meets the definition of “standard forest
density,” or is covered by an acceptable financial guarantee, as provided in §
1-21-25;
         (b)   “New forest” has been planted, and either:
            1.   Has matured to meet the definition of “standard forest
density;” or
            2.   Is covered by an acceptable FIPA and a financial guarantee, as
provided in §
1-21-25; has been planted in accordance with the final forest conservation
plan; and has been inspected and approved by Department inspectors.
      (5)   Financial agreements. Any financial agreements between persons
regarding approved forest bank transfers shall occur solely as a private
transaction. Neither the Department nor the county shall become a party to the
financial aspects of any transfers.
      (6)   Official notification of credit transfer. Both the grantor and
grantee of any forest credit transfer shall notify the Department in writing of
the agreement to transfer forest credit using forms approved by the Department.
   (E)   Credit ratios. Forest bank transfers of:
      (1)   “Existing forest” shall be credited at a 1:2.5 ratio, meaning that
for every 1 acre of required forestation, 2.5 acres of existing forest must be
acquired;
      (2)   “New forest” shall be credited at a 1:1 ratio, meaning that for
every 1 acre of required forestation, only 1 acre of new forest must be
acquired.
   (F)   Species diversity requirements. The acres of existing forest combined
with new forest shall meet the species diversity requirements stipulated in §
1-21-43(B)(2).
(Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 11-19-585, 7-28-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 17-17, 2-28-2018)
ARTICLE III: PLAN REQUIREMENTS (§§ 1-21-30 — 1-21-39)
Section
   
1-21-30   Plans in general
   
1-21-31   Forest stand delineation
   
1-21-32   Forest conservation plans in general
   
1-21-33   Preliminary forest conservation plan
   
1-21-34   Final forest conservation plan
§ 1-21-30. PLANS IN GENERAL.
   (A)   Plan applications. Applicants shall submit all plans on department-
approved application forms and applicable fees. Applications shall be valid for
3 years after submission. Thereafter, the applicant must resubmit with new
application forms and fees.
   (B)   Period of validity. Subject to the limitations of the forest stand
delineation approval period outlined in §
1-21-34(C), all forest conservation plans approved and signed by department
representatives shall be valid for a period of 5 years or the duration of the
adequate public facilities approval for the development project, whichever is
greater, unless vested by execution of the short-term protective agreement
described in §
1-21-10(A) and the long-term protective agreement described in §
1-21-10(B).
   (C)   Required submissions and permitted combinations.
      (1)   Three sequential submissions are required:
         (a)   A forest stand delineation (FSD);
         (b)   A preliminary forest conservation plan (PFCP); and
         (c)   A final forest conservation plan (FFCP), which includes any
required legal documents and financial guarantees for forest retention or
forest improvements.
      (2)   The first 2 submissions (the FSD and PFCP) may be submitted
simultaneously as a combined submission for all activities regulated under this
chapter.
      (3)   For:   
         (a)   All minor subdivisions;
         (b)   Site plan projects that comprise not more than 50 acres; and
         (c)   Grading or sediment and erosion control permits that comprise
not more than 50 acres,
      (4)   All 3 forest plan submissions may be submitted as a “combined
delineation and preliminary/final forest conservation plan.” A “combined
delineation and preliminary/final forest conservation plan” shall contain all
requirements of the FSD, PFCP, and FFPC.
   (D)   Specifications and standards. All forest stand delineations and all
preliminary and final forest conservation plans shall follow specifications and
standards of performance as provided in the technical manual and as provided in
this chapter, with respect to protecting retained forests and trees during
construction, and with respect to planting trees, shrubs, and new forest areas.
In the case of conflict, this chapter prevails over the technical manual.
   (E)   Requirements of plan preparers.
      (1)   Except as noted below in this subsection, licensed foresters,
licensed landscape architects, or qualified professionals who meet the
requirements stated in COMAR 08.19.06.01 must prepare all required forest stand
delineations and all preliminary and final forest conservation plans.
      (2)   Maryland licensed surveyors or other individuals, who by a
combination of relevant work experience and education meet the general level of
expertise as expressed in COMAR 08.19.06.01, as determined by the Department,
may prepare required forest plans for:
         (a)   All minor subdivisions; and
         (b)   Site plan projects and major subdivisions that:
            1.   Do not require a full forest stand delineation as determined
by the technical manual standards; and
            2.   Comprise not more than 50 acres.
      (3)   All persons may submit simplified forest stand delineations,
worksheets, and forest conservation plans for site plan or subdivision
development projects, provided that:
         (a)   The submissions are accompanied by a site plan or subdivision
plan prepared in accordance with the zoning or subdivision ordinances, as
appropriate;
         (b)   There is no existing forest or shrub cover on the subject tract;
         (c)   The tract does not include any priority areas; and
         (d)   The applicant proposes to mitigate any forestation requirements
through either the forest banking program or the fee-in-lieu program.
      (4)   All persons, including the applicant, may submit information
showing that this chapter does not apply to certain development projects or
that a project is exempt under §§
1-21-6 or
1-21-7 of this chapter.
   (F)   Use of state funds. If a local agency or person using state funds
makes application to conduct a regulated activity, the provisions of COMAR
08.19.04.01 D-G, shall apply.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 08-22-498, 8-6-
2008; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-19-585, 7-28-2011; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-
27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-31. FOREST STAND DELINEATION.
   (A)   Timing of submissions.
      (1)   A forest stand delineation (“FSD”) shall be used during the initial
review process to determine the most suitable and beneficial areas for forest
conservation. Except as provided in subsection (A)(2) of this section, an FSD
shall be submitted simultaneously with the first submission of a development
project, whether it be a MXD, PDR, or PDE Phase I Plan, a PUD Phase II Plan, a
cluster concept plan, a co-housing plan, preliminary subdivision plan, a site
plan, or a grading permit application, but before a sediment and erosion
control application is submitted for the tract or development project in
question.
      (2)   Exceptions:
         (a)   Septic testing. In subdivisions classified for individual well
and septic service, an applicant may submit for septic percolation testing
simultaneously with a partial FSD showing the existing forest canopy line and
other environmental features required by the Frederick County Subdivision
Ordinance (
Chapter 1-16) or Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 1-19), provided that the applicant shall:
            1.   Protect all historic, champion, and specimen trees; habitats
for threatened and endangered species; and hydrologically-sensitive areas
during the septic testing process;
            2.   Not remove 40,000 square feet or greater of forest; and
            3.   Submit normal FSD information that includes forest canopy
conditions prior to removal for septic testing, before proceeding beyond septic
testing.
         (b)   Survey lines. A licensed surveyor may cut trees if necessary to
see property or other required survey information, provided that the applicant
shall:
            1.   Protect all historic, champion, and specimen trees; habitats
for threatened and endangered species; and hydrologically-sensitive areas
during surveying; and
            2.   Submit normal FSD information if 40,000 square feet or greater
of forest area is cut, even if no development project is proposed.
         (c)   Geotechnical testing. An applicant may perform geotechnical
testing with a partial FSD showing the existing forest canopy line and other
environmental features required by the Frederick County Subdivision Ordinance (
Chapter 1-16) or Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 1-19), provided that the applicant shall:
            1.   Protect all historic, champion, and specimen trees; habitats
for threatened and endangered species; and hydrologically-sensitive areas
during the testing process;
            2.   Not remove 20,000 square feet or greater of forest; and
            3.   Before proceeding beyond testing, submit normal FSD
information that includes forest canopy conditions as they were prior to
removal for testing; and
            4.   Submit a forest conservation plan and provide mitigation for
the forest removal activity.
   (B)   Required information, in general.
      (1)   The FSD shall be prepared at 1 of 3 levels, namely, “full,”
“intermediate,” or “simplified.” The criteria for determining which level
applies to a development project and the requirements for each level shall be
governed by the technical manual, unless this chapter provides otherwise.
      (2)   All FSDs shall contain the following components:
         (a)   A topographic map delineating intermittent and perennial streams
and steep slopes over 25%;
         (b)   A soils map delineating soils with structural limitations,
hydric soils, or soils with a soil K value (erodibility factor) greater than
0.35 on slopes of 15% or more;
         (c)   Forest stand maps at an appropriate level of detail (as listed
in subsection (B)(1) of this section) based upon the criteria set forth in the
technical manual or this chapter, whichever is more stringent;
         (d)   One hundred year floodplains as described in the flood insurance
rate maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and all
floodplains listed in the Frederick County Zoning Ordinance, §
1-19-9.100, as amended, verified by field inspection;
         (e)   Locations of exotic, invasive plant infestation;
         (f)   Locations of historic, champion, and specimen trees; and
         (g)   Other information the Department determines is necessary to
implement this chapter.
   (C)   Effective period. An approved FSD is presumed to remain valid for a
period of 5 years absent significant change to the site. The Department may re-
approve an FSD for an additional period of time.
   (D)   Review deadline.
      (1)   Within 30 calendar days after receipt of the forest stand
delineation (FSD), the Department shall notify the applicant at its regularly
scheduled Technical Advisory Committee meeting or by mail as to whether the FSD
is complete and correct. If the applicant is not notified, the FSD shall be
treated as complete and correct.
      (2)   The Department may require further information or extend its time
for review and notification for an additional 15 calendar days under
extenuating circumstances.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-
2010; Ord. 11-19-585, 7-28-2011; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-17, 2-28-2018)
§ 1-21-32. FOREST CONSERVATION PLANS IN GENERAL.
   (A)   Conservation priority. In developing a forest conservation plan, the
applicant shall follow the forest retention and forestation priorities as
provided in §
1-21-40.
   (B)   Demonstration of compliance with forest priorities. If existing on-
site forest is not proposed to be retained, the applicant shall demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Department:
      (1)   How techniques for forest retention have been exhausted;
      (2)   Why the priority areas specified in §
1-21-40(B) and in Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources Article, § 5-1607(c)(2)
cannot be left in an undisturbed condition, including:
         (a)   How the sequence for forestation will be followed in compliance
with Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources Article, § 5-1607; and
         (b)   Where on the tract or development project priority area
forestation will occur in compliance with Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources
Article, § 5-1607.
      (3)   How the disturbance to the priority forests and priority areas
specified in §
1-21-40(B) and in Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources Article, § 5-1607(c)(1)
qualifies for a modification.
   (C)   Fee-in-lieu. If an applicant proposes to make a payment into the fee-
in-lieu program instead of on-site forestation, then the applicant shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Department that the requirements for
forestation cannot be reasonably accomplished on-site or off-site, including
the acquisition of credits through the forest banking program.
   (D)   Nontidal wetlands. A regulated activity within the net tract area that
occurs wholly or partly in areas regulated as nontidal wetlands under Md. Code
Ann., Environment Article, §§ 5-901 through 5-911 and COMAR 26.23.01 through
26.03.06 is subject to both the nontidal wetlands regulatory requirements and
the requirements of this chapter, subject to the following.
      (1)   Any area of forest in the net tract area, including forest in
nontidal wetlands that is retained, shall be counted towards forest
conservation requirements under this chapter.
      (2)   For the purpose of calculating reforestation mitigation under this
chapter, a forested nontidal wetland permitted to be cut or cleared and
required to be mitigated under COMAR 26.23.04 shall be shown on the forest
conservation plan and subtracted on an acre-for-acre basis from the total
amount of forest to be cut or cleared as part of a regulated activity.
      (3)   Nontidal wetlands shall be considered to be priority areas for
retention and replacement.
      (4)   Forested nontidal wetland identification and delineation should be
included at the earliest stage of planning to assist the applicant in avoidance
and reduction of impacts to the nontidal wetlands and to avoid delay in the
approval process.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 09-26-530, 9-29-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-21-33. PRELIMINARY FOREST CONSERVATION PLAN.
   (A)   Timing of submissions. A preliminary forest conservation plan (“PFCP”)
shall be submitted along with the forest stand delineation with the first of
the following submitted for the site:
      (1)   A Phase II for a PUD or MXD;
      (2)   A residential cluster or co-housing concept plan;
      (3)   A preliminary subdivision plan;
      (4)   An application for a grading or sediment and erosion control
permit; or
      (5)   A site plan.
   (B)   Required information, in general. The PFCP shall contain the following
data:
      (1)   A map of the site drawn at the same scale as the grading,
subdivision plan or site plan;
      (2)   A table of acreage calculations that shows required forest
conservation and forestation, in the form of the worksheet provided in the
technical manual, or as approved by the Department;
      (3)   A clear graphic indication of the forest conservation provided on
the site, showing areas where retention of existing forest or forestation is
planned;
      (4)   When applicable, a forestation plan prepared by a qualified
professional, with a description of tree and/or shrub species, size, and
spacing to be used;
      (5)   The planned limits of disturbance;
      (6)   The types of protective devices to be used; and
      (7)   Other information the Department determines is necessary to
implement this chapter.
   (C)   Review period. The PFCP shall be reviewed concurrently by the
Department with the review of a Phase II Plan for a PUD or MXD; a residential
cluster or co-housing plan; preliminary subdivision plan or site plan; or
grading or sediment and erosion control permit, whichever is applicable.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-
2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-17, 2-28-2018)
§ 1-21-34. FINAL FOREST CONSERVATION PLAN. 
   (A)   Timing of submissions.
      (1)   A final forest conservation plan (“FFCP”) shall be submitted
simultaneously with or prior to the following, whichever is submitted first:
         (a)   A final subdivision plat; or
         (b)   An application for a grading or sediment and erosion control
permit.
      (2)   All applicable legal documents (including short term and long term
protective agreements) must be submitted and fully executed prior to lot
recordation for subdivision projects and prior to grading permit release for
all site plan or grading permit projects.
   (B)   Review period.
      (1)   Within 45 calendar days after receipt of the final forest
conservation plan (FFCP), the Department shall notify the applicant whether the
FFCP is complete. If the applicant is not notified, the FFCP shall be treated
as complete and correct.
      (2)   The Department may require further information and extend its time
for review and notification for an additional 15 calendar days under
extenuating circumstances.
      (3)   The Department shall review the FFCP concurrently with the review
of the final subdivision plan or the grading or sediment and erosion control
permit associated with the subject development project.
   (C)   Required information, in general. The FFCP shall contain the
following:
      (1)   A map of the site drawn at the same scale as the grading or
sediment and erosion control permit application drawings, site plan, or final
subdivision plat;
      (2)   All the information required under §§
1-21-31,
1-21-32 and
1-21-33, and the technical manual;
      (3)   Locations and types of protective devices to be used during
construction activities to protect trees and areas of forest designated for
conservation;
      (4)   A binding forest improvements and protection agreement (FIPA), as
described in §
1-21-10 that details how the areas designated for forestation will be
maintained to ensure protection or satisfactory establishment, including:
         (a)   Watering, fertilizing, mowing and herbicide treatment; and
         (b)   A reinforcement planting provision if survival rates fall below
required standards, as provided in §
1-21-43;
      (5)   A binding long-term protective agreement as specified in §
1-21-10 and COMAR 08.19.05.02 that:
         (a)   Provides protection for areas of forest conservation, including
areas of forestation and retention, but not including individual street trees
or other trees or areas afforded miscellaneous credits, as provided in §
1-21-44;
         (b)   Limits uses in areas of forest conservation to those uses that
are consistent with forest conservation, including recreational activities and
forest management practices that are used to preserve forest; and
         (c)   Incorporates conservation easements, deed restrictions,
covenants, and other agreements as necessary, including, but not limited to, a
graphic metes and bounds of all protected forest areas to be recorded in the
Frederick County Land Records, either as part of a final plat or as part of the
long-term protective agreement. Where county-owned property will be subject to
a long term agreement, an inter-departmental written agreement incorporating
the approved graphic metes and bounds description shall be executed and filed
with the Department.
   (D)   FFCP approval authority.
      (1)   The FFCP cannot be altered without expressed written approval from
the Department.
      (2)   The Department may revoke approval for a FFCP if it finds that:
         (a)   A provision of the FFCP has been violated;
         (b)   Approval of the FFCP was obtained through fraud,
misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, or omission of a relevant
or material fact; or
         (c)   Changes in the development or in the condition of the site
necessitate preparation of a new or amended FFCP.
      (3)   Prior to revoking approval of a final forest conservation plan
(FFCP), the Department shall notify the applicant in writing and provide an
opportunity for a hearing before the Frederick County Planning Commission.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 08-22-498, 8-6-2008; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§§ 1-21-35 – 1-21-39. RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV: DESIGN CRITERIA (§§ 1-21-40 — 1-21-49)
Section
   
1-21-40   Conservation and forestation priorities
   
1-21-41   Afforestation and afforestation threshold
   
1-21-42   Reforestation and conservation threshold
   
1-21-43   Specifications and standards for conservation and forestation
   
1-21-44   Miscellaneous credits
   
1-21-45   Utility and linear projects
§ 1-21-40. CONSERVATION AND FORESTATION PRIORITIES.
   (A)   In general. In the implementation of any subdivision or development
project, priority shall be given:
      (1)   First, to conservation of existing on-site forest areas according
to the sequence listed in subsection (B) of this section;
      (2)   Second, to forestation of on-site areas according to the sequence
listed in subsection (C) of this section;
      (3)   Third, to forestation or mitigation off- site according to the
sequence listed in subsection (D) of this section.
   (B)   Priority areas for on-site conservation.
      (1)   Trees, shrubs, and plants in priority areas shall be retained and
protected and shall be left in an undisturbed condition. The applicant must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Department that reasonable efforts have
been made to protect them and that the plan cannot reasonably be altered.
Priority areas include:
         (a)   Hydrologically-sensitive areas;
         (b)   Forest segments that connect large forested or heavily vegetated
tracts of land within or adjacent to the site;
         (c)   Areas that contain trees, shrubs, or plants identified as rare,
threatened, or endangered under the Federal Endangered Species Act of 1973 in
16 U.S.C. §§ 1531-1544 and in 50 CFR 17, or under COMAR 08.03.08;
         (d)   Critical habitat areas for sedentary animal species; identified
as threatened, endangered or in-need-of-conservation under the Maryland Nongame
and Endangered Species Conservation Act, Md. Code Ann., Natural Resources
Article, §§ 10-2A-01 through 10-2A-09.
         (e)   Nonhazardous trees that:
            1.   Are part of a historic site;
            2.   Are associated with a historic structure;
            3.   Have been designated by the state or the Department as a
national, state, county, or municipal champion tree; and
            4.   Are specimen trees, or are 75 percent or more of the diameter,
measured at 4.5 feet above the ground, of the current state champion tree of
that species as designated by the Department of Natural Resources.
      (2)   Any of the priority areas listed in subsection(B)(1) of this
section that are not retained shall be deemed a modification requiring approval
under §
1-21-21 of this chapter, unless the exception is authorized by §
1-19-9.110, as amended, of the Zoning Ordinance.
      (3)   The following trees or forested areas shall be retained and
protected unless the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Department that reasonable efforts have been made to protect them and the plan
cannot reasonably be altered:
         (a)   Forest areas that buffer significantly noncompatible land uses,
such as industrial and residential, as determined by the Department; and
         (b)   Other forested areas that because of their size, location,
species composition, or quality are deemed by the Department as being worthy of
conserving permanently.
   (C)   Priority sequence for on-site forestation. After every reasonable
effort to minimize the cutting and clearing of trees and other woody plants in
on-site priority areas listed in §
1-21-40(B) has been exhausted, the following areas shall be considered the
priority sequence for on-site forestation:
      (1)   Buffers adjacent to intermittent and perennial streams to widths of
at least 50 feet from stream banks;
      (2)   Areas in 100 year floodplains and all other floodplains listed in
the Zoning Ordinance, §
1-19-9.100;
      (3)   Corridors to connect existing forests within or adjacent to the
development site with a minimum width of 300 feet where practical to facilitate
wildlife movement;
      (4)   Buffers adjacent to critical habitats where appropriate;
      (5)   Slopes of 25% or greater and slopes of 15% or greater with a soil K
value greater than 0.35, including the slopes of ravines or other natural
depressions;
      (6)   Areas identified as green infrastructure network and/or sensitive
species areas in the green infrastructure sector of the Livable Frederick
Master Plan;
      (7)   Buffers between differing land uses that are deemed to be
noncompatible by the Department or buffers adjacent to highways; and
      (8)   Lands adjacent to existing forests to increase the overall area of
contiguous forest cover, when appropriate.
   (D)   Priority sequence for forestation or mitigation off-site. After every
reasonable effort has been made to minimize the clearing of trees and other
woody plants in on-site priority areas listed in §
1-21-40(B), and after every reasonable effort has been made to afforest or
reforest priority areas listed in §
1-21-40(C), the following shall be considered the priority sequence for
forestation or mitigation off-site:
      (1)   Purchase of credits through the Frederick County Forest Banking
Program;
      (2)   Forestation of hydrologically-sensitive areas, preferably in
agriculturally zoned or used land;
      (3)   Protection of existing off-site forest at a 1:2.5 ratio, as
provided in subsection (G) of this section, in areas closely associated with
streams, wetlands, or floodplains, preferably in agriculturally zoned or used
land, when such land is not already substantially protected by the Zoning
Ordinance or other long-term protective instruments in perpetuity; and
      (4)   Payment into the fee-in-lieu program.
   (E)   Flexibility of priorities. A sequence other than the one described in
subsections (C) and (D) of this section may be used for a specific project, if
necessary, to achieve the objectives of the County Comprehensive Plan or county
land use policies or to take advantage of opportunities to consolidate forest
conservation efforts.
   (F)   Minimum forest areas.
      (1)   Forest areas to be retained or created by means of forestation
shall be a minimum of 10,000 square feet and shall be at least 35 feet wide.
Disjointed or noncontiguous forest areas shall be used only when more
continuous forest areas cannot be practically preserved or created, as
determined by the Department.
      (2)   Forest areas that utilize miscellaneous credits as provided in §
1-21-44 shall be a minimum of 2,500 square feet for each area, except for
individual trees in nonforested areas, which may be credited on a tree-by-tree
basis.
   (G)   Off-site existing forest mitigation. When off-site existing forest is
used to mitigate forestation requirements, the applicant must mitigate at a 1:
2.5 ratio, meaning that for every 1 acre of required forestation, 2.5 acres of
off-site existing forest must be protected and conserved.
   (H)   Easement restrictions. No FRO easements (long-term protection) shall
be allowed:
      (1)   Over septic areas or wells;
      (2)   On lots less than 40,000 square feet. However, forest in these
areas may be protected as “tree save area,” as provided in §
1-21-44; or
      (3)   Over existing preservation or utility easements.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 08-26-502, 10-14-2008; Ord. 09-26-530, 9-29-
2009; Ord. 11-19-585, 7-28-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-17, 2-
28-2018; Bill No. 20-08, 7-21-2020)
§ 1-21-41. AFFORESTATION AND AFFORESTATION THRESHOLD.
   (A)   Definitions restated. AFFORESTATION under this section means the
planting of trees where no or little forest exists on-site, in order to meet
the afforestation thresholds. AFFORESTATION THRESHOLD means the percentage of a
net tract area up to which establishment of forest is required if the existing
forest area is less than the threshold, as determined by the land use category.
   (B)   Applicability. A person making application for a regulated activity
subject to this chapter, excluding those development projects listed in
subsection (C) of this section, shall comply with the afforestation
requirements provided in this section.
   (C)   Exceptions. Afforestation requirements shall not apply to the
following.
      (1)   Utility and linear projects that involve no change in land use.
      (2)   Those portions of residential subdivision lots over 3.0 acres, in
which:
         (a)   A pre-existing agricultural or open space land use will remain
unchanged for a period of at least 5 years; and
         (b)   The area over 3.0 acres is approved by the Department.
   (D)   Afforestation requirements. Afforestation on a tract or development
project shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   A tract or development project having less than 20% of the net
tract area in forest cover shall be afforested to at least 20% of the net tract
area for the following zoning categories:
         (a)   Agriculture;
         (b)   Resource conservation; and
         (c)   R-1 residential.
      (2)   A tract or development project having less than 15% of the net
tract area in forest cover shall be afforested to at least 15% of the net tract
area for the following zoning categories:
         (a)   Institutional uses in any zone;
         (b)   R-3, R-5, R-8, R-12, R-16 residential zones and mobile home
parks;
         (c)   Mixed Use and Planned Development zones; and
         (d)   Commercial and Industrial Use zones.
   (E)   Forest removal below afforestation thresholds. Replacement
requirements for removal of forest, even if below the afforestation threshold,
are addressed in the reforestation formulas listed in §
1-21-42(D)(3) and applicants do not need to calculate replacement values
separately under this section.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 09-26-530, 9-29-
2009; Ord. 11-19-585, 7-28-2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-42. REFORESTATION AND CONSERVATION THRESHOLD.
   (A)   Applicability. A person making application for a regulated activity
under this chapter (including utility and linear projects) shall comply with
the reforestation requirements provided in this section. Required reforestation
shall be incorporated into the Final Forest Conservation Plan (FFCP).
Reforestation per the FFCP shall be accomplished in accordance with the
priorities listed in §
1-21-40(C) and (D).
   (B)   Calculation of requirements. There are two methods to calculate
reforestation requirements. The method that results in the most reforestation
shall be used.
      (1)   The first method shall require a 1:1 replacement. This means that
for every one acre (or portion thereof) of forest removed, one acre must be
planted.
      (2)   The second method, the "Standard Method", is set forth in §
1-21-42(D).
   (C)   Definitions restated. REFORESTATION under this section means the
planting of trees to replace forest that has been recently or is proposed to be
removed by development. CONSERVATION THRESHOLD means the percentage of the net
tract area at which the reforestation requirement changes from a ratio of one-
quarter acre planted for every 1 acre removed to a ratio of 2 acres planted for
every 1 acre removed according to the land use categories as listed below:
      Category of Use            Threshold
                        Percentage
(1)   Agricultural and Resource
   Conservation Zones, except for
   cluster developments therein which
   shall utilize R-1 values            50
(2)   R-1 Residential zoned areas         25
(3)   Institutional use areas in any zone      20
(4)   R-3, R-5, R-8, R-12, R-16 and
   Mobile Home Park zoned areas         20
(5)   Mixed Use and Planned Unit
   Development zoned areas            15
(6)   Commercial and Industrial Use
   zoned areas                  15
Required reforestation under the Standard Method shall be calculated according
to the formulas provided in subsection (D) of this section.
   (D)   Standard Method calculations.
      (1)   For all existing forest cover cleared on the net tract area above
the applicable conservation threshold established by subsection (C) of this
section, the area of forest removed shall be reforested at a ratio of one
quarter acre planted for every acre removed.
      (2)   For all existing forest cover cleared on the net tract area below
the applicable conservation threshold, the area of forest removed shall be
reforested at a ratio of 2 acres planted for each acre removed.
      (3)   For each acre of forest retained on the net tract area above the
applicable conservation threshold, credit shall be given against the total
number of acres required to be reforested under subsection (D)(1) of this
section.
   (E)   Accuracy Standards. All calculations of reforestation requirements
shall be calculated to the nearest one-hundredth acre and shall be in
accordance with the worksheet provided in the Technical Manual and approved by
the Department. However, forest field measurements may be measured to the
nearest one-tenth acre.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 10-26-561, 11-9-
2010; Ord. 11-19-585, 7-28-2011; Ord. 11-25-591, 10-27-2011; Ord. 14-23-678,
11-13-2014; Bill No. 20-08, 7-21-2020)
§ 1-21-43. SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR CONSERVATION AND FORESTATION.
   (A)   Technical manual standards. The forest conservation and forestation
(planting) specifications and standards provided in the Final Forest
Conservation Plan shall be equal to or greater than the specifications and
standards provided in the Technical Manual, unless otherwise approved by the
Department, or unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Species selection.
      (1)   Tree and shrub species used for forestation shall be native to
Frederick County, and adapted to the particular site where the forestation is
proposed, unless otherwise approved by the Department.
      (2)   Unless modified by the Department, forest plans shall meet the
minimum species-diversity rates for tree and shrub species according to the
following table:
Total Acres of      Total Species Required (including species found in existing
Forest Easement     forest on-site)
Area in a                                Deciduous Under- Evergreen Over and
Development Project Deciduous Over-Story Story Trees and  Under-Story Trees and
(including existing Trees                Shrubs           Shrubs
forest)
Total Acres of      Total Species Required (including species found in existing
Forest Easement     forest on-site)
Area in a                                Deciduous Under- Evergreen Over and
Development Project Deciduous Over-Story Story Trees and  Under-Story Trees and
(including existing Trees                Shrubs           Shrubs
forest)
0 - 1.0             4                    1                none
1.1 - 3.0           5                    2
3.1 - 8.0           6                    3                1
8.1 - 14.0          8                    4                1 *1-4% of total
14.1 - 20.0         9                    4                2 planting
20.1 or greater     10                   5                2
 
* Except for plantings intended for screening, then the evergreen percentage
may increase.
   (C)   Invasive exotic species.
      (1)   Invasive exotic species listed in the Technical Manual, or by the
Department of Natural Resources, or the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service, shall not be used for forestation or landscape planting.
      (2)   Areas significantly infested, as determined by the Department, with
invasive exotic tree or shrub species shall be subject to a suppression effort
guided by a suppression plan prepared as part of the Final Forest Conservation
Plan.
   (D)   Stocking and survival rates. The stocking and survival rates of trees
and shrubs planted as part of forestation requirements in Frederick County
shall be as follows.
      (1)   Bare root seedlings and whips shall have a minimum stocking ratio
of 600 per acre and shall have a 75% survival rate, or at least 450 per acre.
Both overstory tree and understory tree/shrub species may be counted as part of
the 600 seedling/acre requirement; however, overstory trees (deciduous and
evergreen) shall constitute at least 75% of the total number of seedlings
planted.
      (2)   Container grown seedling tubes (with a minimum cavity width of 1.5
inches) shall have a minimum stocking ratio of 450 per acre and shall have a
75% survival rate, or at least 338 per acre. Both overstory tree and understory
tree/shrub species may be counted as part of the 450 seedling requirement;
however, overstory trees (deciduous and evergreen) shall constitute at least
75% of the total number of seedlings planted.
      (3)   Seedlings and whips planted with tree shelters, or container-grown
1, 2, or 3 gallon plants shall have a minimum stocking ratio of 350 per acre,
and shall have a 75% percent survival rate, or at least 260 per acre. Both
overstory tree and understory tree/shrub species may be counted as part of the
350 seedling requirement; however, overstory trees (deciduous and evergreen)
shall constitute at least 75% of the total number of seedlings planted.
      (4)   One-inch caliper balled and burlapped (B&B) overstory trees shall
have a minimum stocking ratio of 200 per acre and shall have a 75% survival
rate, or at least 150 per acre and shall be supplemented with understory tree/
shrub plantings using 1, 2, or 3 gallon containers planted at 100 per acre,
with a 75% survival rate, or at least 75 per acre.
      (5)   Two-inch caliper B&B overstory trees shall have a minimum stocking
ratio of 100 per acre and shall have a 100% survival rate, or at least 100 per
acre and shall be supplemented with understory tree/shrub plantings using 1, 2,
or 3 gallon containers planted at 100 per acre, with a 75% survival rate, or at
least 75 per acre.
   (E)   Natural regeneration. For areas that are designated as “natural
regeneration” on the Final Forest Conservation Plan (FFCP), or for forestation
areas designated on the FFCP:
      (1)   The areas should not be cleared or graded without approval by the
Department, after the applicant has demonstrated the benefits of such activity.
      (2)   Volunteer seedlings of native tree or shrub species that emerge in
the forest easement areas as a result of natural regeneration may satisfy
forestation requirements, provided the whips meet a stocking/survival ratio of
at least 400 living seedlings per acre during and at the end of the 3-year
maintenance period.
      (3)   Volunteer seedlings may be counted pro rata in conjunction with
planted trees and shrubs, in accordance with their respective required
stocking/survival ratios. Planting requirements for a particular area will be
met if the percentage of the stocking/survival ratio met by volunteer seedlings
added to the percentage of the stocking/survival ratio met by the planted trees
or shrubs totals 100% or more.
   (F)   Site preparation. For forests in proposed development projects:
      (1)   Proposed forest easement areas that are near planned wooded home
sites created by selective clearing may need to receive selective cutting,
pruning or other treatments designed to create a healthy forest. Reductions of
overstocked forests to not less than 80 square feet of basal area/acre should
be considered. Any such forest cutting or thinning shall be approved by the
Department and done pursuant to a plan prepared by a licensed forester;
      (2)   Selective cutting, but not clearing, of trees and other woody
plants in areas to be retained as forest easement areas may be permitted prior
to the submission of a development project application without loss of credit
for forest retention in worksheet calculations if the:
         (a)   “Standard forest density” is maintained or exceeded;
         (b)   Selective cutting is approved by the Department prior to the
commencement of forest cutting activities;
         (c)   Enhancement of forest health and quality is intended; and
         (d)   Selective cutting is done in accordance with a plan prepared by
a licensed forester.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-21-44. MISCELLANEOUS CREDITS.
   (A)   In general. After all on-site priority areas listed in §
1-21-40(B)(1) have been or are shown to be covered by long-term protective
agreements, the following types of forest/tree categories may be used at
various ratios as specified in this chapter toward meeting forest requirements
as part of a final forest conservation plan:
      (1)   Bio-retention stormwater management ponds and rain gardens that
contain native trees and shrubs; and
      (2)   Certain tree and shrub canopy area.
   (B)   Requirements for stormwater management ponds and rain gardens. The
area(s) of canopy cover (projected at a 20-year growth rate) of bio-retention
stormwater management ponds and rain gardens may be used at a 1:1 ratio, and
shall meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Tree and shrub density shall meet or exceed any of the various
stocking and planting ratios described in §
1-21-44(D).
      (2)   The area is protected in a stormwater agreement that is protected
under a long-term management agreement.
   (C)   Eligible types of tree or shrub canopy area. The canopy area of the
following types of trees or shrubs may be used at a 1:1/4 ratio, meaning that
for every one acre of canopy area, .25 acres of credit may be given toward
meeting forestation requirements:
      (1)   Proposed native landscaping or street trees not in forest settings
at their expected 20 year growth. The standard canopy area for each landscape
and street tree planted shall be calculated at a diameter of 30 feet unless
otherwise approved by the Department.
      (2)   Existing trees and shrubs that are healthy and structurally sound
are designated as “tree save area” in forest conservation plans; and meet any
of the following criteria:
         (a)   Individual trees and shrubs associated with historic places;
         (b)   Specimen and champion trees not part of a forest setting; or
         (c)   Forest areas that are not part of priority areas that are
counted as “removed/cleared” forest for purposes of worksheet calculations.
   (D)   Required protection of tree and shrub canopy area. The trees and
forest areas listed in subsection (C) of this section shall be required to be
protected by short-term protective agreements, as provided in §§
1-21-10 and
1-21-34, but shall not be subject to long-term protective agreements.
   (E)   Limitations in the use of miscellaneous credits.  Miscellaneous
credits used in a development project shall not account for more than 25% of
the total reforestation requirement of a tract or development project.
Miscellaneous credits may be used to meet up to 25% of any afforestation
requirement, subject to meeting the requirements of (A) through (D) above.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 11-19-585, 7-28-
2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 17-17, 2-28-2018)
§ 1-21-45. UTILITY AND LINEAR PROJECTS.
   (A)   Afforestation exemption. Applicants for utility and linear projects
that involve no change in land use shall not be required to comply with
afforestation requirements provided in §
1-21-41 of this chapter, unless the activity is subject to the requirements of
a previous forest conservation plan prepared under this chapter.
   (B)   Reforestation and conservation requirements. Applications for utility
and linear projects not otherwise exempted under §
1-21-7 of this chapter, and not subject to the requirements of a previous
forest conservation plan prepared under this chapter, shall be required to meet
the reforestation and conservation requirements when the activity results in
the cutting, clearing, or grading of more than 20,000 square feet of forest.
   (C)   Other requirements. Applicants for utility and linear projects shall
be required to comply with all other requirements provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 09-26-530, 9-29-2009; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§§ 1-21-46 – 1-21-49. RESERVED.
ARTICLE V: SITE DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES (§§ 1-21-50 — 1-21-52)
Section
   
1-21-50   Protecting trees and forest; minimum standards
   
1-21-51   Site work, in general
   
1-21-52   Maintenance of plant material; minimum period of living plant
material
§ 1-21-50. PROTECTING TREES AND FOREST; MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   Standards for the protection of trees and forest from construction activity
that are at least as effective as the standards provided in the technical
manual shall be followed.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-51. SITE WORK, IN GENERAL.
   (A)   Preconstruction meeting. Before cutting, clearing, grading, or
construction begins on a tract or development project for which a final forest
conservation plan (FFCP) is required by this chapter, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the Department inspector that the protective devices for
retained forest and trees have been erected in accordance with the FFCP; and a
preconstruction meeting shall be held on- site with a Department inspector.
   (B)   Restriction on site clearing. Excepting the cases of septic
percolation testing, geotechnical analysis, and survey lines as provided in §
1-21-31(A)(2), if a forest conservation plan is required by this chapter for a
tract or development project, a person may not cut, clear, or grade on the
development site until the Department has approved the FFCP or provided written
agreement to proceed with tree cutting, or the person will be in violation of
this chapter.
   (C)   Work completion. Initial planting and erection of protective
forestation devices required by the FFCP must be completed within 1 year or 2
growing seasons, whichever is greater, following completion of final site
grading.
   (D)   Correcting soil compaction. Any area to receive planting that has been
compacted by construction activity or machinery shall have the compacted soil
mitigated so that normal root growth and plant development may occur.
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 11-19-585, 7-28-
2011; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-21-52. MAINTENANCE OF PLANT MATERIAL; MINIMUM PERIOD OF LIVING PLANT
MATERIAL.
   The applicant shall maintain any planted seedlings, shrubs, or trees in a
living and healthy condition during the FIPA maintenance period, such that a
substantial amount of living seedlings/trees exist in the forest easement area
during the FIPA maintenance period, as determined by Department inspectors, and
as described in §
1-21-25(B)(2).
(Ord. 01-20-294, 9-25-2001; Ord. 07-25-465, 7-19-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
CHAPTER 1-22: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE
ARTICLE I: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS (§§ 1-22-1 — 1-
22-10)
Section
   
1-22-1   Purpose and intent
   
1-22-2   Definitions
   
1-22-3   General provisions; applicability
   
1-22-4   Procedures for imposition, calculation and collection of development
impact fees
   
1-22-5   Establishment of development impact fee accounts; appropriation of
development impact fee funds; and refunds
   
1-22-6   Appeals
   
1-22-7   Exemptions/waivers
   
1-22-8   Enforcement
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 93-10-074, 5-4-1993; Ord. 98-12-214, 5-19-1998; Ord. 99-07-234, 5-18-
1999; repealed and reenacted Ord. 00-30-272, 12-21-2000; Ord. 00-31-273, 12-21-
2000; Ord. 00-32-274, 12-21-2000; Ord. 03-16-339, 11-18-2003; Ord. 14-07-662,
6-17-2014
§ 1-22-1. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of these development impact fee procedures are:
   (A)   To establish uniform procedures for the imposition, calculation,
collection, expenditure and administration of development impact fees imposed
on new development;
   (B)   To implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Frederick
County Comprehensive Plan relating to assuring that new development contributes
its fair share towards the costs of public facilities reasonably necessitated
by such new development;
   (C)   To ensure that new development is reasonably benefitted by the
provision of the public facilities provided with the proceeds of development
impact fees; and
   (D)   To ensure that all applicable legal standards and criteria are
properly incorporated in these procedures.
(Ord. 00-30-272, 12-21-2000; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-22-2. DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   In the interpretation and construction of this chapter, the following
rules of construction shall apply.
      (1)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary and the
word “may” is permissive.
      (2)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular,
unless the context clearly indicates the contrary; use of the masculine gender
shall include the feminine gender.
      (3)   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for,” “designed for,”
“maintained for,” or “occupied for.”
      (4)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves 2 or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunction “and, “or” or “either ... or,” the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows.
         (a)   “And” indicates that all the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
         (b)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.
         (c)   “Either ... or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
      (5)   The words “includes” and “including” shall not limit a term to the
specific example but are intended to extend its meaning to all other instances
or circumstances of like kind or character.
   (B)   The words or phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning
prescribed in the current county code except as otherwise indicated herein.
      APPLICANT. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
society, syndication, trust, or other legal entity which files an application
with the county or with any municipality for a building permit/zoning
certificate.
      APPROPRIATION or TO APPROPRIATE. An action by the county to identify
specific public facilities for which development impact fee funds may be
utilized. APPROPRIATION shall include: listing of a public facility in the
adopted county budget or capital improvements program; execution of a contract
or other legal encumbrance for construction of a public facility using
development impact fee funds in whole or in part; or actual expenditure of
development impact fee funds through payments made from a development impact
fee account.
      BUDGET OFFICER. The county employee or officer responsible for assisting
the County Executive and County Council in the preparation of county budgets.
      BUILDING. Any permanent structure, or portion thereof, designed or built
for the support,  enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, chattels or
property of any kind.
      BUILDING PERMIT/ZONING CERTIFICATE. The official document or certificate
issued by the county or a municipality under the authority of ordinance or law,
authorizing the commencement of construction of any building or part thereof or
authorizing a change in use.
      CATASTROPHIC EVENT. A fire, explosion, flood, hurricane, tornado, or
other disaster not caused by the property owner or his or her agent.
      COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
      COUNTY ATTORNEY. The person appointed by the County Executive and
confirmed by the County Council to serve as its counsel, or designee.
      COUNTY COUNCIL. County Council of Frederick County, Maryland.
      COUNTY EXECUTIVE. County Executive of Frederick County, Maryland.
      COUNTY GOVERNING BODY. County Executive and County Council of Frederick
County, Maryland.
      DEVELOPER. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
society, syndication, trust, or other legal entity that is responsible for
creating a demand for county facilities and services.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, dumping,
extraction, dredging, grading, paving, storage of materials or equipment, land
excavation, land clearing, land improvement, landfill operation, or any
combination thereof; and any change in the use of a building for which a
building permit/zoning certificate is required by law.
      DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE. A fee adopted by the county which is imposed on
new development on a pro rata basis in connection with and as a condition of
the issuance of a building  permit/zoning certificate and which is calculated
to defray all or a portion of the costs of the public facilities required to
accommodate new development at county-designated level of service (LOS)
standards and which reasonably benefits the new development. It may also be
referred to as an impact fee.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Division of Planning and Permitting for the
county, or designee.
      DIRECTOR OF FINANCE. The Director of the Division of Finance for the
county, or designee.
      DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single residential unit
containing living, sleeping and cooking accommodations and designed to be used
for living purposes. Each apartment unit or mobile home shall be considered a
dwelling unit. Dwelling units shall not include those units designed primarily
for transient occupant purposes, nor shall they include rooms in hospitals or
nursing homes.
         (a)   SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING UNIT . A dwelling unit designed
and used only by 1 family and which unit is physically separated on all sides
from any other dwelling unit. A mobile home is a single-family detached
dwelling unit.
         (b)   TOWNHOUSE/DUPLEX . A dwelling unit located in a building
designed for 2 or more dwelling units where such dwelling units are physically
attached and separated from each other by continuous party walls, without
openings, and each of which units has a primary access to the outside, whether
such units are located on a single lot or separate abutting lots.
         (c)   ALL OTHER RESIDENTIAL . Includesany dwelling unit typically
designed and used only for a single family, but which is located in a building
containing 2 or more dwelling units and is not a townhouse/duplex.
      EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS CHAPTER. January 1, 2001.
      LAND DEDICATION. Land that is transferred to the county or the Board of
Education for a public school facility, without expectation of payment or
compensation from the county or the Board of Education.
      LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE. A fee imposed only on new residential
development to fund the proportionate share of the costs of land acquisition
for libraries; library facilities, including construction, furniture, fixtures,
equipment and technology; and collection materials, including, but not limited
to, books, reference materials, audio and visual materials, electronic and
digital information resources, periodicals and others.
      MOBILE HOME. A portable dwelling unit which is designed and built to be
towed on its own chassis, including frame and wheels and to be connected to
utilities. A mobile home is designed without a permanent foundation for year-
round living. A unit may contain parts that can be combined, folded, collapsed,
or telescoped while towed and expanded later to provide additional cubic
capacity. It must be listed by the State of Maryland as a mobile home. This
does not include modular or sectional homes.
      MULTIPLE USES. A new development consisting of both residential and
nonresidential uses, or 2 or more different types of nonresidential use, on the
same site or part of the same new development.
      MUNICIPALITY. Any one of the incorporated municipalities of the county.
      NEW DEVELOPMENT. Any new construction, reconstruction, redevelopment,
rehabilitation, structural alteration, structural enlargement, structural
extension, or new use which requires a building permit/zoning certificate.
      PUBLIC FACILITY OR SERVICE. Public improvements, facilities or services
necessitated by new development, including, but not limited to, water
resources, transportation, Sheriff facilities, public works, fire and emergency
medical services, community facilities, county facilities, water facilities,
sewer facilities, flood control and drainage, solid waste disposal, open space,
parks, utilities and schools and educational facilities.
      PUBLIC FACILITY EXPENDITURES. Include amounts appropriated in connection
with the planning, design, engineering and construction of public facilities;
planning, legal, appraisal, land acquisition, and other costs related to
financing and development costs; the costs of compliance with purchasing
procedures and applicable administrative and legal requirements; and all other
costs necessary or incident to provision of the public facility.
      PUBLIC SCHOOL DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE. A fee imposed only on new
residential development to fund the proportionate share of the costs of public
school buildings, including costs for land acquisition and school
transportation (e.g., buses).
      RESIDENTIAL USE. Any use of a building for a dwelling unit.
(Ord. 00-30-272, 12-21-2000; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill. No. 21-12, 12-21-2021)
§ 1-22-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS; APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Term. This chapter and the procedures established herein shall remain
in effect unless and until repealed, amended or modified by the county
governing body in accordance with applicable state law and the county code,
ordinances and resolutions.
   (B)   Annual review.
      (1)   Preparation of annual report. At least once every year, but not
later than July 1 of each year, beginning July 1, 2002, and prior to the
county's adoption of the annual budget and capital improvements program, the
Director of Finance or designee shall coordinate the preparation and submission
of an annual report to the county governing body on the subject of development
impact fees.
      (2)   Annual report. The annual report may include any or all of the
following:
         (a)   Recommendations for amendments, if appropriate, to these
procedures or to specific ordinances adopting development impact fees for
particular public facilities;
         (b)   Proposed changes to the Frederick County Capital Improvements
Program, including the identification of additional public facility projects
anticipated to be funded wholly or partially with development impact fees;
         (c)   Proposed changes to the boundaries of development impact fee
districts, if applicable;
         (d)   Proposed changes to development impact fee schedules as set
forth in the ordinances imposing and setting development impact fees for
particular public facilities;
         (e)   Proposed changes to any development impact fee calculation
methodology; and
         (f)   Any other data, analysis or recommendations as the budget
officer or appropriate designee may deem appropriate or as may be requested by
the county governing body.
      (3)   Submission of development impact fee annual report and county
governing body action. The Director of Finance shall submit the development
impact fee annual report to the county governing body, which shall receive the
annual report and which may take such actions as it deems appropriate,
including, but not limited to, requesting additional data or analyses and
holding public workshops or public hearings.
   (C)   Affected area.
      (1)   County wide application. This chapter shall apply to all new
development within the county, including new development which takes place
within the boundaries of any municipality. Development impact fees for
particular public facilities may apply to less than the entire county. The
particular article of Chapter 1-22 which establishes a specific development
impact fee shall state whether, or to the extent, such development impact fee
is to apply to less than the entire county.
      (2)   Municipalities. Impact fees on new development within
municipalities shall be collected by all municipalities and remitted to the
county pursuant to law or an intergovernmental agreement with the county which
provides that the impact fees collected by the municipality be transferred to
the county for expenditure in accordance with the terms of these procedures.
      (3)   Identification. The affected area, including development impact fee
districts, if applicable, shall be described or mapped in the particular public
facility development impact fee article of this
Chapter 1-22.
   (D)   Type of development affected. This chapter shall apply to all new
development as herein defined and as defined in the specific articles of this
chapter for particular public facilities.
   (E)   Type of development not required to pay development impact fees.
      (1)   Previously-issued building permits/zoning certificates.
         (a)   No development impact fee shall be imposed on new development if
the following conditions have been satisfied: (i) a building permit/zoning
certificate was issued before the effective date of this chapter; (ii) the work
authorized by the building permit has been completed; and (iii) a certificate
of occupancy has been issued.
         (b)   If a project is abandoned, if the building permit expires or is
revoked, or if the property ownership has changed, any previously paid
development impact fees which have not been refunded will be credited toward
the development impact fees due for the property, and only the difference
between the amount paid and the current rate will be required to be paid prior
to the issuance of a new or replacement building permit.
      (2)   No net increase in dwelling units.
         (a)   No development impact fee shall be imposed on any new
residential development which does not add a new dwelling unit, provided that
the dwelling unit being replaced must have been habitable and occupied as of
July 1, 2001 and must have been continuously habitable and occupied from July
1, 2001 through the date of application for a replacement building permit for
the dwelling unit.
         (b)   No development impact fee shall be imposed for alteration or
expansion of an existing dwelling unit where no additional dwelling unit is
created.
         (c)   No development impact fee shall be imposed if a dwelling unit
has been destroyed by a catastrophic event, and the applicant:
            1.   Requests this exemption within 2 years after the date of the
catastrophic event; and
            2.   Submits a building permit application for the replacement
dwelling unit.
         (d)   No development impact fee shall be imposed for the relocation of
an existing dwelling unit from a lot located in Frederick County to another lot
located in Frederick County.
            1.   This condition shall only apply to an existing dwelling unit
which has been continuously habitable and occupied for at least one (1) year
prior to the proposed relocation.
            2.   This condition shall be applied retroactively to any
residential building permit which satisfies the condition stated in (d) above,
which is dated January 1, 2017 or later.
               (i)    Applications for refunds under this subsection shall be
made on a form provided by the County for such purposes and shall include
information evidencing that the dwelling unit was continuously habitable and
occupied for at least one year prior to the proposed relocation.
               (ii)    Upon receipt of a complete application for a refund, the
Director shall review the application and documentary evidence submitted by the
applicant as well as such other information and evidence as may be deemed
relevant and make a determination as to whether a refund is due. Refunds by
direct payment shall be made following an affirmative determination by the
Director.
            3.   This subsection shall not apply to the relocation of a
dwelling unit purchased from a dealer or retailer that sells dwelling units.
         (e)   The burden of proof shall be on the permit applicant to
demonstrate that the requirements of (E)(2)(a), (b), (c) or (d) above have been
satisfied.
      (3)   Development agreements. The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to development projects which are the subject of a development agreement
and which contain provisions for a development impact fee or other provisions
in conflict with this chapter, but only to the extent of the conflict or
inconsistency.
      (4)   Public facilities provided by governments. No development impact
fees shall be imposed on the development of public facilities by the State of
Maryland, the county, any municipality or the federal government.
   (F)   Effect of payment of development impact fees on other applicable
county land use, zoning, platting, subdivision or development regulations.
      (1)   The payment of development impact fees shall not entitle the
applicant to a building permit/zoning certificate unless all other applicable
land use, zoning, planning, adequate public facilities, forest resource,
platting, subdivision or other related requirements, standards and conditions
have been met. Such other requirements, standards and conditions are
independent of the requirement for payment of a development impact fee.
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall affect, in any manner, the
permissible use of property, density/ intensity of development, design and
improvement standards or other applicable standards or requirements of the land
development regulations of the county or any municipality, where applicable.
(Ord. 00-30-272, 12-21-2000; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill. No. 21-12, 12-21-2021; Bill No. 22-26, 10-25-2022)
§ 1-22-4. PROCEDURES FOR IMPOSITION, CALCULATION AND COLLECTION OF DEVELOPMENT
IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   In general. An applicant shall be notified by the county or by the
municipality within which new development is located of the applicable
development impact fee requirements at the time of application for a building
permit/zoning certificate. At such time, the development impact fees shall be
calculated by the Director and shall be paid by the applicant before the
issuance of a building permit/zoning certificate.
   (B)   Calculation.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a building permit/zoning
certificate, the Director shall determine:
         (a)   Whether it is a residential use;
         (b)   The specific category (type) of residential development, if
applicable; and
         (c)   If residential, the number of new dwelling units.
      (2)   Upon receipt of an application for a building permit/zoning
certificate, the Director shall determine whether it is for a change in use. In
such cases, the development impact fee due shall be based only on the
incremental increase in the fee for the additional public facilities needed for
the change in use. An applicant shall not be entitled to a refund where the
change of use is to a category of development which imposes a lower demand on
public facilities.
      (3)   After making these determinations, the Director shall calculate the
applicable development impact fee by multiplying the demand added by the new
development by the amount of the applicable development impact fee per unit of
development, incorporating any applicable offset if set forth in the particular
development impact fee calculation methodology.
      (4)   If the type of land use proposed for new development is not
expressly listed in the particular development impact fee ordinance and
schedule, the Director shall:
         (a)   Identify the most similar residential development type listed
and calculate the development impact fee based on that residential development
type; or
         (b)   At the option of the applicant, or the Director determine the
basis used to calculate the fee pursuant to an independent impact analysis for
development impact fee calculation. This option shall be requested by the
applicant on a form provided by the county for such purpose. If this option is
chosen, the following shall apply.
            1.   The applicant shall be responsible, at its sole expense, for
preparing the independent impact analysis, which shall be reviewed for approval
by the Director, before payment of the fee.
            2.   The independent impact analysis shall measure the impact that
the proposed development will have on the particular public facility at issue
and shall be based on the same methodologies used in the development impact fee
calculation methodology report and shall be supported by professionally
acceptable data and assumptions.
            3.   After review of the independent impact analysis submitted by
the applicant, the Director shall accept or reject the analysis and provide
written notice to the applicant of its decision within 45 days. If the
independent impact analysis is rejected, the written notice shall provide an
explanation of the insufficiencies of the analysis.
            4.   The final decision of the Director may be appealed pursuant to
§
1-22-6 herein.
      (5)   An applicant may, at any time, request a non-binding estimate of
development impact fees due for a particular new development by filing a
request on a form provided for such purpose by the Director; provided, however,
that such estimate may be subject to change when a formal application for a
building permit/zoning certificate for new development is made. Such non-
binding estimate is solely for the benefit of the prospective applicant and
shall in no way bind the county nor preclude it from making amendments or
revisions to any provisions of this chapter or the development impact fee
schedules.
      (6)   The calculation of development impact fees due from a multiple-use
new development shall be based upon the type and number of dwelling units
created in the new development.
      (7)   The calculation of development impact fees due from a phased new
development shall be based upon the development impact fees due for each
dwelling unit within the phase of development for which building permits/zoning
certificates are requested.
      (8)   Development impact fees shall first be calculated based on the
development impact fee amount in effect at the time of application for a
building permit/zoning certificate, but the amount of the development impact
fee due is the amount of the development impact fee in effect on the date of
issuance of the building permit/zoning certificate.
   (C)   Reserved.
   (D)   Collection.
      (1)   The Director shall collect all applicable development impact fees
at the time of issuance of a building permit/zoning certificate and shall issue
a receipt to the applicant for such payment unless:
         (a)   The applicant has been determined to be entitled to a full
credit or offset; or
         (b)   The applicant has been determined to be not subject to the
payment of a development impact fee; or
         (c)   The applicant has filed an appeal, and a letter of credit in the
amount of the development impact fee, as calculated by the Director has been
posted with the county. Such letter of credit must first be approved by the
County Attorney and Director of Finance.
      (2)   The Director shall collect a development impact fee at the time of
issuance of a building permit/zoning certificate even if development impact
fees were paid by the applicant at an earlier time in the development permit or
approval process, including at the time of application for a building permit/
zoning certificate, if the amount of the development impact fees has increased
since such prior approval. The applicant shall only be liable for the
difference between the development impact fees paid earlier and those in effect
at the time of issuance of the subsequent building permit/zoning certificate.
(Ord. 00-30-272, 12-21-2000; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill. No. 21-12, 12-21-2021)
§ 1-22-5. ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ACCOUNTS; APPROPRIATION OF
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE FUNDS; AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   Development impact fee accounts. A development impact fee account
shall be established
by the county for each category of public facilities for which development
impact fees are imposed. Such account shall clearly identify the category,
account, or fund for which the development impact fee has been imposed. All
development impact fees collected by the county or a municipality shall be
deposited into the appropriate development impact fee account or subaccount,
which shall be interest bearing. All interest earned on monies deposited to
such account shall be credited to and shall be considered funds of the account.
The funds of each such account shall be capable of being accounted for
separately from all other county funds, over time. The county shall establish
and implement necessary accounting controls to ensure that the development
impact fee funds are properly deposited, accounted for, and appropriated in
accordance with this chapter, and any other applicable legal requirements.
   (B)   Appropriation of development impact fee funds.
      (1)   In general. Development impact fee funds may be appropriated for
public facilities, for public facility expenditures as defined in §
1-22-2 hereof, and for the payment of principal, interest and other financing
costs on contracts, bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of
the county or other applicable local governmental entities to finance such
public facilities and public facility expenditures. All appropriations from
development impact fee accounts shall be documented by the Finance Division.
      (2)   Restrictions on appropriations. Development impact fees shall be
appropriated only for the particular category of public facilities for which
they were imposed, calculated and collected.
   (C)   Procedure for appropriation of development impact fee funds.
      (1)   The Director of Finance shall each year identify public facility
projects anticipated to be funded in whole or in part with development impact
fees. The public facilities so identified shall be based upon such information
as may be relevant and may be part of the county’s annual budget and capital
improvements programming process.
      (2)   All such identification of public facility projects shall be
consistent with the provisions of this chapter or other applicable legal
requirements and any guidelines adopted by the county.
      (3)   The county may include development impact fee-funded public
facilities in the county’s annual budget and capital improvements program.
Before including these public facilities in the budget and capital improvements
program, the county shall consider the nature of the facility, the location of
the public facility, the capacity to be added by the public facility, the
service area of the public facility, the need/ demand for the public facility,
and the anticipated timing of completion of the public facility.
      (4)   The county may authorize development impact fee-funded public
facilities at such other times as may be deemed necessary and appropriate by
the county governing body.
      (5)   The County Executive shall verify that adequate development impact
fee funds are or will be available from the appropriate development impact fee
account for the particular public facility.
   (D)   Refunds.
      (1)   Eligibility for refund.
         (a)   Expiration or revocation of building permit/zoning certificate.
An applicant who has paid a development impact fee for a new development for
which the necessary building permit/zoning certificate has expired or for which
the building permit/zoning certificate has been revoked before construction
shall be eligible to apply for a refund of development impact fees paid on a
form provided by the county for such purposes.
         (b)   Abandonment of development after initiation of construction. An
applicant who has paid a development impact fee for a new development for which
a building permit/zoning certificate has been issued and pursuant to which
construction has been initiated, but which construction is abandoned before
completion and issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be eligible for
a refund unless the uncompleted building is completely demolished.
         (c)   Administrative fee. A 2% administrative fee, not to exceed $500,
shall be deducted from the amount of any refund granted and shall be retained
by the county to defray the administrative expenses associated with the
processing of a refund application.
      (2)   Except as provided in subsections (D)(1)(a) and (b) hereof, refunds
shall be made only to the current owner of property on which the new
development was proposed or occurred.
      (3)   Applications for a refund shall be made on a form provided by the
county for such purposes and shall include all information required in
subsection (D)(4) hereof, as appropriate. Upon receipt of a complete
application for a refund, the Director shall review the application and
documentary evidence submitted by the applicant as well as such other
information and evidence as may be deemed relevant and make a determination as
to whether a refund is due. Refunds by direct payment shall be made following
an affirmative determination by the Director.
      (4)   Applications for refunds due to abandonment of a new development
beforecompletion or due to expiration or revocation of a building permit/zoning
certificate shall be made on forms provided by the Director and shall be made
within 60 days following expiration or revocation of the building permit/zoning
certificate. The applicant shall submit:
         (a)   Evidence that the applicant is the property owner or the duly
designated agent of the property owner;
         (b)   The amount of the development impact fees paid by public
facilities category and receipts evidencing such payments; and
         (c)   Documentation evidencing the expiration or revocation of the
building permit/zoning certificate before construction or approval of
demolition of the structure pursuant to a valid county-issued demolition
permit.
         (d)   Failure to apply for a refund within 60 days following
expiration or revocation of the building permit/zoning certificate or
demolition of the structure shall constitute a waiver of entitlement to a
refund. No interest shall be paid by the county in calculating the amount of
the refunds.
      (5)   The county may, at its option, make refunds of development impact
fees by direct payment, by offsetting such refunds against other development
impact fees due for the same category of public facilities for new development
on the same property, or by other means subject to agreement with the property
owner.
(Ord. 00-30-272, 12-21-2000; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill. No. 21-12, 12-21-2021)
§ 1-22-6. APPEALS.
   (A)   An appeal from any decision of a county official pursuant to this
Article I of
Chapter 1-22 shall be made to the County Executive or the Executive's designee
by filing a written appeal on the appropriate county form with the Chief
Administrative Officer within 30 days following the decision which is being
appealed; provided, however, that if the notice of appeal is accompanied by a
cash bond or letter of credit in a form satisfactory to the County Attorney and
the Director of Finance in an amount equal to the development impact fee
calculated to be due, a building permit/zoning certificate may be issued for
the new development. The filing of an appeal shall not stay the imposition or
the collection of the development impact fee as calculated by the county unless
a cash bond or letter of credit has been provided.
   (B)   The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the
decision of the county is erroneous.
   (C)   All appeals shall detail the specific grounds therefor and all other
relevant information and shall be filed on a form provided by the county for
such purposes.
   (D)   Any party aggrieved by a decision of the county may file for judicial
review of the decision in accordance with Maryland Rules, §§ 7-201 and
following. The decision of the circuit court may be appealed to the court of
special appeals or, upon certiorari, to the court of appeals in accordance with
the Maryland Rules. The county may file a responsive pleading and be a party to
or file for judicial review in the circuit court, or take an appeal to the
court of special appeals, or, upon certiorari, to the court of appeals, of any
decision made under this chapter.
(Ord. 00-30-272, 12-21-2000; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-22-7. EXEMPTIONS/WAIVERS.
   (A)   Filing of application. Petitions for waivers from specific development
impact fees shall be filed with the county on forms provided by the county.
   (B)   Effect of grant of exemption. If an exemption from the application of
the provisions of this chapter is authorized by the terms of a specific impact
fee ordinance, the county shall not be required to provide any funds equal to
the amount of any development impact fee which would have been due without such
exemption.
   (C)   Effect of grant of waiver. If the county grants a waiver in whole or
in part of development impact fees otherwise due, the amount of the development
impact fees waived shall be provided by the county from nondevelopment impact
fee funds, and such funds shall be deposited to the appropriate development
impact fee account within a reasonable period of time consistent with the
applicable county capital improvements program.
   (D)   Development agreements. Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the
county’s authority or ability to enter into development agreements with
applicants for new development which may provide for dedication of land,
payments in lieu of development impact fees, or actual infrastructure
improvements. Such development agreements may allow offsets or credits against
development impact fees for contributions made or to be made in the future in
cash, or by taxes or assessments or dedication of land or by actual
construction of all or part of a public facility by the affected property
owner.
   (E)   Exemption for moderately priced dwelling units (MPDUs).
      (1)   Moderately priced dwelling units (MPDUs) are not required to pay
development impact fees if each MPDU:
         (a)   Has been constructed under §
1-6A-5 or §
1-6A-5.2 of the Frederick County Code and in conformance with §§
1-19-8.620.1 through
1-19-8.620.6 of the Frederick County Code;
         (b)   Satisfies all applicable requirements of
Chapter 1-6A of the Frederick County Code for the construction and use of
MPDUs; and
         (c)   Remains in use as an MPDU for a minimum of 40 years.
      (2)   If any MPDU fails to continue to satisfy the applicable
requirements under Chapter 1-6A, the owner of the MPDU shall immediately pay
the full amount of the exempted development impact fees to the County.
   (F)   Exemption for affordable housing program.
      (1)   Residential development is exempt from the payment of a development
impact fee if:
         (a)   The residential development is financed, in whole or part, by
public funding that requires mortgage restrictions or recorded covenants
restricting the rental or sale of the housing units to lower income residents
in accordance with specific government program requirements or
         (b)   The residential development is developed by a nonprofit
organization that:
            1.   Has been exempt from federal taxation under § 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code for a period of at least 3 years; and
            2.   Requires the homebuyer to participate in the construction of
the residential development; and
      (2)   The initial purchaser of the residential development may not have
an income greater than 60% of the Frederick County area median income.
      (3)   Rental housing must be financed by public funding with mortgage
restrictions that include:
         (a)   A requirement that the residential units must be part of an
affordable housing program for at least 40 years; and
         (b)   Each residential unit shall be occupied by a household with
initial income no greater than 60% of the Frederick County area median income.
      (4)   If the residential development fails to continue to satisfy the
requirements for this development impact fee exemption, the owner of the
property shall pay the development impact fee immediately.
      (5)   For properties subject to an affordable housing land trust
agreement, the impact fee exemption will continue as long as the property
remains subject to an affordable housing land trust agreement between the
Frederick County Affordable Housing Land Trust LLC and the homeowner. If the
property ceases to be subject to an affordable housing land trust agreement,
the homeowner shall pay the development impact fee immediately.
   (G)   Impact fee waiver for farm lots.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection, the following
terms shall have the designated definitions:
         CHILD. A full-time farmer's offspring, whether natural or legally
adopted.
         FARM. A parcel of land not less than 25 acres in size on which an
agricultural activity, as defined in §
1-19-11.100 of the Zoning Ordinance, is being actively conducted as of the date
of application for the farm lot waiver.
         FULL-TIME FARMER.  A person who owns and operates a farm, and who has
derived the majority of his or her gross income from agricultural activity
during each of the 3 years prior to filing an application for the farm lot
waiver.
         FARM LOT. A lot which is a maximum of 2 acres in size and has been
legally subdivided from a farm by a full-time farmer. Lot size modifications
may be approved by the county based on subdivision, percolation and other
governmental requirements.
         GRANDCHILD. The offspring of a child, as defined herein, whether
natural or legally adopted.
         PARENT. The parent of a full-time farmer.
         SIBLING. The sibling of a full-time farmer.
      (2)   Impact fees collected under this chapter may be waived for farm
lots if the following conditions are met at the time that the waiver is applied
for:
         (a)   The farm lot must have been transferred directly from a full-
time farmer or a trust or similar entity controlled (more than 50%) by the
full-time farmer to the full-time farmer's parent, sibling, child or grandchild
or to a trust or similar entity controlled (more than 50%) by the full-time
farmer's parent, sibling child or grandchild; and
         (b)   The full-time farmer's parent, sibling, child or grandchild must
show proof that he or she currently provides substantial support to the farm,
whether by physical or administrative work, or by significant financial
support. In this subsection, "substantial support", as it applies to physical
or administrative support, must equate to an average of at least 20 hours per
week for all weeks in the calendar year.
      (3)   If the full-time farmer's parent, sibling, child or grandchild
sells or otherwise transfers the farm lot (except by reason of his or her
death) within 5 years after the date of issuance of the building permit to
which the impact fee waiver has been applied, then the full-time farmer's
parent, sibling, child or grandchild shall be obligated to repay the total
amount of the waived impact fees to the county.
      (4)   If the full-time farmer's parent, sibling, child or grandchild
sells or otherwise transfers the farm lot more than 5 years after the date of
issuance of the building permit to which the impact fee waiver has been
applied, then the obligation to repay the waived impact fees to the county
shall not apply.
      (5)   The obligation to repay the waived impact fees to the county shall
be memorialized by a recorded lien on the farm lot, which shall, by its terms,
expire 5 years after the date of issuance of the building permit to which the
impact fee waiver has been applied.
(Ord. 00-30-272, 12-21-2000; Ord. 10-25-560, 11-16-2010; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-17-
2014; Ord. 14-19-674, 9-25-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 20-13, 9-
1-2020; Bill. No. 21-12, 12-21-2021; Bill No. 22-29, 10-18-2022)
§ 1-22-8. ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or entity to enlarge, alter or change
any use of property or to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, make, put together or convert any building in the county, or attempt
to do so, or cause the same to be done, without first paying all development
impact fees imposed by this chapter. Any person or entity who shall so violate
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined up to $500 or imprisoned for up to 30 days, or be both fined and
imprisoned. Each day that the violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   (B)   In the event a fee is not paid as required hereunder, the County
Attorney may institute an action to recover the fee and enjoin the use of the
property until the fee is paid. The person who fails so to pay shall be
responsible for the costs of such suit, including reasonable attorney’s fees.
   (C)   If not paid as required by this chapter, development impact fees shall
constitute a lien against the property being developed and shall be levied,
collected, and enforced in the same manner as are county real property taxes
and shall have the same priority and bear the same interest and penalties as
county real property taxes for lien purposes.
(Ord. 00-30-272, 12-21-2000; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§§ 1-22-9 - § 1-22-10. RESERVED.
ARTICLE II: PUBLIC SCHOOL DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE (§§ 1-22-11 — 1-22-20)
Section
   
1-22-11   Service area
   
1-22-12   Amount of impact fee
   
1-22-13   Annual adjustment
   
1-22-14   Senior housing exemption
   
1-22-15   Exemption for accessory dwelling units less than 800 square feet
   
1-22-16   Credits for land dedication or construction of public school
facilities
§ 1-22-11. SERVICE AREA.
   The applicable service area (the “service area”) for imposition of a public
school development impact fee is the entire county, including all
municipalities.
(Ord. 00-31-273, 12-21-2000; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 16-04, 4-5-2016)
§ 1-22-12. AMOUNT OF IMPACT FEE.
   All new residential development in the service area shall be subject to the
payment of a public school development impact fee payable at the time of
issuance of a building permit/zoning certificate by the county or a
municipality, as applicable, pursuant to this
Chapter 1-22, as follows:
 
Residential Development FY20 School Impact Fee Per Dwelling Unit
Single-Family Detached  $14,132.00
Townhouse/Duplex        $16,248.00
All Other Residential   $6,974.00
 
(Ord. 00-31-273, 12-21-2000; Ord. 03-16-339, 11-18-2003; Ord. 06-19-415, 6-6-
2006; Ord. 08-15-491, 6-12-2008; Ord. 10-12-547, 6-1-2010; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-
17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-04, 4-5-2016; Bill No. 19-06,
4-16-2019)
§ 1-22-13. ANNUAL ADJUSTMENT.
   On July 1, 2019, and on July 1 of each year thereafter in which the public
school development impact fee is in effect, the amount of the public school
development impact fee, per dwelling unit, shall be adjusted as follows:
   (A)   On or before January 15, 2019, and on or before January 15 of each
year thereafter, the County Executive shall provide to the County Council a
report which proposes an annual adjustment to the public school development
impact fee. The adjustment shall be calculated by taking into account the most
recent data from the State of Maryland school construction cost index and
changes to other factors and data components in the fee calculations.
   (B)   The proposed annual adjustment shall automatically take effect on July
1, the first day of the fiscal year immediately following receipt of the
report, unless the County Council enacts a bill that takes effect on or before
June 30 of the same year as the report, to change or maintain the current
public school development impact fee.
(Bill No. 16-04, 4-5-2016; Bill No. 19-06, 4-16-2019)
§ 1-22-14. SENIOR HOUSING EXEMPTION.
   (A)   The development or construction of age- restricted adult or senior
citizen housing shall be exempt from payment of a public school development
impact fee, provided that:
      (1)   All requests for exemption under this section shall be submitted to
the Planning Director; and
      (2)   All such housing shall contain a deed restriction recorded against
the property, in form satisfactory to the Frederick County Attorney, which deed
restriction shall provide that:
         (a)   Such housing is restricted to occupancy by older persons, in
compliance with the terms and provisions of the Federal Fair Housing Act, Title
VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments
Act of 1988, 42 U.S.C. § 3607;
         (b)   No person under the age of 18 years shall reside within any such
housing unit; and
         (c)   The deed restriction shall provide that in the event that the
above restrictions are ever modified or violated, the owner of the property at
the time the restrictions are modified or violated shall pay to the county the
then-current public school development impact fee.
   (B)   If public school development impact fees for age-restricted adult or
senior citizen housing are paid before issuance of building permits, then these
fees may be refunded if the following requirements are satisfied:
      (1)   A notice of intent to seek a refund of the public school impact
fees is submitted at the time that the fees are paid; and
      (2)   All of the requirements listed above in §
1-22-14(A) are completed and approved within 12 months of payment of the public
school development impact fees.
   (C)   The county may adopt such administrative regulations and guidelines
and provisions for enforcement as they deem appropriate to implement this
section and ensure that any housing exempted from payment of the public school
development impact fee under this section contains adequate age and occupancy
restrictions.
(Ord. 00-31-273, 12-21-2000; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill. No. 21-12, 12-21-2021)
§ 1-22-15. EXEMPTION FOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS LESS THAN 800 SQUARE FEET.
   (A)   Accessory dwelling units that do not exceed 800 square feet in size
are exempt from payment of public school development impact fees.
   (B)   The public school development impact fee for accessory dwelling units
greater than 800 square feet in size shall be the impact fee amount indicated
above in §
1-22-12 for "All Other Residential".
(Bill No. 18-17, 8-21-2018)
§ 1-22-16. CREDITS FOR LAND DEDICATION OR CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC SCHOOL
FACILITIES.
   (A)   The county may provide credits against the development impact fees due
from a new development for the value of: land dedication for construction of a
public school facility; and actual construction of all or part of a public
school facility.
   (B)   Credits will be available only for: (i) the dedication of land for a
public school facility; or (ii) actual construction of public school facilities
meeting or exceeding the demand generated by the new development for the
specific facility; and only if the land dedication or construction is
determined by the Director to be a reasonable substitute for the cost of public
school facilities which are included in the particular development impact fee
calculation methodology.
   (C)   The Director shall determine eligibility for, and the amount of, the
credit available under this section. The Director may not approve a credit for
land dedication or construction of public school facilities unless the
particular public facility development impact fee fund has sufficient revenue
to make the reimbursement without jeopardizing the continuity of the county's
capital improvements program.
   (D)   The total amount of any impact fee credit under this section may not
exceed the actual amount of the impact fees due, and credits may not be
transferred to any other type of development impact fee due from the same
applicant for other types of public facilities.
   (E)   Impact fee credits for public school construction.
      (1)   An impact fee credit for construction of public school facilities
may only be applied to development impact fees imposed for the same level(s) of
public school facilities constructed.
      (2)   Even if the value of the public school facility provided by
construction exceeds the total development impact fees due for that type of
public school facility, the excess value may not be transferred to development
impact fees due from the applicant for other types of public facilities or for
other property being developed or to be developed by the applicant.
   (F)   Impact fee credits for land dedication.
      (1)   The county may approve impact fee credits for public school
facility land dedication if the applicant submits an impact fee credit
application which: (a) specifies the location and dimensions of the land which
has been or will be dedicated for the public school facility; and (b)
identifies the applicant's development and specific lots that are eligible for
the land donation credit.
      (2)   To be eligible for this impact fee credit, land dedicated for
public school facilities must: (a) be subdivided as an outlot; (b) be of
sufficient size, as determined by the Board of Education, for the school type
to be constructed; (c) comply with all applicable Board of Education Policies,
as amended; and (d) be formally accepted by the Board of Education.
(Bill. No. 21-12, 12-21-2021)
§§ 1-22-17 – 1-22-20. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III: LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE (§§ 1-22-21 — 1-22-23)
Section
   
1-22-21   Service area
   
1-22-22   Amount of impact fee
   
1-22-23   Annual adjustment
§ 1-22-21. SERVICE AREA.
   The applicable service area (the “service area”) for imposition of a library
development impact fee is the entire county, including all municipalities.
(Ord. 00-32-274, 12-21-2000; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 16-04, 4-5-2016)
§ 1-22-22. AMOUNT OF IMPACT FEE.
   All new residential development in the service area shall be subject to the
payment of a library development impact fee payable at the time of issuance of
a building permit/zoning certificate by the county or a municipality, as
applicable, pursuant to this
Chapter 1-22, as follows:
 
Residential Development FY20 Library Impact Fee Per Dwelling Unit
Single-Family Detached  $681.00
Townhouse/Duplex        $627.00
All Other Residential   $389.00
 
(Ord. 00-32-274, 12-21-2000; Ord. 03-16-339, 11-18-2003; Ord. 06-19-415, 6-6-
2006; Ord. 08-15-491, 6-12-2008; Ord. 10-12-547, 6-1-2010; Ord. 14-07-662, 6-
17-2014; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 16-04, 4-5-2016; Bill No. 19-06,
4-16-2019)
§ 1-22-23. ANNUAL ADJUSTMENT.
   On July 1, 2019, and on July 1 of each year thereafter in which the library
development impact fee is in effect, the amount of the library development
impact fee, per dwelling unit, shall be adjusted as follows:
   (A)   On or before January 15, 2019, and on or before January 15 of each
year thereafter, the County Executive shall provide to the County Council a
report which proposes an annual adjustment to the library development impact
fee. The adjustment shall be calculated by taking into account the most recent
data from the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index, and changes to
other factors and data components in the library development impact fee
calculations.
   (B)   The proposed annual adjustment shall automatically take effect on July
1, the first day of the fiscal year immediately following receipt of the
report, unless the County Council enacts a bill that takes effect on or before
June 30 of the same year as the report, to change or maintain the library
development impact fee.
(Bill No. 16-04, 4-5-2016; Bill No. 19-06, 4-16-2019)
CHAPTER 1-23: HISTORIC PRESERVATION (§§ 1-23-1 — 1-23-14)
Section
   
1-23-1   Authority
   
1-23-2   Purpose
   
1-23-3   Definitions
   
1-23-4   Historic Preservation Commission
   
1-23-5   Powers and duties
   
1-23-6   Designation
   
1-23-6.1   Delisting properties from historic designation
   
1-23-7   Application for certificate of approval and Commission review
   
1-23-8   Relocation or demolition of non-designated sites or structures
   
1-23-9   Economic hardship
   
1-23-10   Demolition by neglect
   
1-23-11   Archaeological protection
   
1-23-12   Cemeteries
   
1-23-13   County-owned historic properties
   
1-23-14   Maryland Historical Trust
   
1-23-15   Appeals
   
1-23-16   Violations
   
1-23-17   Changes and amendments
   
1-23-18   Severability
   
1-23-19   Applicability
Cross references:
   Buildings, see
Chapter 1-6;
   Planning and development, see
Chapter 1-13
§ 1-23-1. AUTHORITY.
   The county derives authority for this chapter by virtue of its conformance
with provisions of the State of Maryland Enabling Act for Historic Area Zoning
(Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article, Title 8, as amended).
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-
2024)
§ 1-23-2. PURPOSE.
   (A)   The preservation of sites, structures, and districts of historical,
cultural, archaeological, or architectural significance, together with their
appurtenances and environmental settings is a public purpose in the county.
   (B)   It is the further purpose of this article to:
      (1)   Safeguard the heritage of the county by preserving sites,
structures, or districts which reflect elements of the county’s cultural,
social, economic, political, architectural, or archaeological history;
      (2)   Stabilize and improve property values of such sites, structures, or
districts;
      (3)   Foster civic beauty;
      (4)   Strengthen the economy of the county;
      (5)   Preserve and enhance quality of life;
      (6)   Promote the preservation and appreciation of the sites, structures,
and districts for the education and welfare of the residents of the county;
      (7)   Develop an awareness among property owners of the value of
preserving, protecting, and restoring areas of historical, cultural,
archaeological, or architectural significance;
      (8)   Enable the county to identify and officially designate sites,
structures, and districts of historical, cultural, archaeological, or
architectural importance to the county in order to make such sites, structures,
and districts eligible for specific benefits that may be available from various
local, state, or federal programs; and
      (9)   Establish and maintain the Frederick County Register of Historic
Places as a list of those properties that meet the county's criteria for
designation and have been approved for listing in the Register by the County
Council.
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-
2024)
§ 1-23-3. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Historic Preservation Ordinance, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them.
   ALTERATION. Any exterior change that would affect the historic, cultural,
archaeological, or architectural significance of a designated site or
structure, any portion of which is visible or intended to be visible from a
public way, including, but not limited to, construction, reconstruction,
moving, or demolition.
   APPURTENANCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL SETTINGS. All that space of grounds and
structures thereon which surrounds a designated site, historic district, or
structure and to which it relates physically or visually, and is within the
designated boundary of the site, historic district, or structure. APPURTENANCES
AND ENVIRONMENTAL SETTINGS shall include, but not be limited to, walkways and
driveways (whether paved or not), trees, landscaping, pastures, croplands,
waterways, open space, setbacks, parks, public spaces, and rocks.
   ARCHAEOLOGICAL DATA RECOVERY. Also known as Phase III data recovery, this
involves large-scale excavations designed to document the data from an
archaeological resource before a project proceeds and the resource is lost.
   ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVALUATION STUDY.  Also known as a Phase II survey, this
study requires the investigation of adequate portions of archaeological
properties to evaluate the significance of the resources. The investigated
areas should be no larger than necessary to achieve the research goals.
   ARCHAEOLOGICAL IDENTIFICATION STUDY. Also known as a Phase I survey, the
goal of this study is to locate archaeological properties that may be
significant in the area of potential impact. This study involves development of
research designs, archival and background research, field survey, analysis, and
reporting. An archaeological identification study involves some form of
sampling to permit the economical investigation of land with a high assurance
that significant archaeological resources have not been overlooked.
   ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES. This resource type refers to any physical remains
or artifacts left behind by human activity that provide information about past
cultures, civilizations, and societies. These can include sites, features,
artifacts, human remains, and other types of material evidence that have been
buried over time.
   ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT PLAN. A plan prepared by a professional
archaeologist that is designed to manage and mitigate adverse effects on
significant archaeological resources within an area of potential impact and
create a long-term management plan for these archaeological resources.
   AREA OF POTENTIAL IMPACT. The geographic area or areas within which a
project actively regulated by this chapter may directly, indirectly, or
cumulatively cause changes in the character or use of historic properties, if
any such properties exist.
   CEMETERY. Any land or structure, including any natural or prepared physical
location, whether originally located below, at, on, or above the surface of the
earth, used for the interment of human remains or deposit of funerary objects.
The term "cemetery" shall include the terms "graveyard," "burial site," "burial
ground," "ossuaries," "burial pits," and "burying ground."
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL. A certificate issued by the Historic Preservation
Commission indicating its approval of plans for construction, alteration,
reconstruction, moving, or demolition of an individually designated landmark,
site, or structure or of a site or structure within a designated historic
district.
   CULTURAL RESOURCES.  Cultural resources are any prehistoric or historic
remains or indicators of human activities, including artifacts, sites,
structures, landscapes, and objects of importance to a culture or community for
scientific, traditional, religious, or other reasons.
   DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT. Any neglect in the maintenance and repair of an
individually designated landmark, site, or structure, or a site or structure
within a designated historic district that results in the gradual deterioration
of these historic resources.
   DIVISION. The Frederick County Division of Planning and Permitting.
   ECONOMIC HARDSHIP. Extreme economic impact on an individual property owner
resulting from application of the provisions of this chapter.
   EXTERIOR FEATURES. The architectural style, design, and general arrangement
of the exterior of an historic structure, including the nature and texture of
building material, and the type and style of all windows, doors, light
fixtures, signs, or similar items found on or related to the exterior of an
historic structure.
   GOOD FAITH. Describes a level of review, the provision of information, or
type of action(s) taken with respect to requirements under this chapter that
are characterized by honesty, objectivity, timeliness, reasonableness, and
lacking the intent to mislead.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of
sites, structures, or objects united historically, culturally, or aesthetically
by plan or physical development. A HISTORIC DISTRICT shall include all property
within its boundaries as defined and designated by the county.
   HISTORIC INTEGRITY. The ability of a property to convey its historical
associations or attributes. Seven aspects or standards are used to evaluate the
integrity of properties: location, setting, design, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association.
   HISTORIC PROPERTY. Historic properties are any historical, archaeological,
architectural, or cultural resources designated or eligible for designation by
the Frederick County Historic Preservation Commission as a historic resource.
   LANDMARK. Any site or structure designated by Frederick County outside the
boundaries of a historic district that is of historic, cultural,
archaeological, or architectural significance.
   PROFESSIONAL ARCHAEOLOGIST. An archaeologist who meets or exceeds the
professional qualifications in archaeology as outlined by the Secretary of the
Interior's Professional Qualifications Standards.
   RECONSTRUCTION. The process of reproducing by new construction the exact
form and detail of a vanished structure, or part thereof, as it appeared at a
specific period of time.
   REHABILITATION. The process of making possible a compatible use for a
property through repair, alterations, and additions while preserving those
portions or features which convey its historical, cultural, or architectural
values.
   RENOVATION. See REHABILITATION.
   RESOURCE. Any building, structure, site, or object that is part of or
constitutes an historic property.
   RESTORATION. The process of accurately recovering the form and details of a
property as it appeared at a specific period of time by means of removal of
later work and the replacement of work missing from that period.
   SITE. The location of an event of historic significance, a significant
landscape, or a structure, whether standing or ruined, which possesses
historic, architectural, archaeological, or cultural significance.
   STRUCTURE. A combination of material to form a construction that is stable,
including but not limited to buildings, stadiums, reviewing stands, platforms,
stagings, observation towers, radio towers, water tanks and towers, trestles,
bridges, piers, paving, bulkheads, wharves, sheds, coal bins, shelters, fences,
and display signs visible or intended to be visible from a public way. The term
STRUCTURE shall be construed as if followed by the words “or part thereof.”
   UNANTICIPATED DISCOVERY. A discovery made when ground disturbance uncovers
archaeological resources or evidence of a cemetery.
   UNUSUAL HISTORIC VALUE. A property eligible for designation under this
chapter with the added requirement that the property represent an outstanding
or exceptional aspect of federal, state, or local history, culture,
architecture or archaeology that is not otherwise represented within the
Frederick County Register of Historic Places, the loss of which would cause
irreparable harm to the public interest as stated in §
1-23-2 of this chapter.
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 10-19-554, 7-13-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-2024)
§ 1-23-4. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   Historic Preservation Commission. The county hereby creates a
Commission to be called the Frederick County Historic Preservation Commission.
   (B)   Membership.
      (1)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of 7 members
appointed by the County Executive and confirmed by the County Council. All
members of the Commission shall have a demonstrated interest in Frederick
County and no more than three members shall be non-residents of Frederick
County. All members shall possess a demonstrated special interest, specific
knowledge, or professional or academic training in such fields as history,
architecture, architectural history, planning, archaeology, anthropology,
curation, conservation, landscape architecture, historic preservation, urban
design, or related disciplines. The County Executive may consult other private
societies or agencies to request the names for possible members on the
Commission. Geographic diversity within the county shall be a goal.
      (2)   At least 2 members of the Commission shall possess professional or
academic training in 1 or more of the above- listed fields in accordance with
the minimum professional requirements of the United States Department of the
Interior for certifying local governments under 36 C.F.R. Part 61. A good-
faith effort to locate and appoint such professionals will be made and
documentation as to how this effort was accomplished shall be retained by the
county.
   (C)   Commission membership qualification criteria. The requirement for
Commission membership under the category of demonstrated special interest may
be satisfied by formal training in 1 or more of the fields listed in paragraph
(B). The requirement for membership under the category of specific knowledge
may be satisfied by formal post secondary education, employment or practical
experience in 1 or more of the above-listed fields. The requirement for
Commission membership under the category of professional or academic training
may be satisfied by, at a minimum, 2 years experience as a professional or a
bachelor’s degree in one or more of the above-listed fields.
   (D)   Terms. Commission members shall be appointed for terms of 3 years and
may be reappointed. Terms shall be staggered.
   (E)   Commission officers. The Commission shall elect, from its membership,
a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. The Chairperson and Vice- Chairperson shall
serve for 1 year terms and shall be eligible for reelection but may not serve
more than 4 consecutive years in the same office.
   (F)   Vacancy. Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission caused by the
expiration of a term, resignation, death, incapacity to discharge duties,
removal for cause, or any other reason, shall be filled for a new term, or for
the remainder of the term for which there is a vacancy, as the case may be, in
the same manner as provided herein for the appointment of the initial members
of the Commission. Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by the
appointing authority within 60 days. In the case of expiration of term, a
member may continue to serve until the member’s successor is appointed.
Unexcused absences at 3 consecutive meetings shall constitute resignation by
the member and shall create a vacancy.
   (G)   Removal for cause. A member may be removed by the County Executive
from the Commission for cause, upon written charges, and after a public
hearing, by the County Executive or designee.
   (H)   Compensation. Commission members shall serve with the compensation
that the county governing body deems appropriate, as the county governing body
provides in the annual budget.
   (I)   Meetings. The Commission shall hold such regular meetings and hearings
as necessary to discharge its duties.
   (J)   Staff. Consistent with the county’s policies and procedures, employees
may be assigned to the Commission, and such services and facilities shall be
made available as the county deems necessary or appropriate for the proper
performance of its duties. (Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-2024)
§ 1-23-5. POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   As part of its powers and duties, the Historic Preservation
Commission:
      (1)   Shall adopt rules for the organization and conduct of meetings;
      (2)   Shall act upon all applications for certificates of approval;
      (3)   Shall submit information regarding Frederick County historic,
architectural, archaeological, and cultural resources to the Maryland
Historical Trust for the purposes of updating and maintaining the Maryland
Inventory of Historic Properties;
      (4)   Shall review all petitions for designation to the Frederick County
Register of Historic Places and submit recommendations to the county governing
body;
      (5)   For areas which are located within a designated historic site,
structure, or district, or which have historic preservation easements held by
the county, the Commission shall review any application for a zoning text or
map amendment, conditional use, variance, site plan or subdivision approval,
and any legislation or other proposals, including preparation and amendment of
master plans, and may make recommendations thereon to the appropriate
authorities;
      (6)   Shall have the right to accept and use gifts and services for the
exercise of its functions which are given to the county specifically for use by
the Historic Preservation Commission;
      (7)   Shall adopt rehabilitation and new construction design guidelines
and criteria for construction, alteration, reconstruction, repair, moving and
demolition of property in designated districts or individually designated sites
or landmarks which are consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s
Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties. Guidelines may include design
characteristics intended to meet the needs of particular types of sites,
structures, and districts, and may identify categories of changes that do not
require review by the Commission because they are minimal in nature and do not
affect historic, archaeological, or architectural significance. These design
guidelines shall be used in the Historic Preservation Commission’s review of
applications for certificates of approval;
      (8)   Shall review and recommend for action by the county governing body
the acquisition of historic preservation easements on designated landmarks,
structures, or sites and, when deemed appropriate by the Commission, sites or
structures located in, or adjacent to, a designated district, consistent with
the county’s ordinances, resolutions, local public law, policies and
procedures; and
      (9)   Shall review any grant programs or tax incentives that will aid
historic preservation as approved by the County Council or County Executive and
review any applications based on those programs.
   (B)   In addition, the Historic Preservation Commission shall have all the
powers and authority enumerated in Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article, Title 8, as
presently codified and as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-
2024)
§ 1-23-6. DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Designation. The county governing body may designate boundaries for
landmarks, sites, structures, or districts of historic, cultural,
archaeological, or architectural significance after a public hearing thereon,
consistent with adopted criteria for such designation.
   (B)   Criteria for designation. In considering any property for designation
to the Frederick County Register of Historic Places, the reviewing agencies,
boards, or commissions shall consider the following criteria.
      (1)   Historic, archaeological, and cultural significance:
         (a)   The property has significant character, interest, or value as
part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the county,
state, or nation;
         (b)   The property is the site of an historic event;
         (c)   The property is identified with a person or group of persons who
influenced society; or
         (d)   The property exemplifies the cultural, economic, social,
political, or historic heritage of the county and its communities.
      (2)   Architectural and design significance:
         (a)   The property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period, design style, or method of construction of landscape architecture,
engineering, public art, or architecture;
         (b)   The property represents the work of a master craftsman,
architect, landscape architect, engineer, artist, or builder;
         (c)   The property possesses significant artistic value;
         (d)   The property represents a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinction;
         (e)   The property represents an established and familiar visual
feature of the neighborhood, community, or county, due to its singular physical
characteristics, landscape, or historical event; or
         (f)   The property is a rare example of a particular period, style,
material, or construction technique.
   (C)   Procedure for petitioning for designation.
      (1)   Petitions for designation or expansion shall be filed with, and on
forms provided by, the Frederick County Division of Planning and Permitting
["Division"].
      (2)   The Division shall refer the petition to the Historic Preservation
Commission to determine if the property contained in the petition meets the
requirements for historic designation. The Division shall also notify other
appropriate agencies for comment.
      (3)   A petition for a proposed individual landmark shall be filed by, or
with the written consent of, the legal owner of such landmark.
      (4)   A petition for a proposed historic district shall be filed by a
legal owner or owners of property within the district.
      (5)   (a)   The Historic Preservation Commission, in a public meeting,
shall determine if the property contained in the petition meets the
requirements for historic designation as set forth in this section. If the
requirements are so met, the Historic Preservation Commission shall recommend
historic designation to the county governing body. Legal property owners within
a proposed historic district shall be notified of the nomination by certified
mailing.
         (b)   The recommendation for an historic district shall proceed to the
county governing body if, within 60 days of the Historic Preservation
Commission finding, concurrence is obtained from both:
            1.   Owners of at least 51% of the assessed valuation of the real
property located within the proposed historic district; and
            2.   At least 51% of the owners of the real property located within
the proposed historic district.
         (c)   In determining the owner(s) of real property for purposes of
this section:
            1.   Multiple owners of a single parcel are treated as 1 owner; and
            2.   A single owner of multiple parcels is treated as 1 owner.
      (6)   If a property or district within Frederick County shall be deemed
by the Historic Preservation Commission to possess unusual historic value to
the citizens of Frederick County, the Historic Preservation Commission may
initiate a petition for historic designation. In this instance, the petition
shall first be sent to the Maryland State Historic Preservation Officer for
their concurrence that said property has unusual historic value. If the
Maryland State Historic Preservation Officer does concur with the Historic
Preservation Commission, then the petition shall proceed to the county
governing body. A petition for designation of an area of unusual historic value
shall require a favorable vote of the County Council to receive historic
designation.In making their determination, the County Council shall consider
whether the property owner(s) concur on the designation, along with any
information provided by the property owner(s) regarding their ability to comply
with the provisions of this chapter, in the event that their property is
designated.
   (D)   Limitations on filing of petitions. If the county declines to
designate a property proposed for designation, the identical petition for
designation may not be refiled within 1 year of the final decision by the
county. If the county declines to expand the boundary of a previously
designated historic property, a petition for expansion which is identical to
the rejected petition may not be refiled within 1 year of the final decision by
the county.
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-
2024)
§ 1-23-6.1. DELISTING PROPERTIES FROM HISTORIC DESIGNATION.
   (A)   In order to delist (remove) a property or a Historic District from the
County Register, the Historic Preservation Commission must find, and the County
Council must confirm, that the property or properties have ceased to meet the
criteria for historic designation as set forth in §
1-23-6(B) because the qualities that caused the property or properties to be
included in the original designation have been lost or destroyed.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of subsection (A) above, delisting of
an entire historic district will require approval by: (1) owners of at least
the same percentage of the assessed valuation of the real property located
within the historic district as initially approved the designation of the
historic district; and (2) owners of at least the same percentage of the real
property located within the historic district that initially approved the
designation of the historic district.
   (C)   Delisting applications will not be considered in cases of demolition
by neglect or other self-created hardships.
(Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-2024)
§ 1-23-7. APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL AND COMMISSION REVIEW.
   (A)   Application for certificate of approval. Before the construction,
alteration, reconstruction, moving, or demolition is undertaken of a designated
landmark, site, or structure, or site or structure within a designated
district, if an exterior change is involved which would affect the historic,
archaeological, or architectural significance of a designated landmark, site,
or structure, or site or structure within a designated district, the person,
individual, firm, or corporation proposing to make the construction or change
shall file an application for a certificate of approval with the Commission for
permission to construct, alter, reconstruct, move, or demolish the landmark,
site, or structure. Every application shall be referred to and considered by
the Commission and accepted or rejected by the Commission. An application which
is identical to a rejected application may not be resubmitted within a period
of 1 year after the rejection. No certificate of approval shall be granted
until the Commission has acted thereon as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Application review.
      (1)   In reviewing applications, the Commission shall give consideration
to the historic, archaeological, or architectural significance of the landmark,
site, or structure and its relationship to the historic, archaeological, or
architectural significance of the surrounding area; the relationship of the
exterior architectural features of a landmark or structure to the remainder of
the landmark or structure and to the surrounding area; the general
compatibility of proposed exterior design, scale, proportion, arrangement,
texture, and materials to the landmark, site, or structure and to the
surrounding area; and any other factors, including aesthetic factors which the
Commission deems to be pertinent.
      (2)   The Commission shall consider only exterior features of a landmark
or of a structure within a historic district, and its appurtenances and
environmental setting, and shall not consider any interior arrangements.
      (3)   The Commission shall not disapprove an application except with
respect to the several factors specified in paragraph (1) above.
      (4)   The Commission shall be strict in its judgment of plans for sites
or structures determined by research to be of historic, archaeological, or
architectural significance. The Commission shall be lenient in its judgment of
plans for sites or structures of little historic, archaeological, or
architectural significance, or of plans involving new construction, unless in
the Commission’s judgment such plans would seriously impair the historic,
archaeological, or architectural significance of surrounding sites or
structures. The Commission is not required to limit construction,
reconstruction, or alteration to the architectural style of any 1 period.
   (C)   Commission decision. The Division Staff shall issue a letter to the
applicant documenting the Commission’s approval, modification, continuance, or
rejection of each application and plans submitted to the Commission for review.
The Division Staff shall issue a certificate documenting the Commission's
approval or modification of each application and plans submitted to the
Commission for review. Work shall not be commenced and no building permit shall
be issued on any project until notification of approval of a certificate of
approval has been received by the Department of Permits and Inspections. The
failure of the Commission to act upon a completed application within 45 days
from the date the completed application was filed shall be deemed to constitute
automatic approval of the proposed changes unless an extension of this 45 day
period is agreed upon mutually by the applicant and the Commission or the
application has been withdrawn.
   (D)   Routine maintenance. Nothing in this chapter shall be taken or
construed to prevent maintenance that will have no material effect on the
exterior fabric or features of a designated landmark, site, structure, or
district, or to prevent customary farming operations or landscaping that will
have no material effect on the historic, archaeological, or architectural
significance of a designated landmark, site, structure, or district.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to areas within a designated district
which have been identified as advisory due to existing agricultural
preservation easements.
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 10-19-554, 7-13-2010; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 23-01, 2-7-2023; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-2024)
§ 1-23-8. RELOCATION OR DEMOLITION OF NON-DESIGNATED SITES OR STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to:
      (1)   All applications for Type 1 site plans, preliminary plans, grading
plans, individual zoning map amendments, floating zone reclassifications,
concept plans, and sketch plans (hereinafter a "Plan" or "Plans") that include
a proposal to move or demolish all or a portion of a non-designated site or
structure that is 50 years old or older, whichever Plan is submitted first.
      (2)   Any revised Plan that includes a proposal to move or demolish all
or a portion of a non-designated site or structure that is 50 years old or
older, whichever Plan is submitted first.
      (3)   An application (that does not involve any of Plan or Plans
described in subsection (A)(1) above) submitted to the Department of Permits
and Inspections for the moving or demolition of all or a portion of a non-
designated site or structure that is 50 years old or older.
   (B)   Assessment of significance.
      (1)   If a Plan or application is submitted for the moving or demolition
of all or a portion of a non-designated site or structure that is 50 years old
or older, the Plan or application will be forwarded to Historic Preservation
staff to determine whether the site or structure has historical, cultural,
architectural, or archaeological significance. A property has historical,
cultural, architectural, or archaeological significance if it meets the
criteria in §
1-23-6(B) above. If no significance is determined, the Plan or application for
moving or demolition of all or a portion of the site or structure may move
forward. If the site or structure is determined to be significant, Historic
Preservation staff shall forward the Plan or application to the Commission for
a decision as to whether the site or structure possesses unusual historic
value.
      (2)   If the Commission considers the site or structure to be of unusual
historic value to Frederick County, the state, or the nation, the Commission or
its designee shall attempt to formulate an economically feasible plan with the
owner(s) of the site or structure, who will act in good faith, for the
preservation of the site or structure. If the Commission determines that the
site or structure does not possess unusual historic value to Frederick County,
the state, or nation, the plan or application for moving or demolition of all
or a portion of the site or structure may move forward.
      (3)   If a Plan or application is submitted for the moving or demolition
of a site or structure that the Commission considers to be of unusual historic
value and no economically feasible plan can be formulated, the Commission or
their designee shall have 90 days, from the time it concludes that no
economically feasible plan can be formulated, to negotiate with the owner and
other parties in good faith in an effort to find a means of preserving the site
or structure. If no means of preserving the site or structure is agreed upon,
the Plan or application shall be approved unless a petition for designation has
been filed with the Division in accordance with §
1-23-6(C). If the County Council votes favorably and the property is designated
to the Frederick County Register of Historic Places, the Plan or application
shall be reviewed under §
1-23-7.
   (C)   Special merit exception. Even if a non-designated site or structure is
50 years old or older and is determined by the Commission to be of unusual
historical value to Frederick County, the state, or nation, the Commission may
approve a Plan or application that proposes moving or demolition of the site or
structure if:
      (1)   The site or structure is a deterrent to a major improvement program
that will be of substantial benefit to the local jurisdiction; or
      (2)   The retention of the site or structure would:
         (a)   Cause economic hardship to the owner as defined in §
1-23-9; or
         (b)   Not be in the best interests of a majority of persons in the
community.
(Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-2024; Bill No. 25-01, 2-18-2025)
§ 1-23-9. ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.
   Any owner seeking an exemption from the operation of the provisions of this
chapter due to economic hardship has the burden of proof to show by clear and
convincing evidence that the owner does not have the financial ability to
comply with the requirements of this chapter. In making its determination, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall consider a justification statement and
any additional evidence submitted by the owner and shall give due consideration
to whether the property was designated on the county's initiative, under the
procedure defined in §
1-23-6(C)(6).
(Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-2024)
§ 1-23-10. DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to prevent the gradual deterioration of
designated historic resources on the Frederick County Register of Historic
Places due to a failure to provide normal and customary maintenance such that
the unique attributes and character of the historic resource or district might
be lost due to decay, deterioration, or structural defects.
   (B)   The property owner of an individually designated landmark, site, or
structure, or of a site or structure within a designated historic district
shall not permit such landmark, site, or structure to fall into a state of
disrepair which may result in the deterioration of any exterior appurtenance or
architectural feature so as to produce or tend to produce, in the judgment of
the Commission, a detrimental effect upon the character of the district as a
whole or the life and character of the landmark, site, or structure in
question, including:
      (1)   Deterioration of exterior walls, foundations, or other vertical
support that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing, or buckling;
      (2)   Deterioration of flooring or floor supports, roofs, or other
horizontal members that cause leaning, sagging, splitting, listing, or
buckling;
      (3)   Deterioration of external chimneys that causes leaning, sagging,
splitting, listing, or buckling;
      (4)   Deterioration or crumbling of exterior plasters or mortars;
      (5)   Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, and
foundations, including broken windows or doors;
      (6)   Defective protection or lack of weather protection for exterior
wall and roof coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of
paint or other protective covering;
      (7)   Deterioration of exterior stairs, porches, handrails, window and
door frames, cornices, entablatures, wall facings, and architectural details
that causes delamination, instability, loss of shape and form, or crumbling;
      (8)   Deterioration of landscape features relevant to the historic
integrity of the structure or site, including but not limited to: fences,
gates, and accessory structures.
   (C)   In the event of demolition by neglect, the Commission may request the
Director of the Department of Permits and Inspections or their designee to
notify, in writing, the property owner of record as reflected on the tax rolls
of Frederick County, and the occupant or other person responsible for the
maintenance of the property, of the deterioration. The notice shall specify the
minimum items of repair or maintenance necessary to correct the deterioration
or prevent further deterioration.
   (D)   Prior to the issuance of a written notice, the Commission may request
that Division Staff establish a record of demolition by neglect. Such a record
may include dated materials such as photographs and written reports of the
condition of the property so as to record or measure the deterioration.
   (E)   The notice shall provide that corrective action shall commence within
30 days of the receipt of said notice and be completed within a reasonable time
thereafter. The notice shall state that the owner of record of the property, or
any person of record with any right, title, or interest therein, may, within 10
days after the receipt of the notice, request a hearing on the necessity of the
items and conditions contained in the notice. In the event a public hearing is
requested, it shall be held by the Commission upon 30 days’ written notice
being mailed to all persons of record with any right, title, or interest in the
property and to all citizens and organizations which the Director of the
Department of Permits and Inspections or their designee determines may have an
interest in the proceedings.
      (1)   If, after the public hearing, the Commission determines that the
corrective actions remain necessary, the Commission may request the Director of
the Department of Permits and Inspections to issue a final notice to comply
with the corrective action notice within 30 days of the date of the
Commission’s determination.
      (2)   Upon failure, neglect, or refusal of the property owner or other
responsible person, duly notified, to take the corrective action specified in
the corrective action notice within the time required, the Commission may
request that the Director of the Department of Permits and Inspections or their
designee enter the building or premises affected by the order and cause the
building or premises to be repaired, or cause any dangerous condition to be
remedied, as the case may be, at the expense of the owner.
      (3)   If the property owner fails to repay the county for expenses
incurred under subsection (D)(2) above within 30 days after written demand has
been mailed to their last known address, the Director of Permits and
Inspections shall notify the County Treasurer and a tax lien in favor of the
county for the amount of the expenses incurred under subsection (D)(2) shall
attach to the property. The property may be sold at tax sale to satisfy the
lien.
      (4)   Failure to comply with the original or final correction notice
shall constitute a violation of this chapter for each day that such violation
continues and shall be punishable as set forth in §
1-23-16 of the Frederick County Code.
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-
2024)
§ 1-23-11. ARCHAEOLOGICAL PROTECTION.
   (A)   Archaeological resources. The purpose of this section is to identify,
evaluate, and protect archaeological resources in Frederick County, which are
defined in §
1-23-3 above. Archaeological resources are non-renewable resources that
tangibly connect the county's history across hundreds and thousands of years.
   (B)   Applicability. This section applies to:
      (1)   All applications for Type 1 site plans, preliminary plans,
individual zoning map amendments, and floating zone reclassifications
(hereinafter a "Plan" or "Plans") that are submitted to the Division or to the
Planning Commission for consideration. Compliance with this section is
recommended for concept plans and sketch plans.
      (2)   For Type 1 site plans, preliminary plans, floating zone
reclassifications, and individual zoning map amendments, compliance with this
section must be completed prior to a Plan being scheduled for Planning
Commission review.
      (3)   Any revised Plan that extends the limits of disturbance of the
original Plan may also be subject to this section. Applicants should contact
the Division to determine if the revisions constitute a need for additional
archaeological review.
      (4)   This review process cannot be completed in lieu of any state or
federal review process that a project may be subject to.
   (C)   Administration. This section shall be administered by the Division,
which may adopt reasonable procedures for its administration, consistent with
applicable law. All reviews will be conducted by a professional archaeologist
working for the Division and whose professional qualifications meet or exceed
those established by the Secretary of the Interior.
      (1)   All archaeological work must be designed and completed by a
professional archaeologist in accordance with the Standards & Guidelines for
Archaeological Investigations in Maryland. Failure to submit the required
materials for archaeological review may cause delays in the plan review
process.
   (D)   Archaeological significance. The significance of archaeological
resources identified within the area of potential impact will be evaluated by a
professional archaeologist working for the Division, applying the National
Register of Historic Places Criteria for Evaluation (Criteria). The
archaeological resources will be considered significant if they possess one or
more of the qualities of significance as defined by the Criteria, can be
associated with a historic context, and retains historic integrity. The
National Register of Historic Places Criteria for Evaluation state that the
quality of significance in American history, architecture, archaeology, and
culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that
possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association, and:
      (1)   Criteria A: That are associated with events that have made a
significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history;
      (2)   Criteria B: That are associated with the lives of persons
significant in our past;
      (3)   Criteria C: That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period, or method of construction or that represent the work of a master, or
that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
      (4)   Criteria D: That have yielded, or may be likely to yield,
information important in prehistory or history.
   (E)   Assessment of archaeological potential. Prior to the submission of any
applicable Plans to the Division, applicants must participate in a scoping
meeting with the Division's Professional Archaeologist to discuss the
archaeological potential of the property and the scope of any potential
archaeological studies.
      (1)   At least 45 days prior to the scoping meeting, the applicant must
submit a request for an assessment of archaeological potential for the proposed
project. This request includes, but is not limited to, full and accurate
information about all ground disturbing activities proposed at the site,
existing conditions survey, a contour map of the project area, photographs of
the site, and any known historic resources on the site.
      (2)   Following the submission of the above information by the applicant,
the Division will research and perform on-site inspection to create an
assessment of the archaeological potential of the proposed project area, which
will be presented to the applicant at the scoping meeting. The applicant will
coordinate with the Division's professional archaeologist for site visits as
needed. No archaeological identification study should be started prior to the
review of the archaeological potential of the proposed project area by the
Division's professional archaeologist.
      (3)   Exemptions may be made at the discretion of the Division's
professional archaeologist if the area of potential impact is less than 5,000
square feet, if the area has significant existing disturbance that has already
destroyed potential archaeological sites, or if a previously conducted survey
unrelated to the Plan being applied for has concluded that archaeological
resources are non-existent.
   (F)   Archaeological studies. Following the archaeological assessment
scoping meeting, if the applicant was not granted an exemption, the applicant
must:
      (1)   Undertake an archaeological identification study (Phase I) and an
archaeological evaluation study (Phase II), as determined in the scoping
meeting, by a Professional Archaeologist for the area determined in the scoping
meeting to identify and evaluate intact archaeological resources in accordance
with standards outlined in the most current edition of the Standards and
Guidelines for Archeological Investigations in Maryland. A copy of the
archaeological identification and evaluation report and completed or updated
Maryland Inventory of Historic Properties (Archaeology) forms must be submitted
to the Division for review and comment.
      (2)   The Division shall have 30 days to comment on the materials
submitted by the applicant. After the Division's comments have been addressed
by the applicant and their professional archaeologist, a final copy of the
archaeological identification or evaluation report and a copy of the Maryland
Inventory of Historic Properties (Archaeology) forms must be submitted to the
Division. A copy of the report and forms shall be forwarded by the Division to
the Maryland Historical Trust. A redacted copy of the archaeological
identification or evaluation report must be submitted to the Division.
         (a)   If no archaeological resources are identified as the result of
the archaeological identification and evaluation studies, a summary letter of
negative findings must be submitted to the Division by the applicant's
professional archaeologist.
         (b)   If archaeological testing identifies archaeological resources,
but determines that they are not significant, in accordance with subsection (D)
above, then the archaeological identification and evaluation report must be
submitted to the Division. The Division will have 30 days to confirm that the
identified resources are not significant, in accordance with subsection (D)
above.
         (c)   If archaeological testing identifies significant archaeological
resources in accordance with subsection (D) above, an archaeological resource
management plan must be submitted to the Division. The Division will render a
determination in writing regarding the acceptability of the proposed
archaeological resource management plan within 30 days after receipt of the
studies and management plan, unless written consent to extend such period is
given by the applicant. The applicant maintains the right to amend their
application to avoid areas of high archaeological potential or known
archaeological resources.
      (3)   The county will treat archaeological resource locations and reports
with discretion.
   (G)   Archaeological identification and evaluation report and resource
management plan.
      (1)   When required under the provisions of this section, the applicant
must submit, as part of the Plan application an archaeological identification
report, an evaluation study, and archaeological resource management plan, as
necessary, prepared by a professional archaeologist. All archaeological
investigations, reports, and plans will conform with the most current edition
of the Standards and Guidelines for Archaeological Investigations in Maryland.
      (2)   An archaeological identification and evaluation report must include
a detailed evaluation of the archaeological significance of the archaeological
resources on the property, specifically addressing the proposed disturbance
within the Plan area, including a detailed assessment of the information
potential of identified resources according to the criteria outlined in
subsection (D) above.
      (3)   An archaeological resource management plan must include reasonable
measures for the preservation or mitigation of adverse effects on significant
archaeological resources within the Plan's area of proposed disturbance,
including but not limited to additional archaeological testing, archaeological
data recovery (Phase III), site construction monitoring, archaeological
resource avoidance, field recording, photography, laboratory analysis,
conservation of organic and metal artifacts, curation of the collection (e.g.,
artifacts, notes, photographs), public interpretation, and the preparation of
reports.
      (4)   The archaeological resource management plan must provide reasonable
measures for further archaeological study, stabilization, conservation,
curation of recovered artifacts by an appropriate public or private curation
facility or museum, and in situ preservation of archaeological resources found
within the site plan area, as required by the Planning Commission.
   (H)   Review of archaeological evaluation report and resource management
plan. The archaeological identification and evaluation studies and
archaeological resource management plan must be reviewed and approved,
disapproved, or approved with modifications or conditions, as part of the
applicable plan review process.
      (1)   This review will be completed and summarized in writing by the
Division's professional archaeologist. In the case of a substantive
disagreement between the county and the applicant regarding the findings, the
county can request a review by and consultation with the Maryland Historical
Trust. The findings by the Maryland Historical Trust will be nonbinding.
   (I)   Appeal. An applicant has 30 days from the date of the Division's final
determination to file an appeal for a hearing with the Division Director. The
Division Director will use best efforts to hold the hearing within 30 days of
the appeal request. If an applicant is still aggrieved by the Division
Director's decision, they may appeal to the Circuit Court, pursuant to Maryland
Rules Title 7, Chapter 200.
   (J)   Unanticipated discoveries. If the applicant or the applicant's
employees or assignees uncover unanticipated discoveries during soil
disturbance, work in the immediate vicinity must cease immediately and the
Division must be notified. Construction activities in the vicinity must not
resume until such time that all relevant parties have agreed upon a course of
action. If any human remains, funerary objects, or other features or artifacts
associated with a cemetery are uncovered, refer to the procedure in §
1-23-12(F).
(Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-2024)
§ 1-23-12. CEMETERIES.
   (A)   Preamble. Burial sites, human remains, and funerary objects are
significant cultural resources and should be treated with dignity and respect
in all circumstances. Disturbing or disinterring burial sites, human remains,
or funerary objects, when not requested by descendants, associated indigenous
people, or required by applicable law or regulation, should not be pursued
unless there are no other alternatives available, and only after consultation
with descendants or other legally authorized individuals or groups and fully
considered avoidance of impact and preservation in place. The burial sites,
human remains, and funerary objects of certain groups of people, including but
not limited to indigenous people and enslaved persons and their descendants,
have a higher probability of being unmarked and undocumented and are thus more
likely to be affected by development activity.
   (B)   Applicability. This section applies to all preliminary plans, site
plans, plats, concept plans, sketch plans, and grading permits for properties
that have a cemetery on the site.
   (C)   Cemetery identification. The location and boundary of an onsite
cemetery must be determined by one of the following methods, in consultation
with the Division:
      (1)   A survey using professionally acceptable methods and techniques
performed by a professional, including archival research, professional
archaeology, geophysical survey methods, and/or other nondestructive approved
techniques;
      (2)   Observations in the field including visible gravestones or markers,
a pattern of depressions indicative of graves, or associated fence boundaries;
or
      (3)   Reference to a modern map or plat or evidence found on historic
maps or documents.
   (D)   Preservation. A property owner/developer must preserve an onsite
cemetery by meeting the following requirements:
      (1)   Grading, construction, or subsurface disturbance within 25 feet of
the known cemetery boundary is prohibited; however, if a developer
professionally surveys the cemetery as described in subsection (C)(1) above,
the boundary of no disturbance may be decreased to 15 feet from the surveyed
cemetery boundary;
      (2)   Appropriate measures must be taken to protect the cemetery during
construction, such as a field-delineated limit of disturbance zone, orange
blaze safety fencing, or other appropriate physical markings.
   (E)   Reinterment. If a property owner/developer disinters and reinters
human remains at a burial site or sites, they must follow reinterment law
outlined in the Criminal Law Article of the Maryland Code, specifically, Title
10: Crimes Against Public Health, Conduct, and Sensibilities, Subtitle 4:
Crimes Relating to Human Remains, Md. Code Ann., Criminal Law Article, § 10-402
(d-f) and, if applicable, consult with the Maryland Historical Trust as
outlined in Md. Code Ann., Real Property Article, § 14-121.1. Proper treatment
of burial site in existence for more than 50 years.
   (F)   Discovery. If any person discovers the existence of previously unknown
human remains, grave markers, funerary objects, or other evidence of a cemetery
which reasonably indicates the presence of a cemetery in the course of grading,
construction, or work of any kind, that person must stop work immediately in
the discovery area and must give notice of the discovery within 24 hours to the
State's Attorney, the Division and, if applicable, consult with the Maryland
Historical Trust as outlined in Md. Code Ann., Real Property Article, § 14-
121.1. Proper treatment of burial site in existence for more than 50 years. All
permits issued relating to the discovery area will be suspended and the
property owner/developer must stop all work in the discovery area until a
determination is made pursuant to subsection (C) above. If reasonably
identifiable, the property owner will notify the nearest descendent of the
discovery.
      (1)   Determination. The Division will determine, in consultation with
the State's Attorney Office, if the discovery area is a cemetery. In making
this determination, the Division may require the property owner to comply with
the cemetery identification portions of subsection (C) above. If the Division
determines that the area is not a cemetery, the stop-work order will be lifted,
and the suspended permits released by the Division.
      (2)   Cemetery protection. If it is determined that the discovery area is
a cemetery, the property owner must comply with the requirements of cemetery
preservation listed in subsection (C) of this section and any requirements from
the State's Attorney Office.
   (G)   Subdivision and site development plan review.
      (1)   Inventory of cemetery elements and cemetery narrative descriptions.
An inventory of existing cemetery elements (such as walls, gates, landscape
features, and grave markers, including a record of their inscriptions) and
their condition must be submitted as part of any preliminary plan or site
development plan application. All plan submissions are required to provide a
narrative description and map identifying the location of cemeteries and known
historic and archaeological resources on the site.
      (2)   Establish a permanent fence. When a proposed preliminary plan or
site plan includes a known cemetery within the site, the applicant must provide
and maintain an appropriate fence or wall constructed of stone, brick, metal,
or wood to delineate the cemetery boundaries. The design of the proposed
enclosure and a construction schedule must be approved by the Planning
Commission, or its designee, prior to the issuance of any permit. The Division
may waive this requirement on a case-by-case basis.
      (3)   Right-of-way. A 15-foot right-of-way from the nearest public or
private road will be required to maintain family or person of interest access
to the cemetery.
      (4)   Non-buildable and open space lots. Property owners or developers
must accommodate the cemetery within a major subdivision by: i) placing the
cemetery in a non-buildable lot with a cemetery designation; ii) dedicating the
cemetery to a homeowner's association or a preservation, conservation, or
religious organization; iii) providing that the cemetery remains as a cemetery
in perpetuity; and iv) providing individuals related by blood or marriage or a
person of interest access to the cemetery. Any land placed in a non-buildable
cemetery lot designation pursuant to this section may be counted towards open
space requirements. Alternatively, a property owner or developer may transfer
the cemetery to the private ownership and care of a family member or descendant
group.
   (H)   Grading permit review. All grading permit submissions are required to
provide a narrative description and map identifying the location of known
cemeteries, the distance from the grading activity to the known cemetery
boundary, and known historic and archaeological resources on the site.
   (I)   Plat review. All submitted plats must include the known boundaries of
all known cemeteries within the plat.
(Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-2024)
§ 1-23-13. COUNTY-OWNED HISTORIC PROPERTIES.
   Division Historic Preservation staff will be consulted for any alteration to
a county-owned property that is designated as historic or eligible for historic
designation, per §
1-23-6, to determine if the proposed alteration would affect that property's
historic integrity.
(Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-2024)
§ 1-23-14. MARYLAND HISTORICAL TRUST.
   The Commission may designate the Maryland Historical Trust to make an
analysis of and report recommending the preservation of sites, structures, or
districts of historic, archaeological, architectural, or cultural significance
within the county. The report may include proposed boundaries of sites,
structures, or districts, as well as recommendations for the identification and
designation of particular sites, structures, or districts to be preserved.
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-
2024)
§ 1-23-15. APPEALS.
   In the event that any party is aggrieved by a decision of the Commission or
the county, the party has the right of appeal to the Circuit Court in
accordance with the Maryland Rules of Procedure 7-201 and following and in
accordance with the provisions of Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article.
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-
2024)
§ 1-23-16. VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   A violation of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement by the
Division Director or their designee ("Enforcement Official"), pursuant to §
1-1-9 of the Code.
   (B)   The Enforcement Official is not required to issue a warning notice.
   (C)   A first offense shall be deemed a Class C civil offense. Each
subsequent offense by the same individual or property owner(s) shall be cited
at the next highest Class of offense.
   (D)   The Enforcement Official may, in consultation with the County
Attorney, seek additional legal remedies as appropriate under the
circumstances.
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-
2024)
§ 1-23-17. CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The Historic Preservation Commission will review this chapter every 5
years to ensure that its provisions meet the current needs of Frederick County.
If the Commission determines that changes need to be made, they will be
submitted to the County Executive for a decision as to whether to send the
proposed changes to the County Council.
   (B)   The County Council shall, prior to any public hearing, refer all
proposed changes and amendments to this chapter to the Historic Preservation
Commission for review and recommendations, except if §
1-23-17(A) applies.
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-
2024)
§ 1-23-18. SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid for any reason, such invalidity shall not affect
the other provisions or any other application of this chapter which can be
given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, all
the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-
2024)
§ 1-23-19. APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all unincorporated lands
within the territorial limits of the county.
(Ord. 97-16-194, 12-2-1997; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 24-01, 4-16-
2024)
CHAPTER 1-24: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   Former Chapter 1-24, entitled “Alarm System Registration”, has been repealed
by ordinance 13-02-630, 2-28-2013.
CHAPTER 1-25: DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES AGREEMENTS (§§ 1-25-1 —
1-25-14)
Section
   
1-25-1   Definitions
   
1-25-2   Authority/public principal
   
1-25-3   Petition
   
1-25-4   Contents of development rights and responsibilities agreement
   
1-25-5   Referral to Planning Commission
   
1-25-6   Public hearing
   
1-25-7   Amendment of agreement
   
1-25-8   Termination of agreement; suspension
   
1-25-9   Applicable laws, regulations and policies
   
1-25-10   Recording
   
1-25-11   Enforcement
   
1-25-12   Time limits
   
1-25-13   Open sessions
   
1-25-14   Appeals
§ 1-25-1. DEFINITIONS.
   The words or phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning prescribed
in the current County Code except as otherwise indicated herein:
   AGREEMENT. A development rights and responsibilities agreement, including
any amendment.
   APPLICANT. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
society, syndication, trust, or other legal entity that files a petition to
enter into an agreement.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The current Frederick County Comprehensive Plan as
adopted by the county under the provisions of Division 1, Title 3 of the Land
Use Article of the Md. Ann. Code.
   COUNTY. Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY COUNCIL. County Council of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY EXECUTIVE. County Executive of Frederick County, Maryland.
   COUNTY GOVERNING BODY. County Council and County Executive of Frederick
County, Maryland.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, dumping,
extraction, dredging, grading, paving, storage of materials or equipment, land
excavation, land clearing, land improvement, landfill operation, or any
combination thereof; and any change in the use of a building for which a
building permit/zoning certificate is required by law.
   DIVISION. The Frederick County Division of Planning and Permitting or any
successor(s) to the duties and responsibilities of the Division.
   ENHANCED PUBLIC BENEFITS. Public infrastructure improvements or other public
benefit features to be provided at the applicant's expense, above and beyond
those that the applicant would otherwise be required to provide under
applicable law, during the course of the development of the property, including
but not limited to, adequate public facilities and rezoning ordinance
requirements.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Frederick County Planning Commission.
   PROPERTY. The parcel or parcels of real property to be developed which are
the subject of an agreement.
   PUBLIC PRINCIPAL. The governmental entity of the County that has been
granted the authority to enter into agreements under this chapter.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 13-16-644, 8-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 19-05, 5-21-2019)
§ 1-25-2. AUTHORITY/PUBLIC PRINCIPAL.
   The county may exercise the authority granted by Md. Ann. Code, Land Use
Article, § 7-302(b), to enter into development rights and responsibility
agreements and the County Executive shall exercise the authority of the public
principal to negotiate, execute and enforce agreements, except that the County
Council shall act as the public principal for purposes of conducting the public
hearing on a proposed agreement and either approving or rejecting an agreement
or an amendment to an executed agreement. In the suspension or termination of
an executed agreement, the County Executive and the County Council shall act
together as the public principal.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 13-16-644, 8-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-25-3. PETITION.
   (A)   Any applicant having a legal or equitable interest in real property in
Frederick County may petition the county to enter into an agreement.
   (B)   The petition shall be filed with the Division and must include the
processing fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by Resolution of the
county governing body.
   (C)   A proposed development with a residential component must contain at
least 900 dwelling units to be eligible for a development rights and
responsibilities agreement, unless the development is a mixed use development
district, in which case a minimum of 600 dwelling units are required for
eligibility.
   (D)   The petition shall include a copy of the proposed agreement.
   (E)   All persons with a lien interest in the property must authorize the
petition.
   (F)   The County Executive shall first review the petition and determine
whether to accept the petition and initiate this process.
   (G)   If the County Executive accepts the petition, a filing fee for each
petition shall be paid in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by Resolution
of the county governing body.
   (H)   The County Executive may negotiate the terms of the development rights
and responsibilities agreement with the applicant.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 13-16-644, 8-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 19-05, 5-21-2019)
§ 1-25-4. CONTENTS OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES AGREEMENT.
   (A)   At a minimum, a development rights and responsibilities agreement
shall contain the following:
      (1)   A lawyer's certification that applicant has either a legal or
equitable interest in the property;
      (2)   The names of all persons having an equitable or legal interest in
the property, including lien holders;
      (3)   A legal description of the property subject to the agreement;
      (4)   The duration of the agreement;
      (5)   The permissible uses of the property;
      (6)   The density or intensity of use of the property;
      (7)   The maximum height and size of structures to be located on the
property;
      (8)   A description of permits required or already approved for the
development of the property;
      (9)   A statement that the proposed development plan is consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan and all applicable county regulations;
      (10)   A description of the conditions, terms, restrictions or other
requirements determined by the county to be necessary to ensure the public
health, safety or welfare;
      (11)   A description of the enhanced public benefits to be provided by
the applicant to the county in exchange for the benefits received by the
applicant in the agreement;
      (12)   An estimated cost or value of the enhanced public benefits
provided by the applicant to the county in exchange for the benefits received
by the applicant, and the timeframe within which the applicant will provide the
enhanced public benefits in accordance with the following:
         (A)   If an enhanced public benefit of land is to be provided, the
land shall be transferred to the county prior to the expiration date of the
agreement; and
         (B)   If an enhanced public benefit is to be provided in the form of
construction of or improvement to a public facility, it shall be assured by the
applicant submitting a financial guarantee (e.g., a letter of credit or a
performance bond), and such guarantee shall be provided prior to the expiration
date of the agreement;
      (13)   To the extent applicable, provisions for the:
         (a)   Dedication of a portion of the property for public use;
         (b)   Protection of sensitive areas;
         (c)   Preservation and restoration of historic structures;
         (d)   Construction or financing of public facilities; and
         (e)   Responsibility for attorney's fees, costs, and expenses incurred
by the county in the event an agreement is abandoned or breached by the
applicant.
   (B)   An agreement may contain other terms, provisions, requirements and
agreements concerning the property which may be agreed upon by the county and
the applicant.
   (C)   An agreement may fix the time frame and terms for development and
construction on the property.
   (D)   An agreement may provide for other matters consistent with this
chapter.
   (E)   All persons with a lien interest in the property must execute the
agreement.
   (F)   Any superior interest with a power of sale must be subordinated to the
position of the county.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 12-04-599, 2-21-2012; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 16-10, 9-6-2016; Bill No. 19-05, 5-21-2019)
§ 1-25-5. REFERRAL TO PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   If the County Executive accepts the petition as provided in §
1-25-3(F), the Division shall refer the petition to the Planning Commission for
determination of whether the proposed agreement is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   If the County Executive negotiates the terms of the development rights
and responsibilities agreement with the applicant as provided in §
1-25-3(G), the Division shall refer the negotiated agreement to the Planning
Commission.
   (C)   The county may not enter an agreement unless the Planning Commission
determines whether the proposed agreement is consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 13-16-644, 8-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-25-6. PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   Before entering an agreement, the County Council shall conduct a
public hearing on the agreement. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county once each week for 2 consecutive
weeks, with the first such publication of notice appearing at least 14 days
prior to the hearing.
   (B)   The County Executive may not execute the development rights and
responsibilities agreement unless the County Council has adopted a resolution
authorizing the execution of the agreement.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-25-7. AMENDMENT OF AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Subject to paragraph (B) of this section and after a public hearing,
the parties to an agreement may amend the agreement by mutual consent.
   (B)   The parties may not amend an agreement unless:
      (1)   The Planning Commission considers and recommends whether an
amendment should require compliance with the current County Code provisions,
rules, and regulations, including but not limited to those relating to adequate
public facilities, school capacity, stormwater management and forest
conservation; and
      (2)   The Planning Commission determines whether the proposed amendment
is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; and
      (3)   After a public hearing, the County Council adopts a resolution
authorizing the amendment.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 13-16-644, 8-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 19-05, 5-21-2019)
§ 1-25-8. TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT; SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The parties to an agreement may terminate the agreement by mutual
consent.
   (B)   If the county governing body determines that suspension or termination
is essential to ensure the public health, safety, or welfare, the county
governing body may suspend or terminate an agreement after a public hearing.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 13-16-644, 8-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-25-9. APPLICABLE LAWS, REGULATIONS AND POLICIES.
   (A)   The local laws, rules, regulations, and policies governing the use,
density, or intensity of the property subject to the agreement shall be the
local zoning laws, rules, regulations and policies in force at the time the
county and the applicant execute the agreement.
   (B)   An agreement may not prevent the application to a development of the
local zoning laws, rules, regulations, and policies enacted after the date of
the agreement, if the county determines that compliance with the local zoning
laws, rules, regulations and policies is essential to ensure the health,
safety, or welfare of residents of all or part of Frederick County.
   (C)   An agreement may not prevent the application to a development of local
laws, rules, regulations, and policies that are not part of the local zoning
laws, rules, regulations, and policies.
   (D)   An agreement may not alter the applicant's obligation to pay the fees
in effect at the time the fee payment is due.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 13-16-644, 8-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 19-05, 5-21-2019)
§ 1-25-10. RECORDING.
   (A)   An agreement not recorded in the Land Records of Frederick County
within 20 days after the day on which the county and the applicant execute the
agreement is void. Either the applicant or the county may record the agreement.
   (B)   The county and the applicant, and their successors in interest, are
bound to the agreement after the agreement is recorded.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-25-11. ENFORCEMENT.
   Unless the agreement is terminated under §
1-25-8 of this chapter, the county and the applicant, or their successors in
interest, may enforce the agreement.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 13-16-644, 8-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014)
§ 1-25-12. TIME LIMITS.
   The term of an agreement shall not exceed 8 years from the date of execution
of the agreement.
   (A)   An agreement may be amended once to extend the term for a period not
to exceed 5 years, in accordance with §
1-25-7 of this chapter.
   (B)   The applicant must file a written request for an extension of the
agreement with the division not less than 90 days prior to the termination date
of the agreement.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014; Bill No. 19-05, 5-21-
2019)
§ 1-25-13. OPEN SESSIONS.
   Any negotiations between a County elected official and the applicant or the
applicant's agents concerning an agreement shall be conducted in open session.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-2014)
§ 1-25-14. APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by an agreement may file an administrative appeal
as set forth in § 9-1005 of the Land Use Article of the Md. Ann. Code.
   (B)   An appeal must be taken within 30 days of the day on which the parties
execute the agreement or an amendment to an agreement.
   (C)   If the effect of the decision of the Circuit Court revises the
agreement or an amendment to an agreement in any way, any party to the
agreement may terminate the agreement within 30 days of the date on which the
Circuit Court decision becomes final.
(Ord. 07-33-473, 11-15-2007; Ord. 13-16-644, 8-8-2013; Ord. 14-23-678, 11-13-
2014; Bill No. 19-05, 5-21-2019)
PART II CODE OF PUBLIC LOCAL LAWS OF FREDERICK COUNTY, 1979
CHAPTER 2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS (§§ 2-1-1 — 2-1-8)
Section
   
2-1-1   How Code designated and cited; status
   
2-1-2   Definitions and rules of construction
   
2-1-3   Catchlines of sections
   
2-1-4   Severability of parts of Code
   
2-1-5   Provisions construed as continuation of existing acts
   
2-1-6   Working of prisoners on public roads and the like
   
2-1-7   Confirmation of code of public local laws
   
2-1-8   Title of Clerk changed to Administrative Officer
§ 2-1-1. How Code designated and cited; status.
   The provisions embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated "Code of Public Local Laws of Frederick
County," and may be so cited. The Code of Public Local Laws of Frederick County
shall constitute Article 11 of the Public Local Laws of Maryland.
(Code 1959, § 1-1)
Editor's note:
   Section 2-1-1 was amended in 2005 by Senate Bill 904 to correct an obsolete
reference that occurred as a result of republication of the code.
§ 2-1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
   In the interpretation and construction of this Code, the following
definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are
inconsistent with the acts of the legislature, decisions of the courts of the
state, or the context clearly requires otherwise.
      (1)   Whenever the term ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT TO THE BOARD
OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS shall appear in this Code, it shall mean the
administrative officer to the board of county commissioners.
      (2)   The term BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS shall mean the board of
county commissioners for Frederick County, Maryland.
      (3)   Wherever the term CLERK in reference to the Clerk to the Board of
County Commissioners shall appear in the Code, it shall mean the administrative
officer to the Board of County Commissioners.
      (4)   Except where otherwise specifically provided, the words THIS CODE
shall mean the Code of Public Local Laws of Frederick County, 1979, as
established in §
2-1-1 above.
      (5)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by law for
the doing of any act, the day of the act, event or default after which the
designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of
the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or
a legal holiday, in which event, the period runs until the end of the next day,
which is neither a Saturday, nor a Sunday, nor a holiday. When the period of
time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, immediate Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays shall be excluded in the computation. A half holiday shall
be considered as other days and not as a holiday.
      (6)   The words COUNTY or THE COUNTY means Frederick County, in the State
of Maryland.
      (7)   Words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more public
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such officers or persons.
      (8)   The word MONTH means a calendar month.
      (9)   Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to
several persons or things and words importing the plural number may include the
singular.
      (10)   The word OATH shall be deemed to include an affirmation, and the
word SWORN shall be construed to include the word AFFIRMED.
      (11)   “Or” may be read “and” and “and” may be read “or,” if the sense
requires it.
      (12)   The word OWNER, applied to a building or land, shall include any
part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenants by the entireties, tenant in
partnership or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land.
      (13)   The word PERSON means any individual, partnership, corporation,
joint stock association or any city or state, or any subdivision thereof, and
includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
      (14)   PERSONAL PROPERTY includes every species of property, except real
property as defined by this section.
      (15)   The words PRECEDING and FOLLOWING means next before and next
after, respectively.
      (16)   The word PROPERTY shall include real and personal property.
      (17)   REAL PROPERTY shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments and
shall embrace all chattels real.
      (18)   The words STATE, THE STATE or THIS STATE mean the State of
Maryland.
      (19)   The word STREET means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatsoever nature when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular traffic.
      (20)   Words in the present tense include the future.
      (21)   The word WRITTEN and IN WRITING may include printing and any other
mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any
person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by
law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is
unable to write, by his proper mark.
      (22)   The word YEAR means a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
(Code 1959, § 1-2; 1991, Chapter 19, § 1)
§ 2-1-3. Catchlines of sections.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface
type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section
and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part
of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.
(Code 1959, § 1-3; 1972, Chapter 62, § 2)
§ 2-1-4. Severability of parts of Code.
   Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Code
be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining
words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since
the same would have been enacted without the incorporation of this Code or any
such invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or
section.
(Code 1959, § 1-4)
§ 2-1-5. Provisions construed as continuations of existing acts.
   The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the
same as those of the local laws, existing at the time of the adoption of this
Code, shall be construed as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
(Code 1959, § 1-5)
§ 2-1-6. Working of prisoners on public roads and the like.
   The Sheriff of the county is authorized and directed to require all persons
of sufficient ability who are sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail by
any court of the county as a punishment for any crime or misdemeanor committed
to work upon the public roads, highways, buildings and properties of the county
and any municipality or to do some work in connection with the improvement as
part of the prison discipline and management. However, the work is for public
and not private benefit. The sentence of every person is reduced by 1 day for
every 5 working days spent in work.
(1961, Chapter 687, § 1; 1974, Chapter 275, § 2 )
§ 2-1-7. Confirmation of code of public local laws.
   Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Maryland that the Code of Public
Local Laws of Frederick County, 1979, being Article 11 of the Code of Public
Local Laws of Maryland, published under the direction of the Board of County
Commissioners of Frederick County, as Part II, Frederick County Code 1979, be
confirmed as legal and be taken as evidence of the laws purporting to be
contained therein in all the courts of this state and by all public officials
of the state and its political subdivisions.
(1981, Chapter 59, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 59, § 1, 1979, nonamendatory of the Code, has been included as §
2-1-7 at the discretion of the editors.
§ 2-1-8. [Title of clerk changed to administrative officer.]
   Notwithstanding Article 25, § 1 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, in
Frederick County, the clerk to the county commissioners shall be known as the
county manager. Any reference in the Annotated Code of Maryland to the clerk to
the board of county commissioners shall mean in Frederick County the county
manager.
(1991, Chapter 19, § 1; 1996, Chapter 27, § 1)
CHAPTER 2-2: ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 2-2-1 — 2-2-15)
Section
   
2-2-1   Saturday closing of county offices
   
2-2-2   Retirement pensions
   
2-2-3   Right to farm law
   
2-2-4   Reciprocal local preference
   
2-2-5   Public facilities bonds
Cross references:
   Authority of Board of County Commissioners to provide for school
transportation for children, see §
2-12-2;
   Authority of Board of County Commissioners to provide services for retarded
and handicapped children, see §
2-12-1;
   County Roads Board, see §§
2-11-26 et seq.;
   Finance and taxation, see
Chapter 2-7 
§ 2-2-1. Saturday closing of county offices.
   In the individual discretion of the executive head of every department,
office or agency of the county government, any such department, office or
agency may be entirely closed for business on Saturdays.
(1957, Chapter 183, § 1)
§ 2-2-2. Retirement pensions.
   The Board of County Commissioners may in their discretion investigate the
matter of providing retirement pensions for county employees and officers whose
compensation is paid by the county commissioners and for whom pensions are not
otherwise provided, and may, in their discretion, establish and maintain a
general county retirement or pension system, including through private
insurance for such employees and officers. For these purposes the board of
county commissioners may:
   (a)   Employ such persons as they deem necessary under their direction to
investigate the matter of providing such pensions and to prepare, establish,
maintain and administer a system which will operate on a sound actuarial basis;
   (b)   Prescribe classifications and conditions of admission or exclusion
from any system adopted and provide for a general system of allowances,
benefits and payments to the members of such system, or in the case of their
death, to the dependents, and prescribe all rules and regulations necessary or
advisable for the operation of such system;
   (c)   Levy such taxes and appropriate and expend such sums as may be
necessary to pay for all salaries, expenses, contributions and charges arising
out of the exercise of the powers herein conferred.
(Code 1959, § 10B-1; 1962, March Ex. Sess., Chapter 1; 1965, Chapter 227, § 1)
§ 2-2-3. Right to farm law.
   (a)   Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the county commissioners
may adopt an ordinance or regulations or take any other action that the county
commissioners consider necessary to protect a person’s right to farm or engage
in agricultural or forestry operations.
   (b)   Before adopting an ordinance or regulations under this section, the
county commissioners shall hold a public hearing and shall provide reasonable
notice of the hearing.
(1995, Chapter 28, § 1)
§ 2-2-4. Reciprocal local preference.
   (a)   (1)   In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (2)   FREDERICK COUNTY FIRM means a business entity that has its
principal office in Frederick County.
      (3)   NONRESIDENT FIRM means a business entity that has its principal
office out of Frederick County.
   (b)   (1)   When awarding a contract by competitive bidding, if the state or
political subdivision in which a nonresident firm is located gives an advantage
to its resident businesses, the board of county commissioners of Frederick
County may give an identical advantage to the lowest responsive and responsible
bid from a Frederick County firm over that of the nonresident firm.
      (2)   An advantage may include:
         (I)   A percentage preference;
         (II)   An employee residency requirement; or
         (III)   Any other provision that favors a nonresident firm over a
Frederick County firm.
   (c)   The board of county commissioners may adopt regulations to carry out
this section.
(1995, Chapter 613, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 613, § 1, 1995, added provisions designated as § 2-2-3 of the Public
Local Laws. Inasmuch Chapter 28, § 1, 1995, already added provisions as a § 2-
2-3, the editor has redesignated these Chapter 613 provisions as § 2-2-4.
§ 2-2-5. Public facilities bonds.
   (a)   As used herein, the term COUNTY means the body politic and corporate
of the State of  Maryland known as the County Commissioners of Frederick
County. PUBLIC FACILITIES means the costs of construction and reconstruction of
capital projects, including, but not limited to, landfill projects, public
schools, roads, bridges, flood control projects, solid waste facilities, water
and leachate treatment facilities, libraries, and communication systems,
including development of property, acquisition, and installation of equipment
and furnishings, together with any related architectural, financial, legal,
planning, or engineering services.
   (b)   The county is hereby authorized to finance any part or all of the
costs of the facilities described in section 1 of this Act, and to borrow money
and incur indebtedness for that purpose, at one time or from time to time, in
an amount not exceeding, in the aggregate, $21,400,000.00 and to evidence its
borrowing by the issuance and sale upon its full faith and credit of general
obligation bonds in like par amount, which may be issued at one time or from
time to time, in one or more groups or series, as the county may determine.
   (c)   (1)   The bonds shall be issued pursuant to a resolution of the county
which shall describe generally the public facilities for which the proceeds of
the bond sale are intended and the anticipated amount needed for those
purposes. The county shall have and is hereby granted full and complete
authority and discretion in the resolution to fix and determine with respect to
the bonds of any issue: the designation, date of issue, denomination or
denominations, form or forms and tenor of the bonds; the rate or rates of
interest payable thereon, or the method of determining the same, which may
include a variable rate; the date or dates and amount or amounts of maturity,
which need not be in equal par amounts or in consecutive annual installments,
provided only that no bond of any issue shall mature later than thirty years
from the date of its issue; the manner of selling the bonds, which may be at
either public or private sale, for such price or prices as may be determined to
be for the best interests of the county; the manner of executing the bonds,
which may be by facsimile; the terms and conditions, if any, under which bonds
may be tendered for payment or purchase prior to their stated maturity; the
terms or conditions, if any, under which bonds may or shall be redeemed prior
to their stated maturity; the place or places of payment of the principal of
and the interest on the bonds, which may be at any bank or trust company within
or without the State of Maryland; and generally all matters incident to the
terms, conditions, issuance, sale and delivery thereof.
   The county may enter into agreements with agents, banks, fiduciaries,
insurers, or others for the purpose of enhancing the marketability of and
security for the bonds and for the purpose of securing any tender option that
may be granted to holders of the bonds.
   In case any officer whose signature appears on any bond ceases to be such
officer before delivery, the signature shall nevertheless be valid and
sufficient for all purposes as if the officer had remained in office until
delivery. The bonds and their issue and sale shall be exempt from the
provisions of sections 2C, 9, 10 and 11 of Article 31 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
   If the county determines in the resolution to offer any of the bonds by
solicitation of competitive bids at public sale, the resolution shall fix the
terms and conditions of the public sale and shall adopt a form of notice of
sale, which shall outline the terms and conditions, and a form of
advertisement, which shall either be published in one or more daily or weekly
newspapers having a general circulation in the county or with appropriate
financial information services and which may also be published in one or more
journals having a circulation primarily among banks and investment bankers.
   Upon delivery of any bonds to the purchaser or purchasers, payment shall be
made to the treasurer of Frederick County or such other official of the county
as may be designated to receive payment in a resolution passed by the county
commissioners of Frederick County before delivery.
   For purposes of issuance and sale, bonds authorized hereunder may be
consolidated into a single issue with any other bonds authorized to be issued
by the county.
   (d)   The net proceeds of the sale of bonds shall be used and applied
exclusively and solely for the public facilities for which the bonds are sold.
If the net proceeds of the sale of any issue of bonds exceeds the amount needed
to finance the public facilities described in the resolution, the excess funds
shall be applied to the payment of the next principal maturity of the bonds or
to the redemption of any part of the bond which has been made redeemable or to
the purchase and cancellation of bonds, unless the county adopts a resolution
allocating the excess funds to the construction, improvement, or development of
other public facilities.
   (e)   The bonds hereby authorized shall constitute, and they shall so
recite, an irrevocable pledge of the full faith and credit and unlimited taxing
power of the county to the payment of the maturing principal of and interest on
the bonds as and when they become payable. In each and every fiscal year that
any of the bonds are outstanding, the county shall levy or cause to be levied
ad valorem taxes upon all the assessable property within the corporate limits
of Frederick County in rate and amount sufficient to provide for or assume the
payment, when due, of the principal of and interest on all the bonds maturing
in each such fiscal year and, if the proceeds from the taxes so levied in any
fiscal year prove inadequate for such payment, additional taxes shall be levied
in the succeeding fiscal year to make up any deficiency. The county may apply
to the payment of the principal of and interest on any bonds issued under this
Act any funds received by it from the State of Maryland, the United States of
America, any agency or instrumentality of either, or from any other source. If
such funds are granted for the purpose of assisting the county in financing the
construction, improvement, development, or renovation of the public facilities
defined in this Act and, to the extent of any such funds received or receivable
in any fiscal year, taxes that might otherwise be required to be levied under
this Act may be reduced or need not be levied.
   (f)   The county is hereby further authorized and empowered, at any time and
from time to time, to issue its bonds in the manner hereinabove described for
the purpose of refunding, upon purchase or redemption, any bonds issued under
this Act. The validity of any refunding bonds are in no way dependent upon or
related to the validity or invalidity of the obligations being refunded. The
powers granted under this Act with respect to the issuance of bonds shall be
applicable to the issuance of refunding bonds. Such refunding bonds may be
issued by the county for the purpose of providing it with funds to purchase in
the open market any of its outstanding bonds issued under this Act, prior to
their maturity, or for the purpose of providing it with funds for the
redemption prior to maturity of any outstanding bonds which are, by their
terms, redeemable. The proceeds of the sale of any refunding bonds shall be
segregated and set apart by the county as a separate trust fund to be used
solely for the purpose of paying the purchase or redemption prices of the bonds
to be refunded.
   (g)   The county may, prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, issue
interim certificates or temporary bonds, exchangeable for definitive bonds when
such bonds have been executed and are available for delivery. The county may,
by appropriate resolution, provide for the replacement of any bonds issued
under this Act which may have become mutilated or lost or destroyed upon
whatever conditions and after receiving whatever indemnity as the county may
require.
   (h)   Any and all obligations issued under this Act, their transfer, the
interest payable on them, and any income derived from them from time to time
(including any profit made in their sale) shall be and are hereby declared to
be at all times exempt from state, county, municipal or other taxation of every
kind and nature whatsoever within the State of Maryland.
   Nothing in this Act shall prevent the county from authorizing hereunder the
issuance and sale of bonds the interest on which is not excludable from gross
income for federal income tax purposes.
   (i)   The authority to borrow money and issue bonds conferred on the county
by this Act shall be deemed to provide additional, alternative, and
supplemental authority for borrowing money and shall be regarded as
supplemental and additional to powers conferred upon the county by other laws
and may not be regarded as in derogation of any power now existing; and all
previously enacted laws authorizing the county to borrow money are hereby
continued to the extent that the power contained in them is continuing or has
not been exercised, unless any law is expressly repealed by this Act, and the
validity of any bonds issued under previously enacted laws is hereby ratified,
confirmed, and approved. This Act, being necessary for the welfare of the
inhabitants of Frederick County, shall be liberally construed to effect its
purposes. All Acts and parts of Acts inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act are hereby repealed to the extent of any inconsistency.
   (j)   This Act shall take effect June 1, 1995.
(1995, Chapter 180, §§ 1-10)
§§ 2-2-6 -- 2-2-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II: BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS (§§ 2-2-16 — 2-2-40)
Section
   
2-2-16   Elections
   
2-2-17   Meetings and availability for county business
   
2-2-18   Compensation; fringe benefits
   
2-2-19   Residency requirements
   
2-2-20   Attorney
   
2-2-21   Printing and advertising
   
2-2-21.1   Authority of Commissioners to sell certain real property at public
or private sale
   
2-2-22   Authority to sell Montevue Hospital
   
2-2-23   Authority of Commissioners to abolish certain authorities and the like
and establish Department of Public Works
   
2-2-24   Defense of employees
   
2-2-25   Tax to support libraries
   
2-2-26   Tax levy for certain organizations
   
2-2-27   Loan for capital improvements for school
   
2-2-28   Enforcement; maximum penalty for violation
   
2-2-29   Civil infractions
   
2-2-30   Authority of Commissioners regarding appliance installers
§ 2-2-16. Elections.
   The election of the members of the board of county commissioners shall be
held on Tuesday after the first Monday in the month of November, 1974 and on
the same day in every fourth year thereafter. There shall then be elected five
(5) commissioners, who shall compose the board of county commissioners. The
county commissioners shall take office on December first following their
election, except if such date shall fall on a Sunday, holiday or any other day
on which the courthouse is not open, in which event they shall take office on
the next succeeding business day on which the courthouse is open.
(Code 1959, § 2-3; 1967, Chapter 603, § 1; 1974, Chapter 103, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   Size of board of county commissioners to be as determined by public local
law, Md. Ann. Code, Art. 25,§ 18. See also Const. Art. VII, § 1
§ 2-2-17. Meetings and availability for county business.
   The board of county commissioners shall determine the times and places of
its meeting.
(Code 1959, § 2-5; 1965, Chapter 423, § 2; 1994, Chapter 50, § 1)
Statutory references:
   Meetings to be public, see Md. Ann. Code, Art. 25, § 5;
   Quarterly meetings required, see Md. Ann. Code, Art. 25, § 17
§ 2-2-18. Compensation; fringe benefits.
   (a)   (1)   Each member of the board of county commissioners is entitled to
an annual salary of $45,000 as full compensation for services as a member of
the board of county commissioners or as a member of any other county board or
agency
      (2)   In addition, each member of the board of county commissioners is
entitled to reimbursement for expenses incurred in the performance of the
duties of the member as may be provided in the annual county budget.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, each member is
entitled to those fringe benefits regularly provided to county employees.
   (c)   (1)   The Board of County Commissioners may:
         (i)   Establish that each member may receive benefits provided in the
county retirement program; or
         (ii)   If the action specified in item (i) of this paragraph is not
taken, establish specific criteria and benefits that apply only to the County
Commissioners.
      (2)   A criterion or benefit established under paragraph (1)(ii) of this
subsection may not:
         (i)   Exceed a similar criterion or benefit provided by state law for
General Assembly members; and
         (ii)   Increase the compensation of the County Commissioner during the
term of office of the County Commissioners in office when the criterion or
benefit is established or modified.
(Code 1959, § 2-4; 1977, Chapter 86, § 1; 1982, Chapter 86, § 1; 1985, Chapter
430, § 1; 1989, Chapter 81, § 1; 1990, Chapter 317, § 1; 2005, Chapter 314, §
1; 2009, Chapter 397, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   The provisions of this section concerning the salary or compensation of the
county commissioners of Frederick County shall take effect at the beginning of
the next following term of office after the effective date of this section.
§ 2-2-19. Residency requirements.
   (a)   A candidate for county commissioner shall be a resident and registered
voter of Frederick County for at least 6 months immediately prior to the date
of election.
   (b)   A county commissioner who no longer resides in Frederick County may
not continue as a county commissioner.
(2006, Chapter 205, § 1)
§ 2-2-20. Attorney.
   The board of county commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to
appoint an attorney to the board of county commissioners, who shall receive as
compensation for the professional services rendered by him as such attorney a
sum determined by the board; such sum shall be paid as salary in lieu of all
fees and other compensation for services rendered the board.
(Code 1959, § 2-6)
§ 2-2-21. Printing and advertising.
   The board of county commissioners is authorized to have its printing and
advertising done in such manner as shall, in its judgment, be most conducive to
the interest of the county.
(Code 1959, § 2-7; 1965, Chapter 223, § 1)
§ 2-2-21.1. Authority of commissioners to sell certain real property at public
or private sale.
   (a)   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the county
commissioners of every county may:
         (i)   Acquire by purchase, gift, devise, bequest, condemnation, or
otherwise, any property, or any interest therein, of any kind needed for any
public purpose;
         (ii)   Erect buildings thereon for the benefit of the county; and
         (iii)   Sell at public sale any property when no longer needed for
public use.
      (2)   Property may not be sold until it has been advertised for at least
20 days prior to the date of sale.
   (b)   (1)   The provisions of this subsection prevail over those of
subsection (a) to the extent of any inconsistency.
      (2)   In Frederick County and Somerset County, county commissioners may
negotiate with any governmental body or agency located within the county for
the sale of real property no longer needed by the county school board, without
advertising the property for sale, after three independent appraisals have been
obtained. Any proceedings for acquisition by condemnation shall be taken
pursuant to Title 12 of the Real Property Article of the Code.
      (3)   (i)   In Frederick County, the board of county commissioners may
also negotiate with Frederick Memorial Hospital, Inc. in the same manner in
which the board of county commissioners may negotiate with any governmental
body or agency located within the county for the sale of real property no
longer needed by the county school board.
         (ii)   In Frederick County, the board of county commissioners may
accept gifts of land not needed for public purposes and sell the property at
public or private sale for such consideration as the board considers adequate.
All proceeds derived from the sale of such land shall be used in accordance
with the county budget, or in accordance with a resolution adopted by the
board. Any sales agreement entered into under this subparagraph may not become
effective until a copy thereof has been filed with the clerk of the court of
the county, and a summary of the agreement has been published in at least one
newspaper of general circulation in the county.
         (iii)   In Frederick County, the board of county commissioners may
sell abandoned rights-of- way in the county:
            1.   At a public or private sale; and
            2.   After the property has been advertised for at least 20 days.
         (iv)   In Frederick County, in addition to the authority granted in
this section, the board of county commissioners may sell at a public or private
sale any real property owned by the board of county commissioners, if the board
of county commissioners:
            1.   Determines that the property is no longer needed for any
public use; and
            2.   Subject to the procedures of the county commissioners,
provides adequate notice and a hearing on the sale of the real property.
(1984, Chapter 656, § 1; 1986, Chapter 787, § 1; 2002, Chapter 506, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 656, § 1, 1984, nonamendatory of the Code, has been included herein
as § 2-2-21.1, at the discretion of the editors. Subsequently, Chapter 787, §
1, 1986, has been treated as amending Chapter 656, as set forth hereinabove.
§ 2-2-22. Authority to sell Montevue Hospital.
   The board of county commissioners is authorized and empowered to sell, grant
and convey Montevue Hospital and the farm whereon such hospital is located,
together with all the buildings and improvements thereon. The board of county
commissioners shall apply the money received therefor to the payment of the
bonded indebtedness assumed by the county for the building and maintenance of
the hospital aforesaid and, secondly, to the payment of any indebtedness of the
board of charities and corrections for the county arising from the balance of
such purchase money shall be expended for the purchase of land and the erection
of buildings suitable for the support and maintenance of the poor of the
county.
(Code 1930, Art. 11, § 128)
§ 2-2-23. Authority of commissioners to abolish certain authorities and the
like and establish department of public works.
   (a)   The board of county commissioners may abolish any water or sewer
authority created by the board of county commissioners pursuant to the
provisions of Title 9, Subtitle 9 of the Environment Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, or by public local law enacted by the General Assembly, and
may abolish any sanitary district or commission created pursuant to the
provisions of Title 9, Subtitle 6 of the Environment Article or enacted by
public local law by the General Assembly. After such an authority, district or
commission has been so abolished, or if none exists, the board of county
commissioners shall create a department of public works and shall provide for
its organization and functions.
   (b)   A department of public works created hereunder may be granted
responsibility for the construction, maintenance and control of the following:
      (1)   General county public works, buildings, publicly-owned water and
sewerage facilities and capital projects;
      (2)   Roads, highways, bridges and streets, lanes, alleys, footways and
culverts;
      (3)   Water supply facilities and projects;
      (4)   Wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities and
projects;
      (5)   Solid waste collection, recycling and disposal facilities and
projects;
      (6)   Storm drainage, erosion and sediment control facilities and
projects;
      (7)   Lighting for roads, highways, alleys and other public places;
      (8)   Fire hydrants, mosquito control facilities and programs and snow
and ice removal;
      (9)   Such other functions and duties which are not inconsistent herewith
as may be assigned from time to time by the board of county commissioners.
   (c)   An ordinance or resolution creating a department of public works
hereunder shall provide for the retiring, refunding, refinancing, transfer, or
assumption of any existing applicable outstanding bonded indebtedness of the
county authority, district or commission which preceded it.
   (d)   The powers granted to board of county commissioners hereunder may be
exercised notwithstanding the existence of any public general law or public
local law to the contrary which is in existence at the time the board of county
commissioners exercise the power granted by this section.
(Code 1959, § 2-2A; 1974, Chapter 629, § 1; 2007, Chapter 5, § 1)
Cross reference:
   Abolishment of Department of Public Works, see §
1-18-1
§ 2-2-24. Defense of employees.
   The board of county commissioners in its sole discretion may provide all or
part payments for the legal defense and damages for court actions involving
county officers or employees who are sued in their individual capacities for
alleged wrongs arising out of performing their duties as county officers or
employees, if the board of county commissioners determines that the officers or
employees acted in a prudent manner in the matter which is the subject of a
suit at law or in equity.
(Code 1959, § 2-7B; 1977, Chapter 85, § 1)
§ 2-2-25. Tax to support libraries.
   The board of county commissioners is hereby authorized in its discretion,
not mandatorily, to levy and collect a tax on all the assessable property in
the county, in each year, in such sum as shall be considered necessary for the
operation, maintenance and annual care of the public libraries in the county.
(Code 1959, § 2-13) (1965, Chapter 221, § 1)
§ 2-2-26. Tax levy for certain organizations.
   The board of county commissioners is hereby authorized, in its discretion,
not mandatorily, to levy and collect a tax on all the assessable property in
the county, in each year a sum to be determined by the board of county
commissioners, to be paid by the county treasurer to such private nonprofit
organizations whose objectives are to promote the health, education, public
welfare and community betterment of the county in the respective amounts set up
by the board of county commissioners in the annual budget for the county.
(1955, Chapter 417, § 1; 1969, Chapter 511, § 1)
§ 2-2-27. Loan for capital improvements for school.
   The board of county commissioners, in its sole discretion, may loan money to
a bona fide nonprofit corporation or association or a public school booster
club for the purpose of erecting capital improvements on land owned by the
county or the Frederick County Board of Education. Any loan shall be made on
the terms and conditions the board of county commissioners may approve in its
sole discretion, and the county commissioners, in the event of any default of
the terms of any such loan, may obtain a judgment or judgments in a court of
competent jurisdiction against any person, corporation, or association agreeing
in writing to be liable for the repayment of any loan made under this section.
(Code 1959, § 12-1A; 1977, Chapter 97, § 1)
§ 2-2-28. Enforcement; maximum penalty for violation.
   The board of county commissioners shall provide for the enforcement of all
county ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and bylaws by fine,
penalty, or imprisonment, as prescribed by law. A fine or penalty for an
offense may not exceed $1,000 or six (6) months imprisonment. The board of
county commissioners may provide that each day’s violation is a separate
offense.
(1982, Chapter 397, § 1)
§ 2-2-29. Civil infractions.
   The board of county commissioners of Frederick County may provide:
   (1)   That a violation of any county ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation
or bylaw shall be a civil offense known as a “civil infraction;” and
   (2)   For the administering of the issuance of citations for civil
infractions.
(1984, Chapter 634, § 1)
§ 2-2-30. Authority of commissioners regarding appliance installers.
   The board of county commissioners of Frederick County may:
   (1)   License appliance installers; and
   (2)   Adopt rules and regulations to:
      (i)   Authorize licensed appliance installers to perform the plumbing
work incidental to the installation of appliances;
      (ii)   Provide license fees for appliance installers;
      (iii)   Require an appliance installer to post a performance bond; and
      (iv)   Define “appliance” and “work incidental to the installation of
appliances.”
(1982, Chapter 774, § 2; 1983, Chapter 8; 1988, Chapter 647, § 7)
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 647, § 7, 1988, transferred Md. Ann. Code, Art 56, § 462 to § 2-13-
21B of the Public Local Laws, Frederick County. Pursuant to instructions from
the county, said § 2-13-21B has been redesignated and included as § 2-2-30
herein.
§§ 2-2-31 -- 2-2-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE III: RESERVED (§§ 2-2-41 — 2-2-65)
Section
   2-2-41 -- 2-2-65   Reserved
§ 2-2-41 -- 2-2-65. Reserved.
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 181, § 1, 1995, repealed Art. III, §§ 2-2-41 through 2-2-49, which
pertained to the classified service, and which derived from 1957, Chapter 465,
§ 1; Code1959, §§ 4-1 through 4-9; and 1965, Chapter 567, § 1.
ARTICLE IV: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION (§§ 2-2-66 — 2-2-67)
Section
   
2-2-66   Authorized; purpose
   
2-2-67   Mandatory provisions in creating ordinances or resolutions
§ 2-2-66. Authorized; purpose.
   The board of county commissioners, by ordinance or resolution, may create an
economic development commission for the purpose of advancing the general
welfare of the people of Frederick County through programs and activities aimed
at developing the county’s natural resources and economic opportunities and to
cooperate and offer assistance to existing industry and business. The
commission shall promote and encourage the establishing and locating of new
industry and business in Frederick County and other matters intended to foster
and to develop gainful employment and happiness in all who are now or may
become residents of the county.
(Code 1959, § 2-7A(A); 1976, Chapter 106, § 1)
§ 2-2-67. Mandatory provisions in creating ordinances or resolutions.
   An ordinance or resolution creating an economic development commission shall
include the following provisions:
   (1)   That the Commission shall consist of between nine (9) and fifteen (15)
members, who shall be appointed by the board of county commissioners; and that
the members shall represent a cross section of the economic composition of the
county and shall be selected because of their known experience and interest in
the development of the county;
   (2)   That the commission may:
      a.   Investigate and assemble information pertinent to the economic
resources and industrial opportunities of the county;
      b.   Encourage location of new industrial enterprises in the county and
the expansion of present enterprises;
      c.   Disseminate information in the interest of industrial development by
publication, advertising and other means;
      d.   Cooperate with any federal, state, local agency, board or
commission, including the Department of Economic and Community Development of
Maryland;
      e.   Cooperate with any interested private concern, civic organization or
subdivision;
   (3)   a.   That each member serves for a term of 5 years. The terms of the
members shall be staggered, as required by the terms of the members serving on
July 1, 1985;
      b.   That they shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for
necessary travel and other expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties;
      c.   That the commission shall select from its own membership a chairman,
vice chairman, and a secretary-treasurer, who may not be the same person, to
serve a term of one year and be eligible for reelection; that a person may not
hold the position of chairman for more than three (3) consecutive terms;
      d.   That upon the death, disability, resignation, or removal of any
member of the commission, the board of county commissioners shall appoint a
person to serve for the unexpired term;
   (4)   That the state senators for the county and the president of the board
of county commissioners shall serve as ex officio members of the economic
development commission without the power to vote;
   (5)   That the commission has the power to establish and appoint advisory
groups and committees to assist in its program of activity, which membership is
not restricted solely to members of the commission;
   (6)   That the commission shall meet monthly and shall hold special meetings
whenever requested by the chairman or any three (3) members of the commission;
that the commission shall adopt rules and regulations as it considers necessary
to govern procedure and business; that a simple majority constitutes a quorum;
that the commission shall submit to the board of county commissioners an annual
operating budget for the fiscal year for the approval of the county
commissioners, and the board of county commissioners shall provide the funds
approved by them; that the commission may employ employees as required, but
within the limits of its budget; that any newly created position and salary
shall receive the approval of the board of county commissioners; that the title
of the position or positions to be created shall be approved by the board of
county commissioners, but the appointment of a person shall be subject to the
approval of the economic development commission; and
   (7)   That annual reports shall be filed with the board of county
commissioners and made available to the public; and that the annual report
shall include subjects and recommendations for the improvement and advancement
of the economic welfare of the people of the county.
(Code 1959, § 2-7A(B); 1976, Chapter 106, § 1; 1981, Chapter 61, § 1; 1990,
Chapter 391, § 1)
ARTICLE V: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS (§§ 2-2-68 — 2-2-69)
Section
   
2-2-68   Human Relations Commission; Human Relations Department
   
2-2-69   Commission for Women
§ 2-2-68. Human relations commission; human relations department.
   (a)   (1)   The board of county commissioners may establish both a human
relations commission and a human relations department.
      (2)   The functions and duties of the commission and the department shall
be set by resolution by the board of county commissioners.
   (b)   The human relations commission shall provide a forum for the
presentation of problems concerning discrimination in the county.
   (c)   (1)   The human relations department shall investigate complaints
alleging discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age,
marital status, physical or mental handicap, gender identity, or sexual
orientation in:
         (i)   Housing;
         (ii)   Public accommodations; and
         (iii)   Employment.
      (2)   (i)   1.   In this paragraph, "familial status" means, with
reference to one or more individuals who are under the age of 18 years, being
domiciled with the individual and being:
               a.   A parent or other person having legal custody of the
individual; or
               b.   The designee of a parent or other person having legal
custody of the individual, with the written permission of the parent or other
person having legal custody.
            2.   In this paragraph, "familial status" includes the status of
being:
               a.   A pregnant woman; or
               b.   An individual who is in the process of securing legal
custody of an individual under the age of 18 years.
         (ii)   The Human Relations Department shall investigate complaints
alleging discrimination as to familial status in housing and employment.
         (iii)   This paragraph does not apply to housing for older persons as
defined in article 49B, §20 of the code.
      (3)   (i)   In this paragraph, "source of income" means any lawful,
verifiable source of money paid directly or indirectly to a renter or buyer of
housing including:
            1.   Income received through any lawful profession or occupation;
            2.   The condition of being a recipient of federal, state, or local
government assistance including medical assistance subsidies, rental
assistance, or rent supplements;
            3.   Any gift, inheritance, pension, annuity, alimony, child
support, trust or investment accounts, or other consideration or benefit; and
            4.   Any sale or pledge of property or interest in property.
         (ii)   The Human Relations Department shall investigate complaints
alleging discrimination as to source of income in housing.
         (iii)   Discrimination as to source of income does not include:
            1.   A commercially reasonable verification of source and amount of
income;
            2.   A commercially reasonable evaluation of the stability,
security, and creditworthiness of any source of income;
            3.   The eviction of any person for violation of the terms of a
lease agreement; or
            4.   The refusal to consider income derived from criminal or
unlawful activity.
      (4)   The department shall make determinations of discrimination or lack
of discrimination.
   (d)   (1)   (i)   Except as provided in subsections (ii), (iii) and (iv) of
this paragraph, the board of county commissioners by ordinance may authorize
the human relations commission to provide remedial relief, including equitable
relief and monetary damages.
         (ii)   The board of commissioners may not authorize the human
relations commission to:
            1.   Award attorney’s fees;
            2.   Assess penalties or fines;
            3.   Create a private cause of action; or
            4.   Award damages for humiliation or pain and suffering.
         (iii)   In employment cases, the board of county commissioners may
grant the human relations commission powers or jurisdiction over only employers
with 15 or more employees.
         (iv)   In public accommodations cases and housing cases, the board of
county commissioners may not grant the human relations commission powers or
jurisdiction in excess of or in conflict with the powers and jurisdiction
described in article 49B of the code.
      (2)    The board of county commissioners by ordinance may provide for the
enforcement of subpoenas, decisions, and orders of the human relations
commission in the circuit court for Frederick County.
      (3)   The board of county commissioners by ordinance may authorize:
         (i)   The human relations department or other party to appeal a
decision or order of the human relations commission to the circuit court for
Frederick County in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 200 of the Maryland Rules;
and
         (ii)   The human relations commission to be a party to an appeal made
to the circuit court for Frederick County.
      (4)   (i)   In employment cases, an award of monetary damages:
            1.   May not exceed a 36-month period; and
            2.   Shall be reduced by any earnings received during that period
or any amounts earnable during that period with reasonable diligence by the
employee discriminated against.
         (ii)   In public accommodations cases and housing cases, an award or
relief is restricted to actual monetary damages and equitable relief.
(1988, Chapter 224, § 1; 2003, Chapter 293, § 1; 2005, Chapter 558, §1) (Bill
No. 19-08, 6-18-2019)
Cross reference:
   Human relations commission, see §§
1-2-91 et seq.
§ 2-2-69. Commission for women.
   (a)   There shall be a commission for women in Frederick County.
   (b)   The board of county commissioners shall appoint the members of the
commission for women.
   (c)   The powers and duties of the commission for women shall include:
      (1)   Serving as a source of public information for women;
      (2)   Identifying, researching, and helping to find solutions to the
problems of women and girls;
      (3)   Promoting the full and equal participation of women in work,
government, and society;
      (4)   Strengthening the home life by directing attention to critical
problems confronting women as wives, mothers, homemakers, and workers;
      (5)   Recommending methods of overcoming discrimination against women in
public and private employment and encouraging women to become candidates for
public office;
      (6)   Securing appropriate recognition of women’s accomplishments and
contributions to Frederick County; and
      (7)   Other powers and duties to be determined by the board of county
commissioners.
(1999, Chapter 372, § 1)
Cross reference:
   For similar provisions, see §§
1-2-74 et seq.
CHAPTER 2-3: ANIMALS AND FOWL (§ 2-3-1)
Section
   
2-3-1   Penalties for violation of state law; enforcement of same
Cross reference:
   Ordinances relating to animals and fowl, see
Chapter 1-4
§ 2-3-1. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF STATE LAW; ENFORCEMENT OF SAME.
   Upon conviction before a court of competent jurisdiction, any person
violating or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of Article 24, Title
11, Subtitle 5 of the Annotated Code of Maryland shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be fined a sum of not less than twenty dollars ($20.00)
nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or shall be imprisoned in the
county jail for not more than three (3) months, or shall be both fined and
imprisoned. It is the duty of the state’s attorney, the sheriff and the law
enforcement officers of the county to prosecute all persons found violating the
law by refusing to comply with its provisions.
(1933, Chapter 414, § 1; Code 1959, § 6-4; 1974, Chapter 275, § 2; 2007,
Chapter 5, § 1 )
CHAPTER 2-4: BUILDINGS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 2-4-1 — 2-4-15)
Section
   
2-4-1   Reserved
Cross references:
   Ordinances relating to buildings, see
Chapter 1-6;
   Ordinances relating to electricity, see
Chapter 1-7;
   Ordinances relating to plumbing, see
Chapter 1-14;
   Ordinances relating to storm water management, see
Chapter 1-15.2
§ 2-4-1. Reserved.
Editor’s note:
   Section 2-4-1, requiring a building permit under certain circumstances,
derived from Code of 1959, § 3-1, and Chapter 416, § 1, 1961, was repealed as
superseded by Md. Code Ann., Art. 25, § 3(s)(2).
§ 2-4-2 -- 2-4-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II: UNSAFE BUILDINGS (§§ 2-4-16 — 2-4-20)
Section
   
2-4-16   Definitions
   
2-4-17   Authority of county to order abatement; abatement order generally
   
2-4-18   Service of abatement order
   
2-4-19   Abatement by county at owner’s expense; collection of expenses
   
2-4-20   Penalty for violations
§ 2-4-16. Definitions.
   In this article the following words have the meanings indicated.
   BUILDING. The term “building” includes any building or structure of any
kind.
   DIRECTOR. The term “director” means the director of the department of
permits and inspections.
(Code 1959, § 3-5; 1978, Chapter 78, § 2)
§ 2-4-17. Authority of county to order abatement; abatement order generally.
   (a)   If the director of the department of permits and inspections finds
that:
      (1)   A building has been constructed, altered, or repaired in an
unlawful manner;
      (2)   A building is a fire hazard for any reason, including, but not
limited to, a lack of repair, age, dilapidated condition, or abandonment; or
      (3)   Any condition, including, but not limited to, the storage of
combustible, flammable, or explosive substances or material in a building or on
a premises endangers the safety of persons occupying or using the building or
premises or endangers any adjacent building, premises, or property; he may
order the owner of the building or premises to repair or demolish the building
or correct the dangerous condition as the case may be.
   (b)   Every order issued under this article shall be in writing and shall be
directed to the owner of the building or premises. It shall specify a date by
which the owner must comply with the order.
   (c)   Any person desiring to contest an order of the director may file an
appeal to the board of county commissioners within fifteen (15) days of service
of the order.
(Code 1959, § 3-6; 1978, Chapter 78, § 2)
§ 2-4-18. Service of abatement order.
   (a)   Orders issued under this article shall be served within five (5) days
of the date of the notice.
   (b)   The order shall be served by delivering a copy to the owner. If the
owner is absent from the county of if his whereabouts is unknown, the order may
be served by posting a copy in a conspicuous place on the building or premises
and mailing a copy by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of the owner.
(Code 1959, § 3-7; 1978, Chapter 78, § 2)
§ 2-4-19. Abatement by county at owner’s expense; collection of expenses.
   (a)   In the event the owner fails to comply with an order of the Director
within thirty (30) days of service of the order, the director, with the
approval of the board of county commissioners, may enter the building or
premises affected by the order and cause the building or premises to be
repaired or demolished and the materials removed, or cause any dangerous
condition to be remedied, as the case may be, at the expense of the owner.
   (b)   If the owner fails to repay the county for expenses incurred under
subsection (a) within thirty (30) days after written demand has been mailed to
his last known address, the director shall notify the collector of taxes for
Frederick County and a tax lien in favor of the county for the amount of the
expenses incurred under subsection (a) shall attach to the property.
   (c)   The property may be sold at tax sale to satisfy a lien authorized by
this section.
(Code 1959, § 3-8; 1978, Chapter 78, § 2)
§ 2-4-20. Penalty for violations.
   (a)   Any person who knowingly fails to comply with an order issued under
this article shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or
imprisoned not more than ten (10) days or both.
   (b)   Each day which a person knowingly fails to comply with an order issued
under this article shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Code 1959, § 3-9; 1978, Chapter 78, § 2)
CHAPTER 2-5: COURTS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 2-5-1 — 2-5-15)
Section
   
2-5-1   Certificate of jury commissioner entitling jurors to payment
§ 2-5-1. Certificate of jury commissioner entitling jurors to payment.
   A certificate that is signed by the jury commissioner and states the number
of days that each prospective, qualified, or sworn juror has been required to
be in attendance at or in proximity to the court for jury service and the sum
due for such service shall be sufficient authority for the county to pay the
amount specified in the certificate.
(Code 1959, § 5-19; 1965, Chapter 142, § 1; 2006, Chapter 372, § 13)
§§ 2-5-2 -- 2-5-15. Reserved.
ARTICLE II: CIRCUIT COURT (§§ 2-5-16 — 2-5-28)
Section
   
2-5-16   Reserved
   
2-5-17   Return days
§ 2-5-16. Reserved.
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 372, § 7, 2006, repealed Art. II, § 2-5-16, which pertained to terms of
court, and which derived from Code 1959, § 5-9; and 1961, Chapter 222, § 1.
§ 2-5-17. Return days.
   In addition to the first day of each term of the circuit court for the
county, the first Monday in January, the first Monday in March, the first
Monday in April, the first Monday in July and the third Monday in October in
each year shall be return days for the return of process in civil cases.
(Code 1930, Art. 11, § 73)
§§ 2-5-18 -- 2-5-28. Reserved.
ARTICLE III: LAW LIBRARY (§§ 2-5-29 — 2-5-31)
Section
   
2-5-29   Tax levy for maintenance and enlargement
   
2-5-30   Librarian -- appointed
   
2-5-31   Same -- salary when crier of circuit court designated librarian
§ 2-5-29. Tax levy for maintenance and enlargement.
   The board of county commissioners are hereby authorized and directed to levy
such sums of money annually as in their discretion may be necessary for the
maintenance and enlargement of the law library of the circuit court for the
county. Such moneys shall be expended for such purpose under the direction of
any judge of such court.
(Code 1959, § 5-15; 1967, Chapter 599, § 1)
§ 2-5-30. Librarian -- appointed.
   The judges of the circuit court for the county, or any one of them, may
appoint one person to serve as the court crier, the bailiff, and the librarian
of the law library and pass orders for the government and regulation thereof.
The compensation of such person for the performance of his duties shall be
fixed by the board of county commissioners commensurable with his duties, and
such sum shall be levied for on the taxable property of the county by the board
of county commissioners and shall be paid by the collector of taxes of the
county.
(Code 1959, § 5-16; 1961, Chapter 570, § 1)
§ 2-5-31. Same -- salary when crier of circuit court designated librarian.
   In case the person appointed as crier of the circuit court should be
designated as librarian of the public law library of the court, he shall
receive, as librarian, the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) per month.
(Code 1930, Art. 11, § 142; 1933, Chapter 145, § 1; Code 1959, § 5-17)
CHAPTER 2-6: ELECTRICITY (§§ 2-6-1 — 2-6-2)
Section
   
2-6-1   Regulation authorized
   
2-6-2   Electrical board
Cross reference:
   Ordinances relating to electricity, see
Chapter 1-7
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 475, § 1, 1981, amended § 1-7-102(A)(4) to provide that owners of
residential or commercial buildings under certain conditions be exempt from
Chapter 1-7, Art. IV, Div. 2.
§ 2-6-1. Regulation authorized.
   The board of county commissioners may make rules and regulations necessary
to supervise and control electrical business within the county. These rules and
regulations shall define the electrical work which is regulated and may provide
for examination of applicants, issuance of work permits, inspection,
enforcement, and such other requirements as may be necessary to supervise and
control the electrical business in the public interest.
(Code 1959, § 11-2(A); 1976, Chapter 317, § 1)
§ 2-6-2. Electrical board.
   (a)   The board of county commissioners may provide for a five (5) member
electrical board which, if appointed, shall advise the county commissioners and
aid in the supervision and enforcement of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant to the authority of this chapter.
   (b)   At least two (2) members of the electrical board may not be related
to, either by blood or marriage, or associated with any person or corporation
who is currently doing electrical work in Frederick County or who is currently
doing electrical work in the county within the year prior to the member’s date
of appointment.
(Code 1959, § 11-2(B); 1976, Chapter 317, § 1)
Cross reference:
   Electrical Board, see §§
1-7-16 et seq.
CHAPTER 2-7: FINANCE AND TAXATION
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 2-7-1 — 2-7-25)
Section
   
2-7-1   Tax levy
   
2-7-2   Reserved
   
2-7-3   Taxes may be paid in installments
   
2-7-3.1   Reserved
   
2-7-4   Contingency fund
   
2-7-5   Revenues to be used for certain appropriations
   
2-7-6   Expending certain revenues received subsequent to adoption of budget
   
2-7-7   Capital budget
   
2-7-8   Borrowing by county prohibited; exceptions
   
2-7-9   Penalties for willful breach of duties and the like by county
commissioners or board of estimates
   
2-7-10   Bond rating enhancement reserve established
   
2-7-11   Appropriation increases
Cross references:
   Ordinances related to finance and taxation, see
Chapter 1-8;
   Special assessments for roads, see §
2-11-73;
   Tax levy to support fire company, see §§
2-8-1 et seq.
§ 2-7-1. Tax levy.
   (a)   (1)   On or before June 1 and in accordance with law, the county
commissioners shall levy upon all of the taxable property of the county and
upon all property subject to taxation in it the aggregate amount of the
estimates, less any revenue certain to be paid the county during the ensuing
fiscal year from sources other than the levy and property to be appropriated
toward the estimates and less any actual or estimated unassigned general fund
balance available for appropriation, as otherwise provided in this Code.
      (2)   To protect the financial integrity of county government and to
provide sufficient liquidity required for daily operations, the county
governing body shall maintain a committed general fund balance. The amount
shall be 5 percent for fiscal year 2016, 6 percent for fiscal year 2017, 6.5
percent for fiscal year 2018, 7 percent for fiscal year 2019 through fiscal
year 2021, and 8 percent for fiscal year 2022 and thereafter of the general
fund expenditures and transfers to the Debt Service Fund, Board of Education
and the Frederick Community College for the prior fiscal year. Any amount that
exceeds 5 percent for fiscal year 2016, 6 percent for fiscal year 2017, 6.5
percent for fiscal year 2018, 7 percent for fiscal year 2019 through fiscal
year 2021, and 8 percent for fiscal year 2022 and thereafter of the general
fund expenditures and transfers to the Debt Service Fund, Board of Education
and the Frederick Community College for the prior fiscal year shall be included
as funds available for appropriation in the current fiscal year.
   (b)   In addition thereto, the county commissioners may levy not more than
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) which shall be added to the total
of estimates and included in their levy. No other sums of money shall be
levied. Taxes levied shall become due and payable and shall be collected in the
manner and at the times fixed by law. The additional five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) or so much of this sum as may be levied shall be a
contingency fund and shall be dedicated and appropriated to meet any unexpected
demand which may arise after tax levy has been made.
(1977, Chapter 95, § 1; 1982, Chapter 57, § 1; 1984, Chapter 428, § 1; 1988,
Chapter 400, § 1; 1993, Chapter 162, § 1; 1993, Chapter 163, § 1; 2012, Chapter
689, § 1; Bill No. 18-01, 4-3-2018; Bill No. 22-11, 6-21-2022)
§ 2-7-2. Reserved.
Editor’s note:
   1996, Chapter 28, § 1, repealed § 2-7-2, which provided for the publication
of the annual tax levy and which derived from Code 1959, § 8-4; and 1963,
Chapter 825, § 4.
§ 2-7-3. Taxes may be paid in installments.
   Taxes may be paid in two (2) equal installments, but interest shall be paid
from the first day of October for all taxes not paid on or before October
first. The county treasurer shall make bills for taxes in such form as to
permit the payment of taxes in two (2) installments, but nothing in this
section shall prevent the payment of all taxes at one time.
(Code 1959, § 8-9; 1963, Chapter 825, § 14)
§ 2-7-3.1. Reserved.
Editor’s note:
   1996, Chapter 28, § 1, repealed § 2-7-3.1, which pertained to interest rates
for overdue taxes and which derived from Ord. No. 82-9-253, adopted June 1,
1982.
§ 2-7-4. Contingency fund.
   (a)   It is expected that the contingency fund established under §
2-7-1(b) of this article will seldom be needed or used, but is provided as a
safeguard or protection in event a contingency should arise. It shall be
dedicated and appropriated to meet any unexpected demand which arises after the
tax levy has been made, the occurrence of which could not reasonably have been
foreseen. The unexpended balance should be a part of the unassigned fund
balance.
   (b)   At the close of each fiscal year, the board of county commissioners
shall prepare a balanced, itemized statement of the contingency fund for such
fiscal year showing first the amount of the fund levied, secondly the
expenditures therefrom in full detail with clear and complete explanation of
the contingency requiring such expenditures and third, the unexpended balance
on hand at the end of the fiscal year, to which statement the county
commissioners shall sign their signatures to be attested by the administrative
assistant to the board of county commissioners. They shall further make
affidavit that the statement is a true and accurate account as therein set
forth, and they shall publish the statement, thus prepared, signed, attested
and sworn to, at least three (3) times during the month of July, following the
close of the fiscal year, in one daily newspaper published in the county.
(Code 1959, § 8-7; 1963, Chapter 825, § 14; 1969, Chapter 91, § 1; 1970,
Chapter 63, § 1; 1977, Chapter 95, § 1; 1984, Chapter 428, § 1; 1988, Chapter
400, § 1; 1993, Chapter 163, § 1; 2012, Chapter 689, § 1)
§ 2-7-5. Revenues to be used for certain appropriations.
   (a)   The revenue derived by the county from all sources shall be devoted
absolutely to paying and defraying the appropriations as approved in the
operating and capital budgets. However, to serve the best interests of the
county throughout the fiscal year, the board of county commissioners may make
adjustments to the approved budgets to the following extent.
      (1)   The county commissioners may delegate to the county budget officer
the authority to approve adjustments which do not increase the total amount
appropriated to any department, agency, or entity in the originally approved
budget. However, this authority may not result in an increase in permanent
employees, as defined in the Frederick County Personnel Rules and Regulations.
      (2)   The county commissioners may approve increases in appropriations
for departments, agencies or entities, if the budget increases are approved in
writing and do not increase the amount approved in the annual total operating
budget, unless otherwise authorized by this chapter.
      (3)   The county budget officer shall submit budget status reports within
15 working days after the close of each quarter. In the event that the county
budget officer certifies that revenues will be insufficient to fund the
approved budget, the budget officer shall submit within 10 working days a
listing of recommended reductions sufficient to balance the budget. The
reduction may not include appropriations for the payment of state taxes, the
principal and interest of the county debt and salaries and obligations affixed
by law. The county commissioners will consider the recommended reductions in
public session and will take such action as necessary to ensure that a deficit
fiscal condition does not result for the fiscal year.
   (b)   This section does not affect restricted revenues received by the
county as provided for in §
2-7-6 of this code.
(Code 1930, Art. 11, § 134; Code 1959, § 8-6; 1970, Chapter 514, § 1; 1973,
Chapter 163, § 1; 1982, Chapter 57, § 1; 1984, Chapter 428, § 1; 1988, Chapter
400, § 1)
§ 2-7-6. Expending certain revenues received subsequent to adoption of budget.
   (A)   The board of county commissioners may expend restricted revenues even
though these revenues are received subsequent to the adoption of the fiscal
year budget. Restricted revenues include funds received as a result of state or
federal legislation or grants issued by state or federal agencies or other
sources that are provided to accomplish specific goals, objectives, or services
through the expenditures of the restricted revenue funds.
   (B)   (1)   After January 1 of any fiscal year, if the board of county
commissioners reasonably anticipates that revenues for a fiscal year will be
sufficient to fund increased expenditures, the board of county commissioners
may increase the expenditures adopted in the budget for the fiscal year by an
amount not to exceed the increased fiscal year revenues.
      (2)   These increased expenditures may only be used to repay debt.
(Code 1959, § 8-11; 1973, Chapter 163, § 1; 1988, Chapter 400, § 1; 2001,
Chapter 261, § 1)
§ 2-7-7. Capital budget.
   The board of county commissioners shall establish and approve a capital
budget in addition to the normal current expense operating budget. The
regulations and budgetary procedures shall be established by the board of
county commissioners and the fund accounted for separately from other funds. It
may include but, is not limited to highway construction, land acquisition,
sanitary facilities, parks and recreation facilities, office buildings and
equipment.
(Code 1959, § 8-49; 1988, Chapter 400, § 1)
§ 2-7-8. Borrowing by county prohibited; exceptions.
   (a)   The board of county commissioners may not create any obligation or
liability on the part of or on the credit of the county which shall be a
floating debt, nor issue any certificate of indebtedness, nor shall the board
borrow any money whatsoever for any purpose, without special legislative
authority to make the loan.
   (b)   The county commissioners may borrow temporarily, on promissory notes
during any one year, a sum of money not to exceed one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), to pay the interest on the bonded indebtedness of the county.
The temporary notes shall mature and be paid not later than December 31 of the
same calendar year in which such sum was borrowed. In addition to the authority
to borrow, the board of county commissioners may borrow, on the credit of the
county, on promissory notes, such sums of money not to exceed five million
dollars ($5,000,000.00) in any one year for the purpose of paying any expenses
or obligations of the county, even though no specific legislative authority to
make the particular loan has been first had and obtained.
(Code 1959, § 8-19; 1963, Chapter 825, § 14; 1962, Chapter 92, § 1; 1984,
Chapter 428, § 1; 1988, Chapter 400, § 1; 1999, Chapter 374, § 1)
§ 2-7-9. Penalties for wilful breach of duties and the like by county
commissioners or board of estimates.
   Any wilful disregard, breach, evasion, violation or failure to discharge any
of the duties imposed by this chapter upon any member of the board of county
commissioners or board of estimates or on the part of the members of any other
board or by or upon the part of any official is a misdemeanor. Upon indictment
for and conviction of this offense in a court of competent jurisdiction for the
county, he shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
imprisoned in the county jail for not more than one year or both fined and
imprisoned.
(Code 1930, Art. 11, § 139; 1974, Chapter 275, § 2; Code 1959, § 8-20)
§ 2-7-10. Bond rating enhancement reserve established.
   (a)   In this section, "reserve" means the bond rating enhancement reserve.
   (b)   The board of county commissioners shall establish a bond rating
enhancement reserve and shall:
      (1)   Establish criteria for maintaining the reserve; and
      (2)   Maintain the reserve.
   (c)   The purpose of the reserve is to:
      (1)   Enhance, preserve, and safeguard Frederick County's bond rating;
and
      (2)   Protect the financial integrity of Frederick County.
(2004, Chapter 350, § 1)
§ 2-7-11. Appropriation increases.
   (a)   Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the board of county
commissioners may increase appropriations and expend the increased
appropriations.
   (b)   Prior to increasing appropriations and expending the increased
appropriations, the board of county commissioners shall:
      (1)   Establish, by ordinance, criteria for increasing appropriations and
expending the increased appropriations; and
      (2)   Require the increase in appropriations to be derived from:
         (i)   The committed general fund balance required under §
2-7-1(a)(2) of this article; or
         (ii)   The bond rating enhancement reserve established under §
2-7-10 of this article.
   (c)   If the committed general fund balance required by §
2-7-1 (a)(2) is appropriated and expended by the county governing body, the
committed fund balance shall be replenished by the end of the third fiscal year
after appropriation to meet the 5 percent for fiscal year 2016, 6 percent for
fiscal year 2017, 6.5 percent for fiscal year 2018, 7 percent for fiscal year
2019 through fiscal year 2021, and 8 percent for fiscal year 2022 and
thereafter requirement of this committed fund balance.
(2004, Chapter 350, § 1; 2012, Chapter 689, § 1; Bill No. 18-01, 4-3-2018; Bill
No. 22-11, 6-21-2022)
§§ 2-7-12 – 2-7-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II: COUNTY TREASURER (§§ 2-7-26 — 2-7-45)
Section
   
2-7-26   Reserved
   
2-7-27   Reserved
   
2-7-28   Service as collector of state and county taxes; powers and duties
generally
   
2-7-29   Reserved
§ 2-7-26. Reserved.
Editor’s note:
   2001, Chapter 207, § 1, repealed § 2-7-26, which pertained to election of
county treasurer, and derived from Code 1930, Art. II, § 807; 1933, Chapter
127, § 1; 1937, Chapter 99, § 1; 1939, Chapter 58, § 1; 1947, Chapter 466, § 1;
and Code 1959, § 8-21.
§ 2-7-27. Reserved.
Editor’s note:
   2001, Chapter 207, § 1, repealed § 2-7-27, which pertained to term of
office, removal from office and vacancy of county treasurer and derived from
Code 1959, § 8-22; 1965, Chapter 31, § 1; and 1996, Chapter 28, § 1.
§ 2-7-28. Service as collector of state and county taxes; powers and duties
generally.
   (a)   The county treasurer shall be collector of all state and county taxes
for the county, for whatsoever purpose, which shall be levied or assessed in
the same manner and to the same extent and with the same powers heretofore
exercised by the county treasurer and collector of state and county taxes for
the county, under the laws of the state. The county treasurer shall receive and
collect all state and county taxes levied, assessed, or received for
collection, with full power and authority to enforce the payment of the same by
distraint, sale or otherwise, and also receive all moneys which shall be due
and payable to the county from any source. The county treasurer may convey to
purchasers thereof the title to any real or personal property sold by the
county treasurer for the payment of state or county taxes.
   (b)   The county treasurer shall collect all taxes levied by the board of
county commissioners and shall receive all money due to the county from any
source, including interest paid on such taxes as are in arrears, and deposit
the same. The county treasurer shall pay over as the board of county
commissioners may direct all money received for the county that may at any time
be in the county treasurer’s custody, charge or control and belong to the
county.
   (c)   The county treasurer shall be a regular county employee.
   (d)   All the authority, rights, powers, duties and privileges heretofore
had, held, enjoyed and exercised by the collector of state and county taxes for
the county under the provisions of Annotated Code of Maryland shall be had,
held, enjoyed and exercised by the county treasurer for the county. The county
treasurer’s manner of proceeding to collect and enforce the payment of state
and county taxes in the county shall be the same as prescribed in the Annotated
Code of Maryland. Nothing herein contained shall be taken in any way to change
or interfere with the provisions of the existing law relating to the collection
of state and county taxes for the county other than the changes herein set
forth or that may be necessarily implied therefrom.
(Code 1930, Art. I, § 810; 1959, §§ 8-23, 826; 1965, Chapter 225, § 1; 1996,
Chapter 28, § 1; 2001, Chapter 207, § 1)
§ 2-7-29. Reserved.
§ 2-7-30. Reserved.
Editor’s note:
   2001, Chapter 207, § 1, repealed § 2-7-30, which pertained to oath of office
of county treasurer and derived from Code 1997, Chapter 14; and 1996, Chapter
28.
§§ 2-7-31, 2-7-32. Reserved.
Editor’s note:
   1996, Chapter 28, § 1, repealed §§ 2-7-31 and 2-7-32, which pertained to the
clerk appointed by the county treasurer and the chief clerk and stenographer,
and which derived from Code 1930, Art. II, § 820; Code 1959, §§ 8-28, 8-29;
1963, Chapter 825, § 14; and 1972, Chapter 62, § 1.
§§ 2-7-33 -- 2-7-45. Reserved.
ARTICLE III: BUDGET PROCEDURES (§§ 2-7-46 — 2-7-65)
Section
   
2-7-46   Generally
   
2-7-47   Formal budget document
   
2-7-48   Justification to be submitted for budget requests; audits
   
2-7-49   Miscellaneous provisions
Cross reference:
   Annual budget, see §
1-8-21 et seq.
§ 2-7-46. Generally.
   (a)   The board of county commissioners shall establish orderly procedures
for budgeting and finance which shall:
      (1)   Designate a county employee or officer as county budget officer
responsible for assisting the county commissioners in the preparation of county
budgets;
      (2)   Provide that the budgets for all operating general funds,
enterprise funds, internal service funds, and capital project general funds
shall be adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year;
      (3)   Fix a calendar or schedule for budget preparation, submission of
estimates, review, presentation, public hearings, enactment, and for related
budget and accounting matters;
      (4)   Require a budget manual and instructions; and
      (5)   Provide for the submission of departmental and agency work programs
and other justification with the budget estimates.
(Code 1959, § 8-30; 1963, Chapter 825, § 14; 1972, Chapter 62, § 1; 1977,
Chapter 83, § 2; 1988, Chapter 400, § 1)
§ 2-7-47. Formal budget document.
   (a)   The budget procedures shall require the presentation of a formal
budget document which shall:
      (1)   Be available to the public upon request;
      (2)   Be a comprehensive financial plan showing all receipts and all
expenditures from all funds for the past and current years and current
requests;
      (3)   Set forth county fiscal policy and significant changes in policy;
      (4)   State the debt service requirements;
      (5)   Contain any other information the county commissioners may deem
advisable; and
      (6)   Be balanced as to revenues and expenditures for all funds.
   (b)   The document shall include a current expense budget, a capital budget,
and capital program. The capital program shall set forth clearly the plan of
proposed capital projects to be undertaken in the ensuing fiscal year and the
next 5 fiscal years and the proposed means of financing them. The capital
budget shall include a statement of the receipts anticipated during the ensuing
fiscal year from all borrowing and from other sources for capital projects. The
budget procedures shall provide for public hearings on the budget and the
capital improvements program and shall also provide that the enacted budget
will be reproduced and available to the public upon request.
(Code 1959, § 8-31; 1963, Chapter 825, § 14: 1977, Chapter 83, § 2; 1988,
Chapter 400, § 1)
§ 2-7-48. Justification to be submitted for budget requests; audits.
   Any department, board, commission, agency, or court, or any private
organization, corporation, or individual seeking county funds shall submit to
the county commissioners such justification, financial data, or other
information as the board of county commissioners shall require, and after
expenditure of the appropriation, if any, shall submit such information or be
subject to audit as the board of county commissioners may direct.
(Code 1959, § 8-33; 1963, Chapter 825, § 14; 1970, Chapter 75, § 1; 1977,
Chapter 83, § 2)
§ 2-7-49. Miscellaneous provisions.
   The procedures to be adopted by the board of county commissioners shall
provide for an annual budget and appropriation ordinance, the fixing of
appropriate levies, fees, and charges by ordinance to keep the budgets in
balance, and for bond issue authorization resolutions pursuant to enabling laws
in force to provide for projects to be financed from borrowing.
(Code 1959, § 8-32; 1963, Chapter 825, § 14; 1970 Chapter 75, § 1; 1977,
Chapter 83, § 2)
§§ 2-7-50 -- 2-7-65. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV: INDEPENDENT AUDITOR AND COUNTY AUDITOR (§§ 2-7-66 — 2-7-86)
Section
   
2-7-66   Appointment; vacancies; oath
   
2-7-67   To set up system of bookkeeping or accounts
   
2-7-68   Annual audit
   
2-7-69   Authority to require production of books, papers, etc. and appearances
of witnesses
   
2-7-70   Annual review
   
2-7-71   Tax levy for examinations, audits, etc.
   
2-7-72   Publication of auditor’s annual report
§ 2-7-66. Appointment; vacancies; oath.
   The County Council shall, on or before the first day of April appoint a
certified public accountant, duly licensed under the laws of the State, of good
standing and experienced in auditing, who shall be designated as the
independent auditor for the County and who shall serve at the pleasure of the
County Council for a period coextensive with the term of the County Council.
(Code 1959, § 8-42; 1965, Chapter 244, § 1; 1983, Chapter 613, § 1) (Bill No.
22-21, 10-25-2022)
§ 2-7-67. To set up system of bookkeeping or accounts.
   The County financial records shall be maintained in such a manner that will
present fairly and with full disclosure the financial position results of
financial operations of the fund and account groups in conformity with
generally accepted accounting principles. Where conflicts between legal
provision and generally accepted accounting principles occur the accounting
system shall be maintained on a legal compliance basis but should include
sufficient additional records to permit reporting based on generally accepted
accounting principles.
(Code 1959, § 8-43; 1966, Chapter 702, § 1; 1969, Chapter 745, § 1; 1981,
Chapter 64, § 1) (Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-2022)
§ 2-7-68. Annual audit.
   The independent auditor shall perform an annual audit in accordance with
generally accepted auditing standards of the comprehensive financial statement
of the County. The independent auditor shall issue an opinion as to whether the
statement fairly presents the financial position of the County in the report.
(Code 1959, § 8-44; 1965, Chapter 825, § 14; 1983, Chapter 613, § 1) (Bill No.
22-21, 10-25-2022)
§ 2-7-69. Authority to require production of books, papers, etc. and appearance
of witnesses.
   (a)   The County Auditor may order the production of all records and
materials necessary to perform audits of the County, including the Board of
Education and Frederick Community College. The County Auditor may examine the
records and materials of any commission or agency that receives an
appropriation from the County Council.
   (b)   The County Auditor may order the production of all records and
materials necessary to perform audits of any commission or agency that receives
an appropriation from the County Government.
(Code 1930, Art. 11, § 28; 1939, Chapter 336, § 1; 1955, Chapter 25, § 1; Code
1959, § 8-46; 1983, Chapter 613, § 1) (Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-2022)
§ 2-7-70. Annual review.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the County
Auditor annually may make an audit or review in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards of the financial or performance data of
the County or any commission or agency that receives an appropriation from the
County, including the Board of Education and Frederick Community College.
   (b)   At the direction of the County Council, the County Auditor may examine
the books, papers, accounts, records, and payment vouchers of any agency or
entity expending funds appropriated by the County Government.
   (c)   In addition, any internal auditors appointed by the County Council may
likewise examine the books, papers, accounts, records, and payment vouchers of
the agencies named above or any agency or entity expending County funds
appropriated by the County Government.
(Code 1959, § 8-46A; 1978, Chapter 78, § 1; 1988, Chapter 202, § 1) (Bill No.
22-21, 10-25-2022)
§ 2-7-71. Tax levy for examinations, audits, etc.
   The County Council is hereby directed and authorized in its levy for taxes
to include therein such sum as in its discretion may be deemed necessary from
year to year to pay for the examinations, audits, accounts and reports provided
for in this article.
(Code 1930, Art. 11, § 28; 1939, Chapter 330, § 1; 1955, Chapter 25, § 1; Code
1959, § 8-47) (Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-2022)
§ 2-7-72. Publication of auditor’s annual report.
   The County shall have published an Annual Comprehensive Financial Report in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles which shall include
the independent auditor’s certificate on the accuracy of the presentation.
Copies of this report shall be available online on the County website for
interested citizens.
(Code 1959, § 8-48; 1963, Chapter 525, § 1; 1969, Chapter 96, § 1; 1983,
Chapter 613, § 1) (Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-2022)
§§ 2-7-73 -- 2-7-86. Reserved.
ARTICLE V: TAX SALES (§§ 2-7-87 — 2-7-200)
Section
Division 1. Generally
   2-7-87 - 2-7-100   Reserved
Division 2. Real Estate
   
2-7-101   For delinquent taxes
   
2-7-102   For water and sewer assessments
   
2-7-103   Notice and conduct
   
2-7-104   Effect of description of “heirs;” procedure when purchaser dies
before procuring deed
Division 3. Personal Property
   
2-7-116   Generally
   
2-7-117   Reserved
Division 4. Community Development Authorities
   
2-7-125   Authority to establish; authority to borrow money, etc.
Division 5. Excise Tax
   
2-7-131   Building excise tax
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
§§ 2-7-87 -- 2-7-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. REAL ESTATE
§ 2-7-101. For delinquent taxes.
   The real estate of a delinquent taxpayer may be sold to pay state and county
taxes, whether there be personal property or not.
(Code 1930, Art. 11, § 14; 1937, Chapter 88, § 1; Code 1959, § 8-12)
§ 2-7-102. For water and sewer assessments.
   If any person shall be assessed upon the assessment book of the county with
front foot assessments for water and sewer services and charges, such
assessments shall be paid within the prescribed time period. If such
assessments are not paid within this period, the county treasurer shall sell
such property of the delinquent taxpayer at the same time as other properties
at a tax sale.
(Code 1959, § 8-12A; 1969, Chapter 778, § 1)
§ 2-7-103. Notice and conduct.
   (a)   (1)   On or before March 1 each year the County Treasurer shall make a
list by election districts in their numerical order of taxes due July first of
the preceding year and now in arrears. The list shall contain:
         (i)   The names of the persons or corporations assessed with property
upon which taxes are due and in arrears;
         (ii)   A brief description of the property certain of identification;
and
         (iii)   The amount of the tax levied and in arrears, with the
interests and costs accrued, and to accrue thereon, to the day of sale.
      (2)   The County Treasurer shall notify the person or corporation by mail
that if the tax is not paid on or before the next second Monday in May,
together with the interest accrued thereon and the proportional costs of notice
and fees, the County Treasurer will proceed on the second Monday in May, to
offer each of such parcels of land and premises for sale to the highest bidder
for cash.
      (3)   The list and notice shall be published in at least one newspaper
with a general circulation in the county once a week for three consecutive
weeks prior to the second Monday in May.
   (b)   On the second Monday in May, the County Treasurer shall proceed to
sell all such pieces or parcels of land and premises. The County Treasurer
shall begin with the first on such lists and so on in order, upon which taxes,
interests, costs and fees have not been paid, and shall continue such sale on
each secular day, legal holidays excepted, until every parcel has been offered.
Should the County Treasurer, by reason of illness or other disability, be
unable to attend or conduct such sale, his or her designee shall conduct such
sale.
(Code 1959, § 8-13; 1965, Chapter 79, § 1; 1976, Chapter 204, § 2; 1988,
Chapter 409, § 1; 2003, Chapter 31, § 1) (Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-2022)
§ 2-7-104. Effect of description of “heirs;” procedure when purchaser dies
before procuring deed.
   Any sale of lands by the county treasurer when the owners are described as
heirs shall pass the title as fully as if such heirs were each named in the
proceedings by his other proper name. If the purchaser of any real estate sold
by the county treasurer for the payment of taxes shall die without having
procured a deed therefor, the county treasurer may convey such real estate to
the devisees or heirs of the purchaser.
(Code 1930, Art. 11, § 819; Code 1959, § 8-16)
§§ 2-7-105 -- 2-7-115. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. PERSONAL PROPERTY
§ 2-7-116. Generally.
   (a)   If any person shall be assessed upon the assessment books of the
county with personal property only and the amount of taxes levied thereon shall
remain unpaid on the thirtieth day of June next following after the date of
July first on which the taxes are due, the county treasurer shall, within one
month after the first day of July in each year or within one month after the
discovery of any property belonging to such delinquent, levy upon such portions
as may be necessary to pay the taxes, interests, costs and fees, as therein
provided, of the personal property assessed to such delinquent taxpayers, in
the same manner as the sheriff of the county is authorized by law to levy upon
property upon execution on judgments issued out of the circuit court for the
county.
   (b)   He shall advertise and sell such personal property in the same manner
as is required by law in case of sales of personal property by the sheriff of
the county and deliver the property so sold to the purchaser thereof. For the
purpose of the levy of the sale herein provided for, the county treasurer shall
have all the powers possessed or lawfully exercised by the sheriff of the
county, executing executions on judgments of the circuit court for the county,
and shall, if necessary, have the same powers prescribed by law for the levy
upon and the sale of shares of stock in any association or corporation, which
the sheriff of the county possesses in executing executions on judgments of
such court.
   (c)   The county treasurer shall be entitled to receive out of the proceeds
of sales made under this section, the same fees and allowances as are allowed
by law to the sheriff of the county on executions issued as provided in this
section.
   (d)   This section shall be construed as an addition to and not as a
substitution for the powers of the county treasurer to collect taxes assessed
upon personal property by suit.
   (e)   It is hereby expressly provided that the county treasurer, if he deems
such course advisable, may proceed to collect any and all taxes due upon such
personal property by suit, in the name of the board of county commissioners,
before any justice of the peace in and for the county or in the circuit court
for the county. Out of the proceeds of sale of such personal property, the
treasurer shall pay all costs and expenses incident to such sale, the taxes in
arrears thereon and interest. The surplus, if any, shall be paid over to such
delinquent taxpayer.
(Code 1959, § 8-17; 1963, Chapter 825, § 14)
§ 2-7-117. Reserved
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 409 of the 1988 Acts, § 1, repealed § 2-7-117, which section pertained
to report by county treasurer of sales, confirmation thereof by court, and
disposition of proceeds, and was derived from Code 1930, Art. 11, § 816; and
Code 1959, § 8-18.
§ 2-7-118 -- 2-7-124. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT A UTHORITIES
§ 2-7-125. [Authority to establish; authority to borrow money, etc.]
   (A)   (1)   In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (2)   “Bond” means a special obligation bond, revenue bond, note, or
similar instrument issued by the county in accordance with this section.
      (3)   “Cost” includes the cost of:
         (I)   Construction, reconstruction, renovation, and acquisition of all
lands, structures, real or personal property, rights, rights-of-way,
franchises, easements, and interests acquired or to be acquired by the county
or another entity approved by the County Commissioners;
         (II)   Machinery and equipment, including machinery and equipment
needed to expand or enhance county services to the community development
authority;
         (III)   Financing charges and interest prior to and during
construction and, if deemed advisable by the County Commissioners, for a
limited period after completion of construction, interest and reserves for
principal and interest, including costs of municipal bond insurance and any
other type of financial guaranty and costs of issuance;
         (IV)   Extensions, enlargements, additions, and improvements;
         (V)   Architectural, engineering, financial and legal services;
         (VI)   Plans, specifications, studies, surveys, and estimates of cost
and of revenues;
         (VII)   Administrative expenses necessary or incident to determining
whether to proceed with infrastructure improvements; and
         (VIII)   Other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the
construction, acquisition, and financing of infrastructure improvements.
   (B)   (1)   For the purposes stated under paragraph (2) of this subsection,
and subject to the provisions of this section, the county commissioners may:
         (I)   Create a community development authority;
         (II)   Levy ad valorem or special taxes or fees; and
         (III)   Issue bonds and other obligations.
      (2)   The purpose of a community development authority established under
paragraph (1) of this subsection is to provide financing, refinancing, or
reimbursement for the cost of design, construction, establishment, extension,
alteration, or acquisition of adequate storm drainage systems, sewers, water
systems, roads, bridges, culverts, tunnels, streets, sidewalks, lighting,
parking, parks and recreation facilities, facilities for indoor and outdoor
recreational and cultural uses, entrance areas, security facilities, guard
houses, fencing, landscaping improvements, curbs and gutters, museums and
cultural facilities, dams, flood mitigation uses, libraries, transit
facilities, solid waste facilities, and other infrastructure improvements as
necessary, whether situated within the community development authority or
outside the community development authority, if the infrastructure improvement
is reasonably related to other infrastructure improvements within the community
development authority, for the development and utilization of the land, each
with respect to any defined geographic region within the county.
   (C)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of public local law or
public general law, and in addition to other powers that the county may have,
the county commissioners may borrow money by issuing and selling bonds for any
of the purposes stated in subsection (B)(2) of this section if a request is
made by both:
         (I)   The owners of at least two-thirds of the assessed valuation of
the real property located within the community development authority; and
         (II)   At least two-thirds of the owners of the real property located
within the community development authority, provided that:
            1.   Multiple owners of a single parcel are treated as one owner;
and
            2.   A single owner of multiple parcels is treated as one owner.
      (2)   This section is self-executing and does not require the county
commissioners to enact legislation to exercise the powers granted under this
section.
   (D)   (1)   Any bonds issued under this section shall be payable from the
special fund required under subsection (E) of this section.
      (2)   If the county commissioners issue bonds under this section, the
county commissioners may:
         (I)   Establish sinking funds;
         (II)   Establish debt service reserve funds;
         (III)   Pledge other assets and revenues towards the payment of the
principal and interest; or
         (IV)   Provide for municipal bond issuance or any other type of
financial guaranty of the bonds.
      (3)   All proceeds received from any bonds issued and sold shall be
applied solely to pay the cost of infrastructure improvements, including:
         (I)   Costs of design, construction, establishment, extension,
alteration, or acquisition of infrastructure improvements;
         (II)   Costs of issuing bonds;
         (III)   Payment of the principal of and interest on loans, money
advances, or indebtedness incurred by the county for any of the purposes stated
in subsection (B)(2) of this section, including the refunding of bonds
previously issued under this section; and
         (IV)   Funding of a debt service reserve fund or payment of interest
prior to, during, or for a limited period of time after construction.
   (E)   (1)   Before issuing bonds under this section, the county
commissioners shall:
         (I)   Designate by resolution one or more areas as a community
development authority;
         (II)   Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, adopt a resolution
creating a special fund with respect to the community development authority;
and
         (III)   Provide for the levy of an ad valorem or community development
tax or fee on all real or personal property within the community development
authority at a rate or amount designed to provide adequate revenues to pay the
principal of, interest on, and redemption premium, if any, on the bonds to
replenish any debt service reserve fund, and for any other purpose related to
the ongoing expenses of or security for the bonds.
      (2)   Ad valorem taxes levied under this section shall be levied in the
same manner, upon the same assessments, for the same period or periods, and as
of the same date or dates of finality as are general ad valorem taxes within
the community development authority and shall be discontinued when all of the
bonds have been paid in full. Special taxes or fees shall be levied pursuant to
subsection (N) of this section.
      (3)   The resolution creating a special fund under paragraph (1)(II) of
this subsection shall:
         (i)   Pledge to the special fund the proceeds of the ad valorem or
special tax or fee to be levied as provided in paragraph (1)(III) of this
subsection; and
         (ii)   Require that the proceeds from the tax or fee be paid into the
special fund.
   (F)   When no bonds authorized by this section are outstanding with respect
to a community development authority:
      (1)   The community development authority shall be terminated; and
      (2)   Any money remaining in the special fund on the date of termination
shall be paid to the general fund of the county or applied to another use
approved by the county commissioners.
   (G)   (1)   In order to implement the authority under this section to issue
bonds, the county commissioners shall adopt an ordinance or resolution that:
         (I)   Specifies and describes the proposed undertaking and states that
it has complied with subsection (E) of this section;
         (II)   Specifies the maximum principal amount of the bonds to be
issued;
         (III)   Specifies the maximum rate or rates of interest for the bonds;
and
         (IV)   Agrees to a covenant to levy upon all real or personal property
within the community development authority ad valorem taxes or special taxes or
fees in rate and amount at least sufficient in each year in which any of the
bonds are outstanding to provide for the payment of the principal of and the
interest on the bonds.
      (2)   The ordinance or resolution may require or may authorize the county
manager to specify as the county manager deems appropriate to effect the
financing of the proposed undertaking:
         (I)   The actual principal amount of the bonds to be issued;
         (II)   The actual rate or rates of interest for the bonds;
         (III)   The manner in which and the terms upon which the bonds are to
be sold;
         (IV)   The manner in which and the times and places that the interest
on the bonds is to be paid;
         (V)   The time or times that the bonds may be executed, issued, and
delivered;
         (VI)   The form and tenor of the bonds and the denominations in which
the bonds may be issued;
         (VII)   The manner in which and the times and places that the
principal of the bonds is to be paid, within the limitations under this
section;
         (VIII)   Provisions pursuant to which any or all of the bonds may be
called for redemption prior to their stated maturity dates; or
         (IX)   Any other provisions not inconsistent with this section as
shall be determined by the county commissioners to be necessary or desirable to
effect the financing of the proposed undertaking.
      (3)   An ordinance or resolution authorizing the bonds required under
this subsection, any ordinance or resolution adopted in furtherance of the
required ordinance or resolution, the bonds, the designation of a community
development authority, or the levy of a special ad valorem tax or special tax
or fee shall be subject to the request of the property owners as specified
under subsection (C) of this section.
      (4)   The special fund and any sinking fund established by the county
commissioners to provide for the payment of the principal of or interest on any
bonds issued by the county under the provisions of this section may not be
invested by the fiscal officer of the county having custody of the special fund
or any sinking fund except in the manner prescribed by Article 31, §§ 6 and 7
of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The fiscal officer having custody of the
proceeds of the sale of any such bonds may invest the proceeds, pending the
expenditure thereof, as prescribed by Article 95, § 22 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
   (H)   The principal amount of the bonds, the interest payable on the bonds,
their transfer, and any income derived from the transfer, including any profit
made in the sale or transfer of the bonds, shall be exempt from taxation by the
state and by the counties and municipal corporations of the state, but shall be
included, to the extent required under Title 8, Subtitle 2, of the Tax—General
article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, in computing the net earnings of
financial institutions.
   (I)   (1)   Bonds issued under this section may be in bearer form or in
coupon form or may be registrable as to principal alone or as to both principal
and interest. Each bond shall be deemed to be a security as defined in § 8-102
of the Commercial Law article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, whether or not
it is one of a class or series or by its terms is divisible into a class or
series of instruments.
      (2)   Bonds shall be signed manually or in facsimile by the president or
vice president of the board of county commissioners, and the seal of the county
shall be affixed to the bonds and attested to by the county manager or other
similar administrative officer of the county. If any officer whose signature or
countersignature appears on the coupons ceases to be such officer before
delivery of the bonds, the officer’s signature or countersignature shall
nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if the
officer had remained in office until delivery.
      (3)   All bonds shall mature not later than 30 years from their date of
issuance.
      (4)   All bonds shall be sold either at public or private sale, and in
the manner and upon the terms as the county commissioners deem best. Any
contract for the acquisition of property may provide that payment shall be made
in bonds. Bonds issued under this section are not subject to Article 31 §§ 9,
10, and 11 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
   (J)   Bonds issued under this section are securities:
      (1)   In which all public officers and public bodies of the state and its
political subdivisions, all insurance companies, state banks and trust
companies, national banking associations, savings banks, savings and loan
associations, investment companies, executors, administrators, trustees, and
other fiduciaries may properly and legally invest funds, including capital in
their control or belonging to them; and
      (2)   Which may properly and legally be deposited with and received by
any state or county officer or any agency or political subdivision of the state
for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or obligations of the state is
authorized by law.
   (K)   The powers granted under this section shall be regarded as
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws and may not be
regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing.
   (L)   This section, being necessary for the welfare of the state and its
residents, shall be liberally construed to effect the purpose stated in
subsection (B)(2) of this section.
   (M)   Before the final adoption of an ordinance or resolution under this
section that designates a community development authority, authorizes the
issuance of bonds, or levies ad valorem taxes or special taxes or fees, the
county commissioners shall hold a public hearing after giving not less than 10
days notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
   (N)   (1)   As an alternative to levying ad valorem taxes under this
section, the county commissioners may levy special taxes or fees on property in
a community development authority to cover the costs of infrastructure
improvements.
      (2)   In determining the basis for and the amount of the tax or fee, the
cost of an improvement may be calculated and levied:
         (I)   Equally per front foot, lot, parcel, dwelling unit, or square
foot;
         (II)   According to the value of the property as determined by the
county commissioners, with or without regard to improvements on the property;
or
         (III)   In any other reasonable manner that results in fairly
allocating the cost of the infrastructure improvements.
      (3)   The county commissioners may provide by ordinance or resolution
for:
         (I)   A maximum amount to be assessed with respect to any parcel of
property located within a community development authority;
         (II)   A tax year or other date after which no further special taxes
or fees under this section shall be levied or collected on a parcel; and
         (III)   The circumstances under which the special tax or fee levied
against any parcel may be increased, if at all, as a consequence of delinquency
or default by the owner of that parcel or any other parcel within the community
development authority.
      (4)   The county commissioners may require special taxes or fees to be
paid either periodically over the terms of the bonds or in one lump sum amount
due at the sale of a lot, the issuance of a building permit, or the occurrence
of another event.
      (5)   The county commissioners may impose or levy taxes or fees in
different amounts within a community development authority to reflect the
extent to which different parcels of property benefit differently from the
infrastructure improvements being financed or other appropriate distinctions
among parcels of property. The county commissioners may create subauthorities
within a community development authority to facilitate the levy or imposition
of taxes or fees at different rates or levels within the authority.
      (6)   The county commissioners by ordinance or resolution may establish
procedures allowing for the prepayment of special taxes or fees under this
subsection.
      (7)   Special taxes or fees levied under this subsection shall be
collected and secured in the same manner as general ad valorem taxes unless
otherwise provided in the ordinance or resolution and shall be subject to the
same penalties and the same procedure, sale, and lien priority in case of
delinquency as is provided for general ad valorem taxes.
   (O)   Before the county commissioners may designate an area wholly or partly
within a municipal corporation as a community development authority, the
governing body of the municipal corporation must consent to the designation.
   (P)   Bonds issued under this section are a special obligation of the county
and may not constitute a general obligation debt of the county or a pledge of
the county’s full faith and credit or taxing power.
   (Q)   Notwithstanding any limitations or other provisions to the contrary
under Article 25 of the Annotated Code of Maryland or under other public
general or public local law, the county may enter into contracts to implement
this section, including, without limitation, contracts providing for the
construction or operation of infrastructure improvements financed under this
section.
(1997, Chapter 517, § 1; 2001, Chapter 719, § 1; 2006, Chapter 175, § 1)
§§ 2-7-126 -- 2-7-130. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. EXCISE TAX
§ 2-7-131. [Building excise tax.]
   (A)   Subject to subsection (B) of this section, the County Commissioners of
Frederick County, by ordinance, may fix, impose, and collect a building excise
tax.
   (B)   (1)   If the county commissioners impose a building excise tax, the
county commissioners may not also impose an impact fee for financing the
capital costs of additional or expanded roads under the authority granted in
Article 25, § 9(J) of the Code.
      (2)   If a municipal corporation has imposed a tax on construction
specifically devoted and limited by law to use for capital projects for
additional or expanded public road facilities, the county commissioners may not
impose or collect a building excise tax on the same construction within the
municipal corporation.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the county
commissioners shall specify in the ordinance the type of construction subject
to the building excise tax.
      (2)   Construction intended to be actively used for farm or agricultural
use may not be subject to a building excise tax under this section so long as
the construction continues to be actively used for farm or agricultural use.
      (3)   Residential construction may not be subject to a building excise
tax under this section if:
         (I)   The construction is for a single- family residential building
existing on July 1, 2001; and
         (II)   The construction increases the square footage of the building
by less than 100% of the already permitted square footage.
      (4)   The county commissioners may establish:
         (I)   Criteria to determine if construction qualifies for an exemption
under this section; and
         (II)   Additional building excise tax exemptions with appropriate
criteria.
   (D)   (1)   The county director of finance shall deposit the revenues from
the building excise tax in an account called the “Development Road Improvement
Fund.”
      (2)   Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, the revenues from the
building excise tax in the development road improvement fund shall be used only
to pay for capital projects or indebtedness incurred for capital projects for
additional or expanded public road facilities, including bridges, intersection
improvements, and new road construction and road improvement.
      (3)   Before the county commissioners may expend funds from the
development road improvement fund, the county commissioners must match at least
the same amount of funds for capital projects for additional or expanded public
road facilities.
   (E)   A municipal corporation shall assist the county commissioners in the
collection of the building excise tax within the municipal corporation by:
      (1)   Collecting and remitting the tax to the county; or
      (2)   Requiring the tax to be paid to the county commissioners in
accordance with a county ordinance.
   (F)   The county commissioners, in consultation with the Frederick County
Director of Finance:
      (1)   Shall conduct a comprehensive study of the impact of the building
excise tax on the economy of Frederick County; and
      (2)   On or before January 1, 2006, shall submit the results of the study
and recommendations to the Frederick County Senators and Delegates.
(2001, Chapter 690, § 1; 2006, Chapter 181, § 1; 2007, Chapter 69, § 1)
§§ 2-7-132 – 2-7-200. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI: INVESTMENTS (§ 2-7-201)
Section
   
2-7-201   Divestment
§ 2-7-201. [Divestment.]
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMPANY. Any corporation, utility, partnership, joint venture,
franchisor, franchisee, trust, entity investment vehicle, financial
institution, or a wholly owned subsidiary of any of these entities.
      DIVESTMENT ACTION. Selling, redeeming, transferring, exchanging,
otherwise disposing of, and refraining from further investment in certain
investments.
      DOING BUSINESS IN IRAN. The company has, with actual knowledge, on or
after August 5, 1996, made an investment of $20,000,000 or more, or any
combination of investments of at least $10,000,000 each, which in the aggregate
equals or exceeds $20,000,000 in any 12-month period, and which directly or
significantly contributes to the enhancement of Iran's ability to develop the
petroleum or natural gas resources of Iran.
      DOING BUSINESS IN SUDAN. Engaging in commerce in Sudan by maintaining or
leasing equipment, facilities, personnel, or other apparatus of business or
commerce in oil-related activities, mineral extraction activities, power
production activities, or production of military equipment of Sudan.
      ELIGIBLE ACCOUNTS. Actively managed separate accounts containing funds of
the several systems.
      INVESTMENT. The commitment of funds or other assets to a company,
including:
         (i)   The ownership or control of a share or interest in the company;
or
         (ii)   The ownership or control of a bond or other debt instrument of
a company.
      IRAN. The Islamic Republic of Iran.
      SUDAN. The government in Khartoum, Sudan, that is led by the National
Congress Party (formerly known as the National Islamic Front) or any successor
government formed on or after October 13, 2006, including the coalition
national Unity Government agreed on in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement for
Sudan. SUDAN does not mean the regional government of southern Sudan.
   (b)   The Board of County Commissioners may enact an ordinance authorizing
the divestment action concerning funds in eligible accounts that are invested
in companies doing business in Iran or Sudan.
   (c)   (1)   The Board of County Commissioners, its officials, agents,
employees, or any fiduciary may not be held liable for any actions taken or
decisions made in good faith for the purpose of complying with or executing the
requirements of any divestment provisions under this section or any ordinance
enacted under the authority granted in this section.
      (2)   The Board of County Commissioners, its officials, agents,
employees, or any fiduciary shall act in good faith to carry out divestment
action as authorized by this section or any ordinance enacted in compliance
with all applicable local, state, and federal law, including relevant judicial
decisions and the federal Sudan Accountability and Divestment Act of 2007.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall require the Board of County
Commissioners to take action as described in this section unless the Board of
County Commissioners determines in good faith that the action is consistent
with its fiduciary responsibilities.
(2009, Chapter 427, § 1)
CHAPTER 2-8: FIRE, RESCUE, AMBULANCE SERVICES (§§ 2-8-1 — 2-8-6)
Section
   
2-8-1   Approval of volunteer fire, rescue and ambulance departments
   
2-8-2   Regulation of volunteer fire, rescue and ambulance departments
   
2-8-3   Annual tax levy
   
2-8-4   Loans to volunteer fire or rescue companies
   
2-8-5   Authority of Board of County Commissioners to borrow money
   
2-8-6   Authority of Board of County Commissioners to regulate fire and rescue
services and to establish special taxing districts
§ 2-8-1. APPROVAL OF VOLUNTEER FIRE, RESCUE AND AMBULANCE DEPARTMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any persons or association to provide any formally
organized fire protection or firefighting or service, rescue or ambulance
service in Frederick County unless a volunteer fire department, rescue
department, or ambulance department is incorporated, designated, and approved
and recognized by the Frederick County Volunteer Fire and Rescue Association,
Inc., and the board of county commissioners. Any person or association
violating this chapter shall be subject to being enjoined from violating this
chapter, and in addition, a civil penalty may be recovered by the board of
county commissioners in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each
offense from any person violating this chapter. This chapter does not include
fire, rescue, and ambulance departments organized by and for service to
government installations and private industry.
(Code 1959, § 9-1; 1979, Chapter 674, § 2; 1981, Chapter 672, § 1; 2000,
Chapter 649, § 1)
§ 2-8-2. REGULATION OF VOLUNTEER FIRE, RESCUE AND AMBULANCE DEPARTMENTS.
   The board of county commissioners with the advice of the Frederick County
Volunteer Fire and Rescue Association, Inc., may, by rules and regulations
adopted by the board of county commissioners, provide specifications for
equipment, service area designations and operations in the best interest of the
volunteer fire, rescue, and ambulance departments in the county. Any volunteer
fire, rescue, or ambulance department which is incorporated and approved and
recognized by the Frederick County Volunteer Fire and Rescue Association, Inc.,
and the board of county commissioners which does not meet the standards for
equipment, service areas or operations of the Frederick County Volunteer Fire
and Rescue Association, Inc., or any other criteria adopted by the board of
county commissioners, shall be ineligible for any appropriations from the board
of county commissioners, anything to the contrary notwithstanding herein, and
any appropriations may be denied, withheld, or curtailed. Any fire, rescue, or
ambulance company or department failing to meet the requirements set by the
board of county commissioners shall suspend operations immediately after
notification that a majority of the board of county commissioners has directed
the cessation of operations.
(Code 1959, § 9-2; 1979, Chapter 674, § 2; 1981, Chapter 672, § 1)
§ 2-8-3. ANNUAL TAX LEVY.
   (a)   The board of county commissioners annually may impose on the
assessable property of the county a tax to provide:
      (1)   The sum of not less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for:
         (i)   Each county volunteer fire company that provides emergency fire
services; and
         (ii)   Each volunteer rescue or ambulance company that provides
emergency ambulance services from a facility not also used by a county
volunteer fire company as described in this subsection; and
      (2)   The sum of not less than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) for:
         (i)   Each county volunteer fire company that provides emergency
ambulance service; and
         (ii)   Each volunteer rescue or ambulance company that provides
emergency ambulance services from a facility also used by a county volunteer
fire company as described in this subsection.
   (b)   In order to be eligible to receive funds provided for in this section,
each company shall be approved, incorporated, and recognized by the Frederick
County Volunteer Fire and Rescue Association, Inc., and meet the other
standards as provided for herein.
   (c)   The board may contribute money to compensate out of county fire,
rescue, or ambulance companies rendering service in the county in the board’s
sole discretion.
(Code 1959, § 9-3; 1979, Chapter 647, § 2; 1981, Chapter 672, § 1; 1986,
Chapter 230, § 1; 1989, Chapter 168, § 1)
§ 2-8-4. LOANS TO VOLUNTEER FIRE OR RESCUE COMPANIES.
   The Board of County Commissioners of Frederick County may provide loans to
approvedvolunteer fire or rescue companies for fire or rescue equipment, land,
or buildings to be used by the companies. The loans shall be in such amounts
and upon such terms as are approved by the Board of County Commissioners.
(1981, Chapter 193, § 1; 2004, Chapter 329, § 1)
§ 2-8-5. AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS TO BORROW MONEY.
   The Board of County Commissioners of Frederick County may borrow an amount
not to exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in any fiscal year from a
bank or other lending institution for the purpose of making loans to volunteer
ambulance and rescue departments in Frederick County to purchase vehicles and
equipment to be used by the departments. The board of county commissioners
shall approve all terms and conditions on loans from a bank or other lending
institution.
(1983, Chapter 39, § 1)
§ 2-8-6. AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS TO REGULATE FIRE AND RESCUE
SERVICES AND TO ESTABLISH SPECIAL TAXING DISTRICTS.
   (a)   (1)   In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.
      (2)   “Fire and rescue services” means firefighting, rescue, or ambulance
services.
      (3)   “Minimum response criteria” means the standards the board of county
commissioners establishes designating the minimum requirements for a fire and
rescue service.
      (4)   “Special taxing district” means an area subject to an additional
county property tax for the purpose of providing fire and rescue services
within the district.
   (b)   In cooperation with the Frederick County Volunteer Fire and Rescue
Association, Inc., the board of county commissioners shall:
      (1)   Establish, by ordinance, minimum response criteria for fire and
rescue services; and
      (2)   Regulate all fire and rescue services in the county and the
municipal corporations of the county, including:
         (i)   The location of fire and rescue companies and stations;
         (ii)   The training and qualifications for personnel, including
volunteers, involved in fire and rescue services;
         (iii)   The procedures for purchasing equipment or property described
in subsection (e)(3) of this section;
         (iv)   The standards and specifications for the equipment and property
described in subsection (e)(3) of this section; and
         (v)   Other matters necessary or incidental to the provision of fire
and rescue services in the county.
   (c)   The board of county commissioners may:
      (1)   In cooperation with the Frederick County Volunteer Fire and Rescue
Association establish fire and rescue companies in the county;
      (2)   In accordance with subsection (d) of this section, establish, by
ordinance, special taxing districts for fire and rescue services in the county;
      (3)   In accordance with subsections (e) and (f) of this section, levy,
collect, and expend a special district property tax for fire and rescue
services in the county; and
      (4)   Acquire and sell real and personal property at public or private
sale to provide for fire and rescue services in the county.
   (d)   (1)   The board of county commissioners may establish, by ordinance, a
special taxing district for fire and rescue services if:
         (i)   The minimum response criteria are not being met within the
proposed district;
         (ii)   A fire and rescue company requests the establishment of the
special taxing districts; or
         (iii)   Property owners within the county request establishment of the
special taxing district by filing with the board of county commissioners a
petition that identifies the proposed district and is signed by at least 50
percent of the property owners within the proposed district.
      (2)   Prior to adopting an ordinance under paragraph (1) of this
subsection, the board shall:
         (i)   Conduct a public hearing on the establishment of the special
taxing district;
         (ii)   At least 30 days before the public hearing, send by regular
mail to all property owners within the proposed district written notice of:
            1.   The boundaries of the proposed district;
            2.   The proposed amount of the special district tax; and
            3.   The time, date, and location of the public hearing;
         (iii)   Provide prior notice of the hearing by publishing, at least
once each week for 2 successive weeks, in at least 1 newspaper of general
circulation in the county:
            1.   The time, location, and date of the public hearing; and
            2.   A summary of the proposed ordinance; and
         (iv)   Consider the recommendations of the Frederick County Volunteer
Fire and Rescue Association, Inc.
      (3)   Unless the ordinance provides for a later effective date, an
ordinance adopted under this subsection is effective on the date it is passed
by the board of county commissioners.
   (e)   (1)   If a special taxing district is established under subsection (d)
of this section, the board of county commissioners may impose on the assessable
real property within the district an annual tax to pay for personnel and
capital expenses incurred in providing fire and rescue services within the
district if the tax:
         (i)   Does not exceed 30 percent of the county property tax; and
         (ii)   Is levied and collected in accordance with §§
2-7-101 through
2-7-104 of this Code.
      (2)   The tax imposed under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be,
until paid, a first lien on the real property in respect to which it is imposed
from the date the tax became payable.
      (3)   The board of county commissioners may appropriate from the proceeds
of the special district tax, and from other sources, funds to be used within
the district for fire and rescue services.
   (f)   (1)   After a special taxing district has been established, the board
of county commissioners may alter, by ordinance, the amount of the special
district tax in accordance with paragraph (2) of this subsection.
      (2)   (i)   Before altering the tax, the county commissioners shall hold
a public hearing.
         (ii)   The county commissioners shall publish notice of the public
hearing at least once a week for two (2) successive weeks in at least one (1)
newspaper of general circulation in the county.
         (iii)   The notice shall state:
            1.   The date, time, and location of the public hearing;
            2.   The special district tax rate currently in effect; and
            3.   The proposed special district tax rate.
(1989, Chapter 168, § 1; 1993, Chapter 164, § 1; 1993, Chapter 166, § 1; 2006,
Chapter 94, § 1)
CHAPTER 2-9: LICENSES (§ 2-9-1)
Section
   
2-9-1   Pinball machines
Cross reference:
   Amusements, see
Chapter 1-4
§ 2-9-1. Pinball machines.
   (a)   Every person keeping, maintaining or operating for public
entertainment in the county any pinball machine or similar device, including
any such machine or device which gives or allows free play by registering such
plays on the machine or device, operated or played by the insertion of a coin
shall obtain a license therefor from the clerk of the circuit court of the
county and shall pay therefor the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such
machine or device. The application and license forms shall be as specified by
the clerk.
   (b)   Each machine or device so licensed shall have affixed to it a metal
tag issued by the clerk, showing that the fee for the current year has been
paid. Each person who owns and maintains three (3) or more of such machines,
regardless of where the same may be kept, as long as they are available to the
public to play, shall also secure from the clerk an operator’s license at a
annual fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). All licenses shall expire on the
thirtieth day of April each year, shall be transferable upon application to the
clerk of the court and shall be prorated monthly; provided, that nothing in
this section shall in any way be construed as authorizing the issuance of a
license, other than one authorized by this section, for any game, device or
machine for which a license may not hereafter lawfully be issued in accordance
with any law of or pertaining to the county. Any such licensed machine or
device may be moved to and operated at a new location, at the discretion of the
licensee.
   (c)   It shall be a misdemeanor and a violation of this section to knowingly
permit any person under sixteen (16) years of age to operate or play any such
device.
   (d)   Any person keeping, maintaining or operating any such machine or
device without a license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction
thereof, he shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (e)   All license fees collected under the provisions of this section shall
be paid to the board of county commissioners, who shall credit one-half thereof
to the general funds of the county and pay the remaining one-half portion to
the emergency hospital of the county for expenditure on or for capital
improvements.
(Code 1949, Chapter 659, § 1; Code 1959, § 10-1)
CHAPTER 2-10: PLUMBING (§ 2-10-1)
Section
   
2-10-1   Unlicensed plumbers and mechanics may repair pumps, windmills, etc.;
exception
Cross reference:
   Ordinances relating to plumbing, see
Chapter 1-14
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 222, § 1, 1981, amended § 1-14-90 by adding paragraph (c) which provided
that a person may perform plumbing work on his own residential or commercial
property if he secures the proper permit.
§ 2-10-1. Unlicensed plumbers and mechanics may repair pumps, windmills, etc.;
exception.
   Every person shall have the power and authority to employ an unlicensed
plumber or a mechanic to do repair work about his premises situated in the
county, such as the repair of pumps, windmills, pipes, machinery and work of
like nature. Such plumber or mechanic shall not be compelled to take out any
master plumber license; provided, that if such premises are situated in any
town, village or city in the county having more than one thousand inhabitants
and the repair work to be done is plumbing work, then no such plumber or
mechanic shall perform such work, unless he is licensed as a plumber in
accordance with Title 12, Subtitle 3 of the Business Occupations and
Professions Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
(Code 1930, Art. 11, § 659; Code 1959, § 11-1; 2007, Chapter 5, § 1)
CHAPTER 2-11: ROADS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL (§§ 2-11-1 — 2-11-25)
Section
   
2-11-1   “Road construction and maintenance” defined
   
2-11-2   Stop signs
   
2-11-3   Use of firearms upon highways, watercourses, etc.
   
2-11-4   Public dumps prohibited near state highways
   
2-11-5   Regulation of weight and speed of vehicles on bridges or culverts
   
2-11-6   Borrowing money for road emergencies
   
2-11-7   Borrowing money for construction of roads
   
2-11-8   Use of funds designated for county road purposes
   
2-11-9   Railroad franchise
   
2-11-10   Removal of snowdrifts by county
   
2-11-11   Street names and addresses
   
2-11-12   Scavenging from recycling bins
   
2-11-13   Lighting of public ways
Cross reference:
   Ordinances relating to roads and public grounds, see
Chapter 1-15
§ 2-11-1. “Road construction and maintenance” defined.
   The term “road construction and maintenance” as used in this chapter, shall
be construed to include the construction and maintenance of necessary bridges,
drainage structures and all structures necessary for a complete highway system.
(Code 1939, Chapter 695, § 1; Code 1959, § 13-1)
§ 2-11-2. Stop signs.
   The board of county commissioners shall erect and maintain, out of the
receipt of their office, along the rights of way of the county roads, the
necessary stop signs and the necessary signs, signals, markers or road names,
for the purpose of directing the traveling public, warning them of danger, or
for any other purpose. Any person who fails to obey such stop signs, unless
traffic is controlled by traffic signals or officers, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than twenty-five ($25.00). Any person who removes, damages or defaces any
such sign, signals, markers or road names shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
fined a sum not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Such fines shall be paid to the board of county
commissioners for road maintenance purposes.
(Code 1930, Art. 11, § 704; 1953, Chapter 306, § 1; 1955, Chapter 75, § 1; Code
1959, § 13-2; 1983, Chapter 40, § 1)
§ 2-11-3. Use of firearms upon highways, watercourses, etc.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to fire a gun, pistol or other firearm upon
or over any road or public highway in the county. It shall be unlawful for
anyone to fire a pistol or a rifle upon or over any body of water or
watercourse situated in whole or in part in the county. Anyone violating any of
the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction, be fined a sum not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such
violation or shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days or both.
(Code 1947, Chapter 864, § 1; Code 1959, § 13-3)
§ 2-11-4. Public dumps prohibited near state highways.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or to permit to be
maintained a public dump within five hundred feet of a state highway in the
county or for any person to throw, dump or deposit any trash, junk or other
refuse upon the same. Any person violating the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not
exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each such violation.
(Code 1939, Chapter 589, § 1; Code 1959, § 13-4)
§ 2-11-5. Regulation of weight and speed of vehicles on bridges or culverts.
   (a)   The board of county commissioners are authorized to regulate the
weight and speed of trucks, tractors, machines and road engines or other
vehicles of any kind passing over any bridges or culverts included in the
county roads system, by posting and maintaining conspicuously, at both ends of
the bridges or culverts, signboards with lettering not less than three (3)
inches in height, setting forth the weight and speed allowed. The county
commissioners, with respect to any roads included in the county road system,
may by resolution impose regulations as to the weight of vehicles to be
operated upon any roads for a period not to exceed six (6) months, whenever any
such road, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other condition, will be
seriously damaged or destroyed unless the permissible weights are reduced.
Additional six (6) month periods may be imposed by a like resolution.
   (b)   The board of county commissioners, upon enacting any such resolution,
shall erect or cause to be erected, posted and maintained, at each end of that
portion of any road affected thereby, signboards with lettering not less than
three (3) inches in height, setting forth the weight limits allowed. The
resolution shall not be effective unless and until such signboards are erected
and posted.
   (c)   Any person, whether the owner, the person in charge of such vehicles
or an employee or agent of such person, who shall draw, drive, propel or in any
other manner take or cause to be taken, drawn, driven or propelled over any
such bridge, culvert or road any of the aforementioned vehicles weighing more
than the maximum weight allowed upon the posted sign without a written permit
from the county commissioners shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such
offense. In addition to such penalty, the owner or person in control of such
vehicle shall be liable to the county commissioners for all damage which may be
caused by the violation of any such regulation.
(Code 1955, Chapter 346, § 1; Code 1959, § 13-5)
§ 2-11-6. Borrowing money for road emergencies.
   The board of county commissioners are hereby authorized to borrow, upon the
faith of the county, up to the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per
year for county road emergencies and unforeseen contingencies and shall include
in the next year’s tax levy a sufficient amount to repay such loan.
(Code 1930, Art. II, § 1; 1939, Chapter 695, § 1; 1947, Chapter 633, § 1; 1951,
Chapter 644, § 1; Code 1959, § 13-6)
§ 2-11-7. Borrowing money for construction of roads.
   The board of county commissioners is hereby authorized to borrow, upon the
faith of the county, the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per year
for the construction of roads and shall include in the next year’s tax levy a
sufficient amount to repay such loan.
(Code 1939, Chapter 695, § 1; Code 1959, § 13-7)
§ 2-11-8. Use of funds designated for county road purposes.
   (A)   As used in this section, “public easement road” means any road:
      (1)   Located in Frederick County;
      (2)   Owned or maintained by a homeowner’s association or an incorporated
nonprofit community organization; and
      (3)   Over which the board of county commissioners has been granted, and
the board of county commissioners has accepted, an easement for public use.
   (B)   The board of county commissioners may use funds designated for county
road purposes by the federal or state government for county road purposes or a
public easement road.
   (C)   The board of county commissioners may establish criteria for the use
of funds designated for county road purposes and for the qualifications for a
public easement road.
(Code 1959, § 13-8; 1965, Chapter 222, § 1; 2001, Chapter 250, § 1)
§ 2-11-9. Railroad franchise.
   The board of county commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to
grant to electric railway companies the right and power to build their lines of
railway on and across public roads, subject to the consent of the board of
county commissioners.
(Code 1930, Art. II, § 101; Code 1959, § 13-12)
§ 2-11-10. Removal of snowdrifts by county.
   Upon application or petition in writing of a majority of the residents
living along any public road or portion of a public road in the county,
including only such residents who have no outlet to any other public road, the
board of county commissioners shall remove or cause to be removed such
snowdrifts as may render such road or portion of road impassable for several
days; provided, that the county commissioners shall not be required to pay more
than sixty (60) percent of the cost of removing such snowdrifts. Nothing in
this section shall prevent the board of county commissioners from removing or
causing to be removed snowdrifts from any public road without application or
petition of such residents.
(Code 1930, Art. II, § 703; Code 1959, § 13-13)
§ 2-11-11. Street names and addresses.
   The county commissioners may change the name of streets and roads in the
county, may assign street or road address numbers to structures along county
roads or streets, and may adopt ordinances or regulations concerning them in
their sole discretion, after notice of change has been advertised and a public
hearing has been held on the proposed change.
(Code 1959, § 13-13A; 1977, Chapter 142, § 1)
§ 2-11-12. Scavenging from recycling bins.
   (a)   The board of county commissioners, by ordinance, may prohibit the
unauthorized removal of any material from a bin or other container placed in
Frederick County for the collection of any material for recycling.
   (b)   The board of county commissioners may establish a civil penalty in an
ordinance adopted under this section, not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation, and any person who violates the ordinance shall be
subject to a civil penalty in accordance with the ordinance.
(1994, Chapter 275, § 1)
§ 2-11-13. Lighting of public ways.
   (a)   This section supplements the authority of the board of county
commissioners to provide lighting under Article 25, § 2B of the Annotated Code
of Maryland.
   (b)   Subject to § 25-102(b)(2) of the Transportation Article, the board of
county commissioners may provide lighting along all or any part of the streets,
lanes, alleys, and public ways of the county.
   (c)   The costs of lighting provided under this section may be paid out of
the general revenues of the county.
(1994, Chapter 276, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 276 of the 1994 Public Local Laws of Maryland enacted the above
provisions numbered as § 2-11-12. Inasmuch as Chapter 275 of the 1994 Public
Local Laws had already set out provisions numbered § 2-11-12, the editor has
renumbered Chapter 276’s provisions as § 2-11-13 in order to conform to
established format.
§§ 2-11-14 -- 2-11-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II: RESERVED
ARTICLE III: BENEFIT ASSESSMENTS FOR PRIVATE ROAD CONSTRUCTION
AND IMPROVEMENTS (§§ 2-11-73  — 2-11-78)
Section
   
2-11-73   Generally
   
2-11-73.1   Road districts in the Lake Linganore Planned Unit Development;
establishment; requirements
   
2-11-74   Assessment lists of property owners
   
2-11-75   Benefit assessments generally, default in payment of assessments
   
2-11-76   Petition and ordinance
   
2-11-77   Appeals
   
2-11-78   Article cumulative
§ 2-11-73. Generally.
   The board of county commissioners are hereby authorized to construct and
improve roads and drainage incident to construction or improvement on or along
private roads, after the approval of a petition of the majority of the property
owners whose property is adjacent to the road to be constructed or improved
requesting that the roads be taken into the county roads system. In the
exercise of the powers granted by this section, the county commissioners may by
proper ordinance, passed in accordance with the provisions of Section 3 of
Article 25 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, 1957, as amended, adopt all
necessary rules and conditions for the acceptance, construction, and
maintenance of the roads and/or other authorized improvements by the county.
Such ordinance may also provide for annual benefit assessments to be levied
against the adjacent properties for the purpose of reimbursing the county for
the cost of the improvements and the time and manner of payment, but not to
exceed ten (10) years. Annual benefit assessments shall be a first lien upon
the property against which they are assessed until paid, subject only to prior
state and county taxes, and if any property be sold for state and county taxes,
and there remains a surplus, then the county commissioners may upon petition to
the circuit court be allowed the payment of their lien.
(Code 1959, § 38-5; 1972, Chapter 615, § 1; 1983, Chapter 28, § 1)
§ 2-11-73.1. Road districts in the Lake Linganore Planned Unit Development;
establishment; requirements.
   (a)   (1)   In this section, “pro rata charge” means the fee imposed on each
property within a road district that constitutes the property’s equal share of
the total cost of improving the roads in the district.
      (2)   “Pro rata charge” does not include a fee based on the assessed
value of the property in the district.
   (b)   In accordance with this section, the county commissioners of Frederick
County may establish, by ordinance, road districts within the Lake Linganore
Planned Unit Development and levy a pro rata charge on the property within the
district to pay for the construction and improvement of roads within the
district.
   (c)   In consultation with the Lake Linganore Association, Inc., the county
shall develop a proposal for the establishment of 1 or more road districts for
the Lake Linganore Planned Unit Development:
      (1)   On its own initiative;
      (2)   On written request of the Lake Linganore Association, Inc.; or
      (3)   On petition of a majority of the property owners within the
proposed district.
   (d)   The proposal developed under subsection (c) of this section shall
comply with the requirements of subsection (e) of this section and include:
      (1)   A description of the property and the roads or parts of roads to be
included in the proposed district;
      (2)   A description of the proposed standards for construction of the
roads within the district; and
      (3)   A good faith and reasonable estimate of the anticipated costs of
construction of the roads within the district and the maximum amount of the pro
rata charge that may be levied against each property within the proposed
district.
   (e)   (1)   Property within the Lake Linganore Planned Unit Development may
be included within only 1 road district.
      (2)   A road district may include only those roads or sections of roads
that abut existing, platted, and recorded lots.
      (3)   Unless the county commissioners specify otherwise in the proposal
developed under subsection (c) of this section, a road within a district may
not be constructed or improved until the water, sewer, telephone, and other
utilities are installed to the properties that abut the road.
      (4)   A road that is included in the road construction project for a
district may be constructed or improved to:
         (i)   County standards, wherever the right-of-way permits; or
         (ii)   Lake Linganore standards as set forth in an agreement
concerning roads and streets between the Frederick County Planning and Zoning
Commission, the Frederick County Roads Board, and Linganore Corporation.
      (5)   (i)   Following completion of the road construction project within
a district, the roads within the district shall be offered to the county or
retained by the Lake Linganore Association for future or subsequent
improvements and maintenance.
         (ii)   The county may accept or reject a road offered for inclusion
into the county road system.
      (6)   The costs of the construction or repair of a bridge adjoining the
Lake Linganore Dam or any other bridge may not be included in any estimates or
charges for road construction levied against any property in a road district.
   (f)   (1)   The appropriate pro rata charge for property within a district
shall be based on the number of dwelling units on the property or, if there is
no dwelling unit on the property, assigned to the property under paragraph (2)
of this subsection.
      (2)   The number of dwelling units assigned to property for purposes of
determining the pro rata charge for the property shall be:
         (i)   One dwelling unit, for undeveloped residential property on which
only one single-family dwelling will be built;
         (ii)   Four and one-half (4.5) dwelling units per acre, for commercial
land;
         (iii)   Four and one-half (4.5) dwelling units per acre, for
undeveloped residential land on which multifamily dwellings or more than one
single- family dwelling will be built; and
         (iv)   Four and one-half (4.5) dwelling units per acre, for property
designated as a parcel “B” or a parcel “C” on the subdivision plats of the Lake
Linganore Planned Unit Development.
   (g)   (1)   Following development of the proposal under subsection (c) of
this section and before adopting an ordinance establishing a road district
under this section, the county shall hold a public hearing to inform the
residents and property owners of the Lake Linganore Planned Unit Development of
the proposal.
      (2)   At least thirty (30) days before the public hearing, notice of the
hearing shall be mailed to each owner of record of property proposed for
inclusion within the road district.
      (3)   The notice shall include:
         (i)   The date, time and place of the hearing;
         (ii)   A description of the boundaries of the proposed district;
         (iii)   An accurate estimate of the maximum amount of the pro rata
charge that may be levied against each property in the district; and
         (iv)   A description of the roads to be constructed within the
district.
      (4)   Notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be
published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county
not more than seven (7) days prior to the day of the hearing.
   (h)   (1)   Before an ordinance establishing a road district under this
section becomes effective it shall be submitted to a referendum of the owners
of property within the district.
      (2)   Within forty-five (45) days after the date of adoption of the
ordinance establishing a road district, the county commissioners shall specify
the day, place, and the hours for the referendum.
      (3)   Not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than forty-five (45)
days before the referendum, notice of the date, time, and place of the
referendum shall be published twice at not less than weekly intervals in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county.
      (4)   On the date and at the time and place specified, the ordinance
establishing a road district within the Lake Linganore Planned Unit Development
shall be submitted to a referendum of the persons who own property within the
district.
      (5)   The ballots shall contain a summary of the ordinance, including the
maximum amount of the pro rata charge that may be levied against property
within the district and a suitable place for the voter to indicate a choice for
or against the ordinance.
      (6)   (i)   If a majority of the votes cast in the referendum are in
favor of the ordinance, the ordinance shall become effective on the fourteenth
day following the referendum.
         (ii)   If a majority of the votes cast in the referendum are against
the ordinance, the ordinance shall be of no force and effect.
   (i)   (1)   If an ordinance establishing a road district becomes effective
under this section, the board of county commissioners may levy against the
property within the district a pro rata charge to pay the costs, including
interest, of road construction within the district.
      (2)   The pro rata charge levied against property in the district may not
exceed the maximum amount for the charge included in the notice of public
hearing under subsection (g) of this section.
      (3)   The charges imposed under this section are a lien on the property
and shall be:
         (i)   Collected in the same manner as other county property taxes; and
         (ii)   Paid to the county over a period of time not to exceed 10
years.
   (j)   The county shall use the charges collected under this section to pay
for the construction and improvement of roads within the district.
(1990, Chapter 608, § 1)
§ 2-11-74. Assessment lists of property owners.
   For the purpose of giving notice to the general public as to existing liens
and charges against any property for benefit assessments, the county
commissioners shall keep a public record of all names of property owners and
the locations of the property, and the amount of the benefit charges among the
land records of the county under the supervision of the clerk of the circuit
court, and the recordation with said clerk of the benefit assessments shall be
legal notice of the liens.
(Code 1959, § 38-6; 1972, Chapter 615, § 1)
§ 2-11-75. Benefit assessments generally, default in payment of assessments.
   The county commissioners shall, on or before January 1, of each year,
certify its benefit assessments hereunder to the county treasurer for
collection from the property owners affected, and the treasurer shall add the
benefit assessments to the state and county property tax bills for collection
each year without interest or discount and upon failure of payment of the
benefit assessments, they may be deducted from any surplus in the hands of the
treasurer after a sale for nonpayment of state and county property taxes under
proper order of the circuit court. In the alternative, the lien created by the
annual benefit assessments may be enforced by bill in equity or by action in
persona.
   Upon default in the payment of any assessment, the property against which
any such assessment has been made shall be sold at tax sale in the same manner
as real property is sold for nonpayment of ordinary taxes. Upon default in the
payment of any installment of an assessment, the assessed property shall be
sold in such manner at tax sale for the entire unpaid balance of the assessment
and interest due thereon, together with all other taxes, charges, and interest
due thereon, if any. The entire unpaid balance of such assessment shall be
immediately due and payable upon the day of such sale.
(Code 1959, § 38-7; 1972, Chapter 615, § 1; 1981, Chapter 63, § 1)
§ 2-11-76. Petition and ordinance.
   Before the powers granted by this article to the board of county
commissioners shall be exercised there shall first be the petition of property
owners as hereinbefore provided requesting improvements; public hearing upon
the petition after ten (10) days’ notice in a newspaper regularly published in
the county; approval of the petition by the board of county commissioners; and
the passage of an appropriate ordinance, pursuant to the authority of this
section, setting forth the improvements being constructed, the property owners
affected, and all material terms of the annual benefit assessments levied to
pay the cost of the improvements, or any reasonable portion thereof, as
determined by the board of county commissioners; provided that no assessment
shall exceed the total assessed value of the property, excluding any
improvements thereon, after giving effect to benefits accruing thereto from the
improvement for which assessed.
(Code 1959, § 38-8; 1972, Chapter 615, § 1)
§ 2-11-77. Appeals.
   Any interested person feeling aggrieved by the levying of any benefit
assessment under this section shall have the right to appeal to the circuit
court for the county within thirty (30) days after the final adoption of the
ordinance by the board of county commissioners, and this court, sitting without
a jury, is authorized to hear and determine whether the board of county
commissioners acted pursuant to the authority granted herein and whether the
benefit assessments levied pursuant to the provisions of this article are
imposed according to law.
(Code 1959, § 38-9; 1972, Chapter 615, § 1)
§ 2-11-78. Article cumulative.
   The authority extended to the board of county commissioners by this article
shall be in addition to, but not in substitution of, the powers heretofore
vested in it for the improvement of roads in the county.
(Code 1959, § 38-10; 1972, Chapter 615, § 1)
CHAPTER 2-12: SCHOOLS AND EDUCATION (§§ 2-12-1 — 2-12-2)
Section
   
2-12-1   Services for retarded and handicapped children
   
2-12-2   Transportation of children attending parochial schools
§ 2-12-1. Services for retarded and handicapped children.
   The board of county commissioners and the board of education for the county
shall cooperate and jointly provide educational programs, transportation and
other facilities, whenever possible, for the use of the retarded and
handicapped children of the county. The cost of such services shall be
apportioned to the agency or agencies benefitting or using the services as
provided.
(Code 1959, § 14-3; 1972, Chapter 219, § 1)
§ 2-12-2. Transportation of children attending parochial schools.
   (a)   All children, who attend nonpublic schools in the county, which
schools do not receive state aid, and who reside on, along or near the public
highways of the county, on which there is operated a public school bus or
conveyance provided by the board of education of the county for transporting
children to and from the public schools of the county, shall be entitled to
transportation on such buses or conveyances, if facilities therefor are
available. Such transportation may be provided for them by the board of
education of the county, subject to the conditions set forth in this section
from a point on the public highways nearest or most accessible to their
respective homes to a point on the public highways nearest or most accessible
to their respective schools, without changing the routes of such school buses
or conveyances. Such transportation may be provided by the board of education
for all the children attending schools described herein upon the same terms and
conditions as may be established by the board of education for children
attending public schools.
   (b)   The board of county commissioners is hereby authorized to appropriate
annually to the board of education of the county, from any funds received by
the county for any general county purpose and not derived from any tax levied
on real property, such sum as the board of education may request to enable it
to defray any costs incurred by it in carrying into effect the provisions of
the subsection (a) and to establish new bus routes, in the discretion of the
board of education, for the transportation to and from school of children
attending schools not receiving state aid. The transportation of children to
and from schools not receiving state aid shall be upon such reasonable terms
and conditions as the board of education may from time to time determine, but
in no event shall the amount charged children attending such schools for using
such buses or conveyances be greater or less than the amount charged children
attending the public schools for the same kind of transportation.
(Code 1941, Chapter 422, § 1; Code 1959, § 14-2)
CHAPTER 2-13: WATER, SEWERS, DRAINS, AND SOLID WASTE (§§ 2-13-1 — 2-13-35)
Section
   
2-13-1   Definitions
   
2-13-2   Statement of legislative history
   
2-13-2.1   Statement of purpose
   
2-13-3   Effect of chapter upon acts of predecessor agencies; validation of
prior acts; notice of changes in rates, charges or assessments; general powers
of county
   
2-13-4   Advisory council
   
2-13-5   Power to construct, operate and maintain water, sewerage, drainage and
solid waste systems; hearing required prior to construction; transfer of powers
to county
   
2-13-6   Bids for construction of water, sewerage, drainage or solid waste
systems; systems constructed by private persons
   
2-13-7   Power of county to require applicants for water, sewerage or drainage
systems to bear costs of engineering studies
   
2-13-8   Preparation of drainage plan; creation of tax districts to finance
same; adoption of manuals
   
2-13-9   Condemnation of property
   
2-13-10   Appropriations and loans authorized
   
2-13-11   Purchase or acquisition by gift of water, sewerage, drainage or solid
waste systems
   
2-13-12   Contracts with governmental agencies authorized
   
2-13-13   Bonds authorized generally
   
2-13-14   Revenue bonds
   
2-13-15   Refunding bonds
   
2-13-16   Interim receipts and/or temporary bonds
   
2-13-17   Status of bonds
   
2-13-18   Special assessments for water or sewerage systems
   
2-13-19   Special assessments for drainage systems
   
2-13-20   County to provide water and sewer connections; power to require
connections; prohibited runoff; power to make connections at expense of
property owner
   
2-13-21   Plumbing permits and fire hydrants
   
2-13-21A   Utility work to be performed by licensed utility contractor or
licensed master plumber; valid permit required
   
2-13-21B   Reserved
   
2-13-22   Water or sewerage connection charges
   
2-13-23   Other water and sewerage authorized charges
   
2-13-24   Charges and assessments are liens; tax sales to collect
   
2-13-25   Entry powers of county employees; power to order work to provide
conservation of water or to eliminate improper use of sewers
   
2-13-26   Private water, sewer or drainage systems
   
2-13-27   Excavation on roads
   
2-13-28   Removal of structures, pipes, etc. impeding construction, plans for
poles, pipes, etc. in public ways to be approved by Board
   
2-13-29   Annual audit of accounts
   
2-13-30   Rules and regulations
   
2-13-31   Penalty for violations
   
2-13-32   Certain acts repealed; powers of certain state agencies not
restricted; severability
   
2-13-33   Discharges to storm sewers
   
2-13-34   Solid waste disposal fee or tax
   
2-13-35   Pay-as-you-throw pilot program
Cross references:
   Ordinances related to sewers and sewage disposal, see
Chapter 1-18;
   Ordinances related to storm water management, see
Chapter 1-15.2
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 194, § 1, 1991, added the term “and Solid Waste” to the chapter title.
§ 2-13-1. Definitions.
   (a)   In this chapter, the following words have the meanings indicated.
   (b)   “Board” means the board of county commissioners.
   (c)   “Bonds” means notes, bonds, and other evidences of indebtedness or
obligations.
   (d)   “Commission” means the Frederick County Metropolitan Commission
created by Chapter 609 of the Acts of 1968, the powers and functions of which
have been transferred to the county by an action of the Board pursuant to §
2-2-23 of this Code.
   (e)   “County” means board of county commissioners of Frederick County, a
body politic and corporate of the State of Maryland.
   (f)   (1)   “Drainage system” means all plants, systems, facilities, or
properties, and all properties, rights, easements, and franchises relating
thereto and deemed necessary or convenient by the board for the operation
thereof, used or useful or having the present capacity for future use in
connection with:
         (i)   The collection, control, distribution, carrying away, or
disposal of surface waters, and any integral part thereof, including (without
limitation) storm water drainage;
         (ii)   The prevention and control of erosion, and any integral part
thereof; and
         (iii)   The management and control of sedimentation and any integral
part thereof.
      (2)   “Drainage system” does not include drainage facilities which are
part of a water system or sewerage system and which are not part of a system
having the primary purpose of draining surface waters.
   (g)   “Frederick County” means the geographic area within the corporate
limits of Frederick County.
   (h)   “Project” means any water system, sewerage system, drainage system, or
solid waste system, and any combination or part or parts thereof owned,
constructed, or operated by the county under the provisions of this chapter.
   (i)   “Service area” means the area within Frederick County in which the
board may exercise power and authority under this chapter in accordance with
the provisions of §
2-13-5 of this chapter.
   (j)   “Sewage” means the water-carried wastes created in and carried, or to
be carried, away from residences, hotels, schools, hospitals, industrial
establishments, commercial establishments, or any other private or public
building or location, together with such wastes as may be present.
   (k)   “Sewerage system” means all plants, systems, facilities, or properties
used or useful or having the present capacity for future use in connection with
the collection, carrying away, treating, neutralizing, stabilizing, or disposal
of sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes, and any integral part thereof,
including sewage treatment plants, disposal fields, lagoons, pumping stations,
drainage ditches, intercepting ditches, outfall sewers, trunk sewers,
intercepting sewers, lateral sewers, force mains, pipes, pipe lines, conduits,
equipment, appurtenances, and all properties, rights, easements, and franchises
relating thereto and deemed necessary or convenient by the board for the
operation thereof; a sewerage system may include related drainage facilities.
   (l)   “Solid waste” means any garbage or refuse that is or may be disposed
of in or through a solid waste system.
   (m)   “Solid waste system” means all plants, systems, facilities, or
properties used or useful or having the present capacity for future use in
connection with the collection, disposal, transportation, processing,
recycling, or treating of solid waste, including solid waste treatment plants,
refuse disposal facilities, solid waste acceptance facilities, solid waste
disposal systems, leachate treatment facilities, processing facilities,
recycling facilities, rubble landfills, sanitary landfills, transfer stations,
waste-to-energy facilities, and water treatment plants and all properties,
rights, easements and franchises related thereto and deemed necessary or
convenient by the board for the operation thereof.
   (n)   “Water system” means all plants, systems, facilities, or properties
used or useful or having the present capacity for future use in connection with
the supply or distribution of water and any integral part thereof, including
water supply systems, water distribution systems, reservoirs, dams, wells,
intakes, mains, laterals, pumping stations, standpipes, filtration plants,
purification plants, hydrants, meters, valves and equipment, appurtenances, and
all properties, rights, easements, and franchises relating thereto and deemed
necessary or convenient by the board for the operation thereof; a water system
may include related drainage facilities.
(Code 1959, § 10A-1; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1991, Chapter 194, § 1)
§ 2-13-2. Statement of legislative history.
   (a)   The Frederick County Metropolitan Commission was created by Chapter
609 of the Acts of 1968, effective June 1, 1968, and, at the time of its
creation, the commission replaced and succeeded the district (a body politic
and corporate) created in Frederick County pursuant to the provisions of §§ 645
to 673, inclusive, of Article 43 of the Annotated Code of Maryland (1971
Replacement Volume and 1978 Supplement). Upon the creation of the commission,
such district ceased to exist as a body politic and corporate on June 1, 1968.
   (b)   Chapter 629 of the Acts of 1974, created § 2-2-33 of this Code,
effective July 1, 1974, and provided, among other matters, that the board could
abolish the commission by a certain procedure and create a department of public
works. The board took action on February 14, 1978 by adopting Ordinance No. 78-
6-104, codified as §§ 1-18-1 through 1-18-4 of this Code which abolished the
Frederick County Metropolitan Commission and created the Frederick County
Department of Public Works. This chapter does not impair any power of the board
pursuant to § 2-2-33 of this Code or other authority to create a department of
public works and to assign the department responsibilities to implement the
board’s actions under this chapter.
(Code 1959, § 10A-2; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1)
§ 2-13-2.1. Statement of purpose.
   On February 14, 1978, the Frederick County Metropolitan Commission ceased to
exist as a separate entity. It is the intent and purpose of the General
Assembly of Maryland that on and after February 14, 1978, the county shall
succeed to and exercise all the powers previously exercised by the commission,
and the county shall undertake and thereafter perform any and all obligations
of the commission, either as successor to any district or incurred on its own
behalf. All property, real, personal, and mixed owned by the metropolitan
commission or any predecessor is hereby conveyed and transferred to the board
without the necessity of any deeds or other writings.
(Code 1959, § 10A-3; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1)
§ 2-13-3. Effect of chapter upon acts of predecessor agencies; validation of
prior acts; notice of changes in rates, charges or assessments; general powers
of county.
   (a)   This chapter does not impair or affect in any way the validity or
enforceability of any proceeding or action taken, or any obligations or
indebtedness incurred:
      (1)   By such district, by its governing body, by the county, or by the
board on behalf of the county pursuant to Article 43 of the Annotated Code of
Maryland prior to June 1, 1968; or
      (2)   By the commission, by the county, or by the board on behalf of the
county pursuant to Article 11 of the Public Local Laws of Maryland, Chapter
10A, prior to May 29, 1979.
   (b)   All proceedings and actions taken by the district, by its governing
body, by the county, or by the board on behalf of the county pursuant to
Article 43 prior to July 1, 1968, and all proceedings and actions taken by the
commission, by the county, or by the board on behalf of the county pursuant to
Chapter 609 of the Acts of 1968, as amended and supplemented, and pursuant to
Chapter 629 of the Acts of 1974, prior to July 1, 1979, are hereby ratified,
validated, and confirmed; the authorization, sale, and issuance of all bonds
and other obligations issued pursuant to said Article 43 and pursuant to
Chapter 609 of the Acts of 1968, as amended and supplemented, prior to May 29,
1979, are ratified and confirmed, and all of these bonds and other obligations
are validated as being validly authorized, sold, and issued. It is the intent
and purpose that the county, on and after February 14, 1978, shall undertake
and satisfy in all respects any and all obligations evidenced by such bonds and
other obligations in accordance with their terms.
   (c)   In the event that the Board decides that any modification of an
existing rate, charge, or assessment previously established:
      (1)   By the district, by its governing body, by the county, or by the
board on behalf of the county pursuant to Article 43 prior to July 1, 1968; or
      (2)   By the commission, by the county, or by the board on behalf of the
county pursuant to Chapter 609 of the acts of 1968, as amended and
supplemented, prior to July 1, 1979, is necessary or desirable, the board
promptly shall give notice of the proposed rates, charges, and assessments in
at least one newspaper of general circulation in Frederick County. Thereafter
the board shall conduct a public hearing on the necessity or advisability of
the proposed rates, charges, or assessments.
   (d)   Without in any way limiting the provisions of this chapter or of any
other provisions of law, the county has and may exercise all powers necessary
or convenient for carrying out the purposes set forth in this chapter,
including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following.
      (1)   To sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain, and defend
in all courts.
      (2)   To appoint officers, attorneys, accountants, agents, employees, and
servants to implement the provisions of this chapter and to fix their
compensation and to supervise their duties.
      (3)   To borrow money and issue bonds, certificates, or other evidence of
indebtedness, the borrowing of all money and the issuance of all bonds being
subject to the terms, provisions, and specifications contained in this chapter.
      (4)   To establish, extend, and maintain water, sewerage, drainage and
solid waste systems in Frederick County.
      (5)   Frederick County is declared to be a sanitary district for the
purpose of the exercise of the powers vested by this chapter in the board;
provided:
         (I)   That the board shall exercise no authority over the operation or
construction of the sewerage, water, drainage, and solid waste facilities of
any incorporated municipality, including the extension of such facilities
beyond the corporate limits of any municipality as such extensions may exist on
July 1, 1968; and
         (II)   That the extension of such facilities beyond the corporate
limits of any municipality after July 1, 1968 shall be subject to the approval
and authority of the board, except that such approval shall not be required in
the event of annexation pursuant to Article 23A of the Annotated Code of
Maryland; and
         (III)   That in exercising the powers granted by this chapter, the
board shall not be subject to the provisions of any planning regulations or
zoning ordinances enacted under the provisions of Article 66B of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.
      (6)   To enter into contracts with any third person to effect the
purposes of this chapter.
(Code 1957, § 10A-4; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1991, Chapter 194, § 1)
§ 2-13-4. Advisory council.
   The board may create and appoint an advisory council to the board under this
chapter. The advisory council may consist of all or any of the former members
of the commission, or any other members as the board may deem necessary or
desirable. The advisory council may review and recommend rates, policies, and
plans for the maintenance, design, construction, or establishment of any water,
sewerage, drainage, or solid waste system existing or to be constructed or
established in Frederick County.
(Code 1959, § 10A-32; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1991, Chapter 194, § 1)
§ 2-13-5. Power to construct, operate and maintain water, sewerage, drainage,
and solid waste systems; hearing required prior to construction; transfer of
powers to county.
   (a)   To provide for the general health and welfare of the residents of
Frederick County, the county may acquire, construct, operate, and maintain such
water, sewerage, drainage and solid waste systems as it deems to be in the
public interest, the county may cause surveys, plans, specifications, and
estimates to be made for such systems. The county shall construct any such
system or extension thereof only after a public hearing held by the board,
after giving notice thereof in one newspaper of general circulation published
in Frederick County at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing, and in the
case of drainage systems, only after a drainage area has been established
pursuant to §
2-13-8 of this chapter. At the hearing, a description of the proposed
improvements shall be presented together with the estimated costs thereof and
estimated revenues to be derived therefrom.
   (b)   The power and authority conferred upon the county by this chapter may
be exercised by it throughout Frederick County, provided that the board may
provide for subservice areas within the county.
      (1)   That any municipal corporation may by appropriate ordinance or
resolution transfer the jurisdiction, power, and control of any sewerage,
water, drainage, or solid waste system of such municipal corporation to the
county upon terms and conditions approved by the board and may consent to be
included within the service area.
      (2)   That any municipal corporation in which there is no existing
sewerage, water, drainage, or solid waste system may consent to be included
within the service area.
(Code 1959, § 10A-6; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1991, Chapter 194, § 1)
§ 2-13-6. Bids for construction of water, sewerage, drainage, or solid waste
systems; systems constructed by private persons.
   (a)   Whenever the plans and specifications for water, sewerage, drainage,
or solid waste systems or extensions have been completed and the board has
decided to proceed with construction, it shall solicit bids for the
construction of the system or systems, in part or as a whole, it judges
advisable. The contract shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder or the
board may reject any or all bids. If in its judgment the prices quoted are
unreasonable or unbalanced, it may obtain bids for the work or any part of it
or may do any part or all of the work by day labor. At any time the board may
expend by day labor for construction and for supplies and equipment an amount
not exceeding $5,000 without advertising and receiving bids. All such contracts
shall be protected by such bonds, penalties, and conditions as required by the
board, all of which shall be enforced in any court having jurisdiction.
   (b)   (1)   Instead of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the
board may authorize a private person to have plans and specifications for a
water, sewerage, or drainage system prepared at the expense of the person.
      (2)   The board also may allow the person to obtain price quotations or
bids for the construction of water, sewerage, or drainage systems and to enter
into contracts for the construction of the system.
      (3)   When constructed in accordance with the specifications and under
this inspection of the board of county commissioners, the system shall become
county property and included in the water, sewerage, or drainage systems of the
county.
      (4)   The systems authorized by this subsection may be constructed with
funds provided by the private person.
      (5)   The board may participate in the cost of construction in accordance
with the board’s regulations when the board determines that its financial
participation is required in the construction of a water and sewer system
undertaken by a private developer that provides facilities beyond the
requirements of the system.
      (6)   Under the provisions of this section, the board may participate
financially only to the extent that the costs of materials or other costs
totaling $10,000 or less exceed the requirements of the private project.
(Code 1959, § 10A-17; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1988, Ch
426, § 1; 1991, Chapter 194, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-17 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-11 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-7. Power of county to require applicants for water, sewerage or drainage
systems to bear costs of engineering studies.
   If the residents of any unincorporated locality in Frederick County make
application for a water, sewerage, or drainage system, or part thereof to be
constructed in their locality, the county may require the applicants to bear
the reasonable costs for any preliminary engineering studies that the board
deems necessary to determine whether it is feasible to construct the
improvements. Upon receipt of such reasonable costs as the board determines to
be necessary to conduct the studies, the board shall have the studies made and
within a reasonable time thereafter advise the applicants of the results
thereof, together with the board’s determination with respect to the
application.
(Code 1959, § 10A-7; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1)
§ 2-13-8. Preparation of drainage plan; creation of tax districts to finance
same; adoption of manuals.
   (a)   The board may prepare a plan or plans which in its judgment are
necessary or required for the control and disposition of surface waters within
the limits or any part of the service area and shall then divide the service
area, or any part of the service area, into separate drainage areas. Each
separate drainage area shall comprise, insofar as practicable, all land from
which surface water drains by gravity along a stream or a natural water course
to its nearest major outlet to tidewater. The division of the service area, or
any part of the service area, into drainage areas shall be effected by a
resolution adopted by the board, after a hearing held not less than 10 days
after notice of the hearing is published in a newspaper having general
circulation in the drainage area to be created. The resolution shall contain a
definite description of the boundaries of the drainage area or areas and shall
identify each drainage area by a distinctive name. After the passage of the
resolution, the board shall cause a plat of the drainage area or areas to be
prepared. One copy of the plat shall be filed with the administrative officer
to the board and one copy shall be indexed and filed among the land records of
Frederick County. Upon the filing of this plat, any drainage area shown on the
plat is designated and constituted for the purpose of this chapter to be a
separate drainage area and a taxing district for the purpose of imposing the
drainage area assessments and taxes authorized by §
2-13-18 of this chapter. The filing of this plat shall constitute legal notice
to the public of the action of the board.
   (b)   The board may adopt storm water and drainage manuals providing for the
type of installations necessary in various areas to accommodate the proper
drainage of given locations.
(Code 1959, § 10A-8; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1991, Chapter 19, § 1)
§ 2-13-9. Condemnation of property.
   (a)   Whenever it is deemed necessary by the county to take or acquire any
land, structure, or building, or any stream bed, waterway, water rights, or
watershed, either in fee or as an easement, within or without Frederick County,
for the construction, extension or maintenance of any water main, sewer, or
appurtenance thereof, or any sewage treatment plant, reservoir, water treatment
plant, storage tank, or pumping station or any surface water drainage facility
or any solid waste facility or for the execution by the county of any other
power or function vested in it by this chapter, the county, if it be unable to
acquire the property of right by purchase, may condemn the property or right by
proceedings in the circuit court for the county in which the property or right
is located, as provided for condemnation of land in the Public General Laws of
Maryland, now or hereafter in effect; and the county may likewise condemn the
interest of any tenant, lessee, or other person having any right or interest in
the property. At any time after ten (10) days after the return and recordation
of the verdict or award in such proceedings, the county may enter and take
possession of the property so condemned, upon first paying to the clerk of the
court the amount of the award and all costs taxed to that date, notwithstanding
any appeal or further proceedings upon the part of the defendant. At the time
of said payment, however, the county shall give its corporate undertaking to
abide by and fulfill any judgment in any such appeal or further proceedings.
   (b)   In the condemnation of privately-owned water, drainage, or sewerage
systems, the jury shall take into consideration as a part of its award any
payment, contribution, or tax upon the respective lot owners or purchasers
toward the construction of the system, and where the system or systems have
been built in connection with or for the purpose of developing home sites,
subdivisions, or villages, or by any individuals, firm, or corporation, and
such system or systems have been offered as an inducement for the purchase of a
lot or land therein, the jury shall deduct from the determined value of the
plan or system such sum as it may reasonably determine was added to the
purchase price of the land or lots in the sale thereof for the purpose of
constructing the systems.
   (c)   Privately-owned systems shall be taken under condemnation by the
county free and clear of all debts and liens, but the county shall make a party
defendant of any person, firm, or corporation having any recorded lien or
encumbrance against the same, and the circuit court may determine the
respective amounts due the defendants; and from and after payment into court or
to the proper parties as herein above provided, the county is authorized to
take possession of, maintain, and operate the system, which shall be subject to
the same regulations and penalties as though the system so acquired had been
constructed and put into operation by the county under the provisions of this
chapter; provided, however, that no building or premises actually connected in
an adequate manner with the acquired water or sewerage system shall be required
to pay any connection charge.
   (d)   Whenever there is in existence a privately- owned water supply,
drainage or sewerage system which in the judgment of the board is unsuitable in
whole or in part for incorporation into the county’s system, the board may
disregard the existence of the system or unsuitable part thereof and extend its
system to serve the area tributary to the existing system or unsuitable part
thereof and all the provisions of this chapter relating to systems constructed
by the county apply thereto.
(Code 1959, § 10A-9; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1991,
Chapter 194, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above  section as section 10A-9 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-3 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-10. Appropriations and loans authorized.
   For the purpose of assisting in the engineering and the construction of
needed water, sewerage, drainage, and solid waste systems, the board may make
general fund appropriations or borrow funds for this purpose, upon such terms
and conditions as they deem right and proper.
(Code 1959, § 10A-19; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1, 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1991,
Chapter 194, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-19 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-15 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-11. Purchase or acquisition by gift of water, sewerage, drainage, or
solid waste systems.
   (a)   The county may purchase or acquire by gift any existing water,
sewerage, drainage, or solid waste system, or parts thereof, including those
owned, operated by, or serving any municipality, or any land, structure,
buildings, stream bed, water rights, or watershed, either in fee or as an
easement, which in its judgment is desirable or necessary for the purpose of
providing adequate water, sewerage, drainage, or solid waste service or any of
them for the residents of the service area. Any such purchase may be made upon
such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon, but before any part of the
purchase price is paid, other than a nominal sum of money to bind the
agreement, it is the duty of the vendor or agent to furnish a statement to the
board setting forth all names and addresses of persons having any interest or
claims against the property whatsoever, which shall be verified by an oath in
writing.
   (b)   Thereupon, it is the duty of the board to notify personally or by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, all persons having any
interest whatever in the property, and in addition the board shall give three
weeks’ notice of its intention to purchase the property, in a newspaper or
newspapers published within the service area where the property is located; and
each person having any claim whatever against the property shall file its, his,
or her claim with the board on or before the expiration date mentioned in the
notice at which time any and all persons shall be heard.
   (c)   Any municipality whose system or any portion thereof is acquired by
the county by purchase may use the amount paid to it for the system for the
purchase or redemption of any bonds or debt which may be outstanding against
the same; or the county, as part of the purchase price of the system, may
assume the payment of any such bond or debt. The county may purchase any
existing water, sewerage or drainage systems, in whole or in part, which are
necessary or desirable for the purpose of carrying out the powers vested in it
by this chapter.
(Code 1959, § 10A-10; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1991,
Chapter 194, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-10 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-4 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-12. Contracts with governmental agencies authorized.
   The county has full power and authority to enter into any contract for the
connection of its water supply, sewerage, drainage, or solid waste systems,
with those of any municipality or adjoining county, or any other governmental
agency, for the purchase of water and for the disposal of sewage, drainage, or
solid waste, and to enter into any other agreement concerning any matter deemed
by the board to be necessary, advisable, or expedient for the proper
construction, maintenance, and operation of the water, sewerage, drainage, or
solid waste systems under its control, or those under the control of any
municipality or county or other governmental agency. The county is further
empowered to enter into contracts with any municipality or other political
subdivision for the joint acquisition, construction, ownership, and operation
of any water, sewerage, drainage, or solid waste system or any portion thereof.
(Code 1959, § 10A-11; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1991,
Chapter 194, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-11 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-5 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-13. Bonds authorized generally.
   (a)   For the purpose of providing funds for the design, construction,
establishment, purchase, or condemnation of water, sewerage, drainage, and
solid waste systems in Frederick County pursuant to this chapter, the County is
hereby authorized and empowered to borrow money, from time to time, and to
evidence such borrowing by the issuance of bonds, which shall constitute a
pledge of the full faith and credit and unlimited taxing power of the County.
   (b)   The bonds of each issue shall be designated, shall be dated and shall
bear interest at such rate or rates, shall mature in such amount or amounts and
at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates of issue,
as may be determined by the County, and may be made redeemable before maturity,
at the option of the County, at such price or prices and under such terms and
conditions as may be fixed by the County prior to the issuance of the bonds.
The County may provide for creation of a sinking fund or funds for the payment
of the bonds at or prior to their maturity date or dates. The County shall
determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached
thereto, and the manner of execution of the bonds, and shall fix the
denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment
of principal and interest, which may be at any bank or trust company, and any
other matter relating to the form, terms, conditions, issuance, sale and
delivery of the bonds. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any
bonds or coupons shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such
bonds or shall become such after the date of issue thereof, such signature
shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he
had remained in office until such delivery or had held said office on said date
of issue. The bonds may be issued in coupon or in registered form, or both, as
the County may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any
coupon bonds as to principal alone, or as to both principal and interest, and
for the reconversion into coupon bonds of any bonds registered as to both
principal and interest. The County may sell such bonds in such manner, either
at public or private sale, and for such price, as the County may determine to
be in the best interest of the County. At any time prior to the issuance of any
such bonds the County may, in addition to any sums appropriated under any other
provision of law, advance such sums as may be necessary to cover the expense of
issuance of such bonds, which shall be treated and repaid as part of the cost
of the project or projects financed with the proceeds of any such bonds.
   (c)   The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the
cost of the project or projects on account of which such bonds are issued and
the cost of issuance of such bonds and shall be disbursed in such manner and
under such restrictions, if any, as the County may provide in the authorizing
resolution. If the proceeds of such bonds, by error of estimates or otherwise,
shall be less than such cost, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to
provide the amount of such deficit, and, unless otherwise provided in the
authorizing resolution, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be
entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the
bonds first issued for the same purpose.
   (d)   In every case where the proceeds of any such issue of bonds are
expended for the cost of one or more projects, the County shall cause separate
capital accounts to be created for each such project,
among which the bond proceeds shall be divided and from which the separate
costs of each such project shall be paid. In connection with the proceeds of
any issue of bonds expended for the purchase, expansion or development of water
and sewer systems to be acquired, constructed or reconstructed by the County
and consolidated with the County’s system and to the extent practicable after
giving due consideration to the financial condition of the County and the
County’s ability to incur indebtedness for any other purposes, the County shall
endeavor to provide for annual debt service on such issue of bonds from the
funds provided by connection charges described in §
2-13-22. If necessary, the County shall levy special assessments or other
charges with respect to each such system in such a manner as to provide a
proportionate share of the annual debt service on the issue of bonds equal to
the proportion of the proceeds of the issue expended for the system.
   (e)   The County’s full faith and credit and unlimited taxing power shall be
unconditionally pledged to the payment of the principal of and interest on any
bonds issued pursuant to this section. In the event that the funds available to
the County from all sources are insufficient to pay any bonds issued hereunder,
together with the interest due thereon, the County, in each and every fiscal
year in which bonds are outstanding, shall levy and collect ad valorem taxes
upon all the legally assessable property within the corporate limits of
Frederick County in rate and amount sufficient to provide for such payments
when due, together with accrued interest to the date of payment. In the event
the proceeds from the taxes so levied in any fiscal year are inadequate for the
above purposes, the County shall levy additional taxes in the succeeding fiscal
year to make up any deficiency.
(Code 1959, § 10A-20; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1979, Chapter 185, § 1; 1979,
Chapter 723, § 1; 1987, Chapter 93, § 1; 1988, Chapter 659, § 1; 1991, Chapter
194, § 1; 2008, Chapter 36, § 1) (Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-2022)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-20 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-16 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-14. Revenue bonds.
   (a)   For the purpose of providing funds for the design, construction,
establishment, purchase, or condemnation of water, sewerage, drainage, and
solid waste systems in Frederick County pursuant to this chapter, the County is
hereby authorized and empowered, in addition to the authority and power
conferred by §
2-13-13 of this chapter, to borrow money in such amounts as may be needed for
said purpose and to evidence such borrowing by the issuance and sale of its
revenue bonds, payable as to principal and interest solely from the proceeds of
special benefit assessments and other charges imposed and made by the County on
the project or projects so financed with the proceeds of the bonds, which
revenues the County is hereby authorized to pledge to such payment. The County
is hereby authorized and empowered to fix and determine the form and tenor of
said revenue bonds, the denominations thereof, the rate or rates of interest
payable thereon, the maturity date or dates thereof, the place or places of
payment thereof, the method and manner of sale thereof and all other matters
related to the form, terms, conditions, issuance, sale, and delivery of the
revenue bonds, all as provided in §
2-13-13 of this chapter. The amount of such revenue bonds which may be issued
by the County shall be limited only by the cost of the project or projects to
be financed thereby. Such revenue bonds shall not constitute an obligation of,
or a pledge of the faith and credit of, the County or the State of Maryland,
but on the contrary, the principal and interest thereof are payable solely from
the revenues prescribed therein or in the resolution or trust indenture
authorizing the same and each revenue bond shall so state.
   (b)   The County is hereby authorized and empowered, in its discretion, to
secure any revenue bonds issued hereunder by an appropriate trust indenture by
and between the County and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company,
or bank having trust powers, within or outside the state. Every such trust
indenture shall clearly recite that such bonds are limited obligations of the
County, payable solely from the revenues therein prescribed, and do not
constitute general obligations of the County or of the State of Maryland and
that the faith and credit and taxing power of the County or the State of
Maryland are not pledged to the payment of the bonds. Any such trust indenture
may contain covenants on the part of the county, not contrary to law, deemed
necessary or appropriate by the County for the proper security of the
purchasers of any such bonds, but the County shall not enter into any covenant
which will permit the trustee or bondholders in any manner to sell or otherwise
divest the County of its title to any project or projects financed with the
proceeds of any such bonds, without the prior written consent of the County.
Subject to the foregoing limitation, any such trust indenture may contain
covenants for the protection of bondholders relating to all or any of the
following:
      (1)   The nature, extent and procedure for acquiring or constructing any
project or projects and the supervision thereof;
      (2)   The maintenance and operation of any such project or projects and
the supervision thereof and the employment of consulting engineers, auditors,
attorneys and other experts in connection with any such acquisition,
construction, maintenance or operation;
      (3)   The terms and provisions of the bonds and the securing of the
proceeds thereof, the imposition and collection of assessments, charges and
rentals for the use of any such project or projects and the use, application
and security of any revenues so collected, including the establishment, deposit
and securing from any such revenues for debt service on, or prior redemption
of, any such revenue bonds, or for the maintenance, operation and improvement
of any such project or projects;
      (4)   The insurance on any such project or projects;
      (5)   The issuance of additional revenue bonds for any such project or
projects and the limitations thereon;
      (6)   The powers, duties and indemnification of any trustee, or its
successor party to any such trust indenture;
      (7)   The rights and remedies of said trustee and of bondholders in the
event of any default by the County under any such trust indenture, which rights
and remedies may include the taking over of any operation by said trustee or by
a receiver appointed by a court of competent jurisdiction of the project or
projects financed with the proceeds of any such issue of revenue bonds secured
by such trust indenture, and the marshaling of the revenues from any such
project or projects for the use and benefit of bondholders. In addition to the
covenants enumerated above but subject to the limitations herein contained, the
County is hereby authorized and empowered to make such further additional
covenants in any such trust indenture, of like or different character as, in
its judgment, may be necessary, convenient or desirable for the better security
of any issue of its revenue bonds secured by any such trust indenture or as
will, in its judgment, tend to make any such bonds more marketable.
(Code 1959, § 10A-21; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1) (Bill No.
22-21, 10-25-2022)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-21 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-17 of the 1969 Code.
§ 2-13-15. Refunding bonds.
   The County may provide for the issuance of bonds under this section at any
time or times for the purpose of refunding any bonds of:
   (a)   The district, a body politic and corporate created by the County
pursuant to the provisions of Title 9, Subtitle 6 of the Environment Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland;
   (b)   The sanitary commission; and
   (c)   The County, acting pursuant to this chapter,
which are then outstanding, including the payment of any redemption premium
thereon and any interest accrued or to accrue to the earliest or any subsequent
date of redemption, purchase or maturity of the bonds. Refunding bonds may be
issued in an amount in excess of that of the bonds to be refunded, but the
proceeds of sale of refunding bonds, after payment of all costs of issuance of
said bonds, may only be used to refund the bonds described in this paragraph.
The powers granted and the limitations imposed by §§
2-13-13 and
2-13-14 of this chapter shall also apply to the issuance of refunding bonds
pursuant to this section.(Code 1959, § 10A-22; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 2007,
Chapter 5, § 1) (Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-2022)
§ 2-13-16. Interim receipts and/or temporary bonds.
   Prior to the preparation of the definitive bonds authorized to be issued by
§§
2-13-13,
2-13-14 and
2-13-15 of this chapter, the [commission] County may, under like restrictions,
issue interim receipts or temporary bonds, with or without coupons,
exchangeable for definitive bonds, when such definitive bonds have been
executed and are available for delivery. With respect to any such bonds,
coupons, temporary bonds, receipts or bond anticipation notes which have
matured, been exchanged or redeemed, the County shall make arrangements for the
mutilation and cremation of any such instruments after an appropriate
accounting therefor, and the County may also provide for the replacement of any
of them which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost, upon receipt of
such indemnification, and the payment of the expenses of replacement as the
County in its discretion may deem proper or requisite.
(Code 1959, § 10A-23; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1) (Bill No.
22-21, 10-25-2022)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-23 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-18 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-17. Status of bonds.
   With respect to any bonds issued under §§
2-13-13,
2-13-14, or
2-13-15:
   (1)   Such bonds are investment securities under the laws of this state,
notwithstanding any other provision of law or any recitals in the instruments;
and
   (2)   For purposes of issuance and sale, such bonds may be consolidated into
a single issue with any other bonds authorized to be issued by the County.
(Code 1959, § 10A-24; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1991, Chapter 194, § 1) (Bill No.
22-21, 10-25-2022)
§ 2-13-18. Special assessments for water or sewerage systems.
   (a)   For the purpose of paying the interest on and principal of the bonds
issued by the County as in this chapter provided for the water and sewerage
systems to be constructed, purchased, or established under this chapter, the
County may fix an annual assessment on all properties, improved or unimproved,
binding upon a street, road, lane, alley, or right-of-way in which a water main
or sewer has been built. The annual assessment shall be made upon the front
foot basis, and the first payment shall be collected during the year in which
the construction is completed on the water supply or sewerage system or in
which the systems are purchased or acquired. All sums collected by the County
for benefits levied against the property for water or sewerage construction
shall be set aside as a separate fund to be known and designated as the front
foot benefit assessment fund.
   (b)   The County for the purpose of assessing benefits shall divide all
properties binding upon a street, road, lane, alley, or right-of-way, in which
a water pipe or sanitary sewer is to be laid, into four (4) classes, namely:
agricultural, small acreage, industrial or business, and residential, and the
County may subdivide each of these classes in such manner as it deems to be in
the public interest. Whenever any water or sewerage project in the service area
has been completed and declared ready for service, the County shall fix and
levy an assessment for the remainder of the fiscal year on a pro rata basis
upon all property in the service area abutting upon the water main or sewer, in
accordance with the classification or subdivision thereof; and it shall in
writing notify all owners of the properties into which class and subdivision
their respective properties fall and the charge determine upon, naming also in
the notice a time and place, when and at which time the owner will be heard.
Such notice may be mailed to the last known address of the owner, or served in
person upon any adult occupying the premises or in case of a vacant or
unimproved property, posted upon the premises.
   (c)   The classification of and the benefit assessment made against any
property by the County is final, subject only to revision at the hearing. The
County may change the classification of properties from time to time as the
properties change in the uses to which they are put. The benefit assessment
shall be levied for water supply and sewerage construction and shall be based
for each class of property upon the number of front feet abutting upon the
street, lane, road, alley, or right-of-way in which the water pipe or sewer is
placed; provided, however, that in the case of any irregular shaped lot
abutting upon a road, street, lane, alley, or right-of-way in which there is or
is being constructed a water or sewer system at any point, the lot shall be
assessed for such frontage as the County may determine to be reasonable and
fair; and provided further that no residential property may be assessed on more
than one side unless it abuts upon two (2) parallel streets, that corner lots
may be averaged and assessed upon such frontage as the County may deem
reasonable and fair, and that all lots in the residential and industrial or
business classification shall be assessed even though a water main or sewer may
not extend along the full length of any boundary; and provided further, that no
land classified as agricultural by the County shall be assessed a front foot
benefit when it has constructed through it or in front of it a sewer or water
main until such time as the water or sewer connection is made, and when so made
and for every connection such land is liable to a front foot assessment for
such reasonable frontage not exceeding three hundred (300) feet, or as may be
determined by the County, and shall be immediately assessed at the rate of
assessment determined by the County for agricultural land. Any land owned by a
religious body upon which there is erected a church or a parsonage and which is
used exclusively for customary religious purposes, in the discretion of the
County, may be exempted from front foot benefit assessment for that frontage
not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet.
   (d)   Front foot benefit assessments for water supply and sewerage
construction shall be as nearly uniform as is practicable for each class or
subclass of property for any one year, and no benefit charge, once levied, may
be increased; provided, however, that whenever the County acquires an existing
system other than a municipal system, the construction of which has been added
in whole or in part to the purchase price of land or lots abutting upon the
system and which contribution the County has determined to be a factor in the
cost to the County of such system, the County in its discretion may levy such
lesser assessment as may take into account this factor.
   (e)   The amount of the assessment per front foot for each class of property
for water and sewer systems may be reduced from time to time by the County in
its discretion, if cost and conditions are deemed by it to justify the
reduction, but may be subsequently increased to the amount of the original
assessment in the event revenues prove to be insufficient. The benefit
assessments shall be paid annually by all properties located as above specified
for a period of years coextensive with the period of maturity of the bonds out
of the proceeds of which such construction was done.
   (f)   The County may permit a connection with a water main or sewer by a
property owner whose property does not abut on the water main or sewer. The
entire cost of extending the system to the property to be connected
(specifically including, but without limitation, the cost of engineering and
feasibility studies, and of acquiring necessary easements) shall be paid by the
property owner requesting service. However, if the size of the extension
required by the County exceeds that which may be necessary to serve the
property of the owner requesting service, then the cost of the excess shall be
paid by the County. The costs to be paid by the property owner, as estimated by
the County, plus a reasonable reserve for contingencies, shall be deposited by
the property owner with the County before the County enters into any contract
or incurs any expense in connection with the proposed extension. The cost of
the extension required to be paid by the property owner shall be in addition to
those front foot benefit assessments as may be assessed according to this
chapter, and those connection charges as may be imposed.
   (g)   The annual benefit assessment or other charge as above specified is a
lien upon the property against which it is assessed until paid, any statute of
limitations to the contrary notwithstanding, subject only to prior State and
County taxes. If any property is sold for State or County taxes, or both, by
the County Treasurer, and if after the sale there is a surplus after all costs
and expenses incident to the sale have been paid, the County upon proper
petition to the circuit court shall be allowed any balance from the surplus,
and shall be a preferred lienor to the extent of its lien; and for the purpose
of giving notice to the general public as to existing liens and charges against
any property within Frederick County abutting upon any water or sewer main, or
connected thereto, the County shall keep a public record of all names or owners
of property, locations of said property, lot numbers when of record, and the
amount of such benefit assessments, water service charges, or such other
charges that may become liens from time to time. The records shall be kept in
the office of the County as a public record, and when so kept shall be legal
notice of all existing liens within Frederick County. The County shall request
the County Treasurer to print a notice on the State and County tax bills that
benefit assessments and other charges for water and sewer services must be paid
in the office of the County or elsewhere as the County may designate.
   (h)   The County may reserve sewerage or water treatment capacity for the
development of schools or other public buildings, facilities or services, or
industrial development. The amount of capacity held in reserve may not exceed
fifteen (15) percent of the system.
   (i)   In addition to the authority to fix assessments on a front foot
benefit basis as described in this section, the County may fix assessments on a
basis that is similar and reasonably reflects the benefit to the property,
subject to County regulations. The assessments may be levied on all property
benefitted by a particular system or systems or may be levied on all property
benefitted by water, sewer, or drainage systems.
(Code 1959, § 10A-25; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1972, Chapter 609, § 1; 1979,
Chapter 723, § 1; 1988, Chapter 659, § 1) (Bill No. 22-21, 10-25-2022)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-25 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-19 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-19. Special assessments for drainage systems.
   (a)   For the purpose of providing for the payment of the principal of and
the interest on the bonds issued by the county under the terms and conditions
of this chapter for the construction of drainage systems, there may be levied
by the board, on behalf of the county, a special assessment to be known as a
drainage area assessment against all of the properties within the drainage area
served by the system, whether immediately or remotely, which the board may
determine to be specifically benefitted by the system, based on the area or on
the assessed value of all of the property belonging to any owner within the
drainage area and so benefitted, which special assessment shall be uniform
throughout the area affected. This special assessment shall be made on either
an area basis or on an assessed valuation basis, whichever is deemed more
equitable and just by the board, and the selection made by the board shall be
final and conclusive. The special assessment, if levied, shall be levied
annually in an amount deemed equitable and just (taking into account the
benefit to the properties in the drainage area) by the board and shall be used
to meet all or a part of the principal and interest requirements of the bonds
outstanding, the proceeds of which were used for the construction, and related
expenses, of the drainage system installed in the drainage area. Before the
special assessment as provided by this section of this chapter is levied, the
board shall mail to the owners of all properties within the drainage area or
part thereof upon which it proposes to levy a special assessment, at the
address of the owner as appears from the tax records of Frederick County,
notice that the special assessment is to be levied and giving the property
owners an opportunity to be heard thereon at a time and place fixed in the
notice. At the hearing, the board may adjust the special assessment,
maintaining, however, the uniformity of the base rate or percentage of levy.
   (b)   In any event, the board shall levy annually, on behalf of the county,
an ad valorem tax upon all legally assessable property in a drainage area in a
sufficient amount, together with any drainage and assessments and any other
funds available for the purpose, to meet the principal and interest
requirements, when due, of any bonds outstanding, the proceeds of which were
used for the construction and related expenses of a drainage system installed
in a drainage area.
(Code 1959, § 10A-26; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1)
§ 2-13-20. County to provide water and sewer connections; power to require
connections; prohibited runoff; power to make connections at expense of
property owner.
   The county may provide a service connection for each property abutting on a
street or right-of-way in which a water service line or sewer service line is
laid, when the property has the appropriate water/sewerage service designation,
and plant capacity is available to service the property. The water/sewer
service connection shall be extended as required from the water and sewer
service line to the property line of the abutting lot. The water service pipe
and the connection with the sewer shall be constructed by and at the expense of
the county, subject to any charge for the connection as provided in §
2-13-22 of this chapter, which shall be paid by property owners at the office
of the board. When any water main or sewer is declared by the board to be
complete and ready for the delivery of water or the reception of sewage, every
abutting property owner, after notice, shall connect all spigots or hydrants,
toilets and waste drains with the water main or sewer within the time
prescribed by the board. If these fixtures do not exist or are of a nature
which, in the judgment of the board, is improper or inadequate, satisfactory
equipment shall be installed by the owner of the premises. The equipment shall
consist of at least one water closet and one sink or washbasin, both of which
shall be properly connected with the sewer of the county. A private water or
sewerage system may not be connected to any water or sewerage system owned or
operated by the county. All private water systems discharging waste water into
the county sewerage system and cesspools, sink drains, and privies located on
properties connected to sewers provided by the county shall be abandoned,
closed, and left in a sanitary condition so that no odor or nuisance will
arise. No roof or other drainage facilities shall discharge into the county’s
water and sewerage facilities. Whenever any property owner, after notice, fails
to connect with a water main or sewer, or fails to abandon all cesspools,
drains and privies, as provided for in this chapter, the board may have the
connections made or cause the cesspools, drains and privies to be closed and
abandoned, or both, and to charge the costs of the connection or closing, or
both, to the owner of the property affected. The costs shall be a lien against
the property affected until paid and may be collected in the same manner as
county or municipal taxes are collected. Any violation of the provisions of
this section is a misdemeanor punishable under §
2-13-31 of this chapter.
(Code 1959, § 10-A-13; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1977, Chapter 96, § 1; 1979,
Chapter 723, § 1; 1991, Chapter 195, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-13 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-7 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-21. Plumbing permits and fire hydrants.
   (a)   Before any plumbing, waterworks, or sewer construction is done in any
building or upon any private property within Frederick County, the person,
firm, or corporation doing the construction shall first obtain a permit from
the county and pay therefor such reasonable sum as the board may prescribe. The
work shall be done under and pursuant to such rules, regulations, and
requirements as the board may from time to time formulate, and subject to such
inspection as it may deem necessary; provided, that, to avoid duplication of
supervision, the board may waive this provision if the state department of
health and mental hygiene issues the permits and makes the inspections required
by this subsection in a manner satisfactory to the board.
   (b)   The county shall have full and complete jurisdiction over all fire
hydrants connected with its water system; and no person, firm or corporation
may operate, use, or make connection with the system without the written
authority of the board, except that no restriction shall apply to any bona fide
fire department in the discharge of its duties. No person, firm, or corporation
may tamper with, deface, damage, or obstruct any fire hydrant. A violation of
any of the provisions of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable under
section §
2-13-31 of this chapter.
(Code 1959, § 10A-12; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1977, Chapter 96, § 1; 1979, Ch
723, § 1)
Cross reference:
   Plumbing permits generally, see §§ 1-14-90 et seq.
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-12 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-6 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-21A. Utility work to be performed by licensed utility contractor or
licensed master plumber; valid permit required.
   For Frederick County, the regulations shall require that all utility work,
meaning the installation of waterlines, sanitary sewers, storm drainage and
related appurtenances, done from the property line of any property to a point
not less than five feet from the foundation wall of any building or structure
on the property shall be performed only under a valid permit and by a utility
contractor who is licensed under Article 56, § 180 or by a licensed master
plumber. The provisions of this section shall prevail, notwithstanding any
other provisions of law.
(1988, Chapter 647, § 3)
§ 2-13-21B. Reserved.
Editor’s note:
   Pursuant to instructions by city, § 2-13-21B has been transferred to §
2-2-30 of
Chapter 2-2 of the Public Local Laws, to which the interested user should turn.
§ 2-13-22. Water or sewerage connection charges.
   (a)   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the
county may make a charge for every sewer and water connection. The funds
derived from these charges may be used for payment of principal and interest on
bonds, accumulating funds for capital improvements, for acquisition and
construction of water and sewerage systems and the operation and maintenance
thereof and for the purchase of equipment and supplies necessary to the
operation of the board. Connection charges may be established by the board.
These charges may be based upon reasonable classifications as the board may
determine and those classifications may vary within any water or sewer system
and among any of those systems depending on any special circumstances which the
[commission] board finds exist. The charges provided are not to be limited to
the costs to the board for making those connections. The board is empowered to
determine the manner in which charges shall be payable.
   (b)   The board may permit a connection with a water main or sewer by a
property owner whose property does not abut on the water main or sewer. The
entire cost of extending the system to the property to be connected
(specifically including, but without limitation, the cost of engineering and
feasibility studies and of acquiring necessary easements) shall be paid by the
property owner requesting service. However, if the size of the extension
required by the county exceeds that which may be necessary to serve the
property of the owner requesting service, then the cost of the excess shall be
paid by the board. The costs to be paid by the property owner, as estimated by
the board, plus a reasonable reserve for contingencies, shall be deposited by
the property owner with the board before the county enters into any contract or
incurs any expense in connection with the proposed extension. The cost of the
extension required to be paid by the property owner shall be in addition to
those front foot benefit assessments as may be assessed according to §
2-13-18 of this chapter and those connection charges as may be imposed
according to subsection (A) of this section.
(Code 1959, § 10A-27; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1970, Chapter 113, § 1; 1979,
Chapter 723, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-27 of
the 1959 county code.; however, such section constitutes as amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-20 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-23. Other water and sewerage authorized charges.
   (a)   For the purpose of providing funds for maintaining, repairing, and
operating its water and sewerage systems and for its operation and other
expenses, including property depreciation allowances, and for interest on and
the retirement of bonds as specified in this chapter, the board may make the
following charges:
      (1)   A water and sewer service charge. The rates for water and sewer
service shall consist of a minimum or ready-to-serve charge which shall be
based upon the size of the meter on the water connection leading to the
property, and of a charge for water used, which shall be based upon the amount
of water passing through the meter during the period between the last two
readings. The meter shall be required to be placed on each water connection by
and at the sole expense of the county, and it shall remain the property of the
county. The rates shall be classified within Frederick County in whatever
manner the board deems advisable. However, the classification shall be based
upon the quantities of water used and shall be, insofar as possible, uniform
throughout Frederick County. If the board at any time does not have meters
available to install in all the properties in a given locality that are
connected to the system, then a flat rate shall be charged on properties in
which meters have not yet been installed. That rate shall be uniform in each
system and based upon the ready-to-serve charge and the amount of water used.
Bills for water and sewer charges shall be sent either quarterly or
semiannually, as the board determines, to each property served and shall be
payable at the office of the board or whatever other place the board
designates. The charges shall be a lien upon the property served and
collectible as elsewhere provided. If any bill remains unpaid 30 days after the
date it was sent, the board, after written notice left upon the premises or
mailed to the last known address of the owner, shall turn off the water from
the property in question. The water may not be turned on again until the bill
has been paid, including a penalty in a reasonable amount to be established by
the Board of County Commissioners.
      (2)   A charge for the upkeep of water and sewer systems against all
properties benefitted by any such system or having a connection with any water
main or sewer under its operation or ownership. The charge for the upkeep of
the water and sewer system, if any, shall be made upon a reasonable basis
determined by the board and shall be collected annually in the same manner as
are front foot benefit assessments against all property benefitted by or having
a connection with a water main or sewer under the operation or ownership of the
county. It shall be a lien against the property. The charges shall be based
upon the classifications the board establishes and shall be uniform throughout
each system within each classification. A charge for the upkeep of water and
sewer systems may not be made against any property in any year for which the
property is currently subject to a front foot benefit assessment as provided in
this chapter.
   (b)   Before any sewer or water system is added to a consolidated system for
either sewer or water rates, the board of county commissioners shall conduct a
duly advertised public hearing on the subject. A consolidated system is an
arrangement in which a sewer and water system or any combinations thereof are
combined as one unit for the establishment of uniform rates.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of
chapter 2-13, the county may consolidate the income and outlays for all water
systems, sewer systems, drainage systems, and solid waste systems it owns for
the purpose of:
      (i)   Maintaining, repairing, and operating water, sewer, drainage, and
solid waste systems;
      (ii)   Establishing rates, charges, and assessments; and
      (iii)   Paying the principal and interest on any authorized indebtedness.
(Code 1959, § 10A-28; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1987,
Chapter 93, § 1; 1988, Chapter 659, § 1; 1991, Chapter 194, § 1; 2009, Chapter
368, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-28 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-21 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-24. Charges and assessments are liens; tax sales to collect.
   Front foot benefit assessments, drainage assessments, water and sewer system
upkeep charges, connection charges, and other charges which the board is
empowered to make shall be liens upon the property served or benefitted and, in
addition to being enforced by actions at law, may be enforced by a bill in
equity against the property so served or benefitted. In addition to being
enforced by actions at law and a bill in equity, the county tax collector, if
directed by the board, shall sell the property of the delinquent property owner
in the same manner as other properties are sold at a tax sale. The liens shall
be subject only to liens for state and county taxes. Such charges shall be due
when made and after thirty (30) days from that date may bear interest at the
rate of up to one percent per month as established by a resolution of the
board. Neither the due dates nor the interval between such dates need be
uniform throughout Frederick County. If a property owner fails to connect to a
sewer or a water system which is declared by the board to be complete and ready
for the delivery of water or the reception of sewage under §
2-13-20 of this code, the property owner shall pay the minimum charge
established for that system from the time that the property owner is given
notice and fails to make connections with the water main or sewer line.
(Code 1959, § 10A-29; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1; 1983,
Chapter 38, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-29 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-22 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-25. Entry powers of county employees; power to order work to provide
conservation of water or to eliminate improper use of sewers.
   Any employee or agent of the county has the right of entry, at all
reasonable hours, upon any private premises and into any building in the
service area while in pursuit of his official duties, after reasonable notice
and upon first presenting proper credentials from the board. The board or the
county’s agent or employees may order and require such changes in plumbing,
water usage, drainage, water or sewer connections as it deems necessary to
eliminate leakage, loss of water, unnecessary or improper use of sewers. The
board shall exercise control of the water supply at all times and in case of
shortage of water or, for any other reason, the board, in the exercise of its
discretion, may determine that the water supply should be conserved. The
consumers, upon notice from the county, its agents or employees, or upon notice
published in one newspaper published in Frederick County for one insertion
shall comply with any order passed by the board to conserve the water supply.
In addition to any other penalty herein prescribed, the county may turn off the
water supply of any person violating such an order at any time without further
notice. Any unreasonable restraint or hindrance offered by any owner, tenant,
or agent or any other person to the right of entry in this section provided or
any violation of any order issued pursuant to this section is a misdemeanor
punishable under section [10A-23] 10A-30 of this chapter. Nothing in this
section is applicable within any municipality or to any water and sewerage
system operated by a municipality unless authorized in accordance with §
2-13-6 of this chapter.
(Code 1959, § 10A-14; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1977, Chapter 96, § 1; 1979,
Chapter 723, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-14 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-28 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-26. Private water, sewer or drainage systems.
   No sewerage, water, or drainage system or extension thereof serving two or
more properties in Frederick County may be constructed by any private owner
without the prior approval of the board. If upon application for the
construction or extension of any such system the board determines that the
construction or extension is inexpedient or impracticable at that time, owing
to the remoteness from its general system or other considerations, the
applicant may build and operate the system or extension thereof at its own
expense; but it shall be constructed only under plans and specifications which
have been submitted to and approved by the board and its maintenance and
operation shall be under the general control or supervision of the board. No
such system or part thereof or no water main, sewer, storm water drain, water
purification or sewage treatment plant or no connection with any of them shall
be constructed or installed except as in this section provided, and any
violation of this provision shall be a misdemeanor punishable under §
2-13-31 of this chapter. The applicant for the construction or extension of any
such privately-owned system shall bear the reasonable costs that the board may
incur for the review and approval of any such plans and for the supervision by
the board of the maintenance and operation of the system. All construction and
operating records, including cost records, shall be filed with the board, which
shall be empowered at any time to take over the system or part thereof or the
water main, sewer, storm water drain, water purification or sewer treatment
plant or connection with any of them in the same manner as provided under §
10A-9. Nothing in this section impairs the rate making powers of the public
service commission nor eliminates the requirements of the law for the approval
of the [department of health] department of health and mental hygiene in the
construction and maintenance of the facilities. No private sewerage, water, or
drainage systems or extensions thereof authorized by this section shall be
approved if the construction and operation of the system or systems will cause
water pollution endangering the water supply of any municipality or other
public agency or private utility corporation supplying water and sewer services
in Frederick County. If a private system approved under the authority hereof
causes such pollution, then the county is authorized to require such
modifications as may be necessary to eliminate the pollution and to take such
other legal steps as may be necessary to enforce its orders eliminating the
nuisance of water pollution.
(Code 1959, § 10A-18; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1977, Chapter 96, § 1; 1979,
Chapter 723, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-18 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-12 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-27. Excavation on roads.
   The board may enter upon and excavate any state or county street, road, or
way, or any other public highway within the service area for the purpose of
installing, maintaining, and operating the water, sewerage, or drainage systems
provided for under this chapter; and it may construct in any such street, road,
way, or public highway, a water main, sewer, or drain or any appurtenances
thereof, without the receipt of a permit or the payment of a charge; provided,
that whenever any state or county highway within the service area is to be
disturbed, the public authority having control thereof shall be duly notified;
and provided further, that the highway shall be repaired and left by the board
in the same condition or in a condition not inferior to that existing before it
was torn up, and that all costs incident thereto shall be borne by the county.
(Code 1959, § 10A-15; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-15 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-9 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-28. Removal of structures, pipes, etc. impeding construction, plans for
poles, pipes, etc. in public ways to be approved by board.
   All individuals, firms, or corporations having buildings, conduits, pipes,
tracks, poles, or other structures or obstructions in, on, over, under, or
through any public road, street, or way, which blocks or impedes the
construction and establishment of the county’s water, sewerage, or drainage
systems, or other works, upon reasonable notice from the board, shall promptly
shift, adjust, accommodate, or remove structures or obstructions as fully to
meet the exigencies occasioning the action; provided, however, that the
reasonable cost of the changes shall be borne by the county. Every public
service corporation, company, or individual, before it or they shall begin any
excavation or construction in street, road, way, or public highway, shall file
with the board plans of such work and construction showing the location and
depth in the street, road, way, or public highway of the proposed main,
conduit, pole, pipe, or other structure, and such construction or work shall
not be begun until the plan is approved by the board, nor shall any change be
made in the approved plan or in the work or construction as shown by the plan,
except on further approval of the board. Whenever any main, conduit, pole,
pipe, or other structure is installed without the filing of plans with the
Board and the approval thereof by it, or when any change is made in the
location of the main, conduit, pipe, pole, or other structure as shown upon the
plans approved by the Board, or any approved change therein, the board, if and
when such conduit, main, pipe, or pole, or other structure interferes with the
construction of or operation of the water, drainage, or sewerage system, or
other works, may remove the conduit, main, pipe, pole, or other structures or
change the location thereof at the cost and expense of the party putting them
in, or their heirs, assigns, or successors, and without any liability upon the
part of the county for damage that might be done to the same by reason of the
board’s operation in constructing or maintaining the system or works. Any
violation of the provisions of this section is a misdemeanor punishable under §
2-13-31 of this chapter.
(Code 1959, § 10A-16; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1977, Chapter 96, § 1; 1979,
Chapter 723, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-16 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-10 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-29. Annual audit of accounts.
   The county shall annually have any accounts which are maintained to
implement this chapter audited by a certified public accountant to be selected
by the board; all fees incurred by such accountant in connection with the audit
shall be paid by the county.
(Code 1959, § 10A-5; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1)
§ 2-13-30. Rules and regulations.
   (a)   The board may prescribe all needful rules and regulations for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   (b)   In addition to its own power to adopt appropriate rules and
regulations, the board may adopt and enforce regulations of the state
department of health and mental hygiene or the Frederick County Health Officer,
or both, fixing standards of construction for water and sewer facilities or
installations.
   (c)   Prior to the adoption of any such rules and regulations other than
those of the state department of health and mental hygiene or the Frederick
County Health Officer, the board shall give public notice of the rules and
regulations which it proposes to adopt by publishing a fair summary of the same
in at least one newspaper of general circulation published in Frederick County
at least twice not less than fifteen (15) days prior to a public hearing, the
date, time and place of which shall be specified in the notice.
(Code 1959, § 10A-31; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1977, Chapter 96, § 1; 1979,
Chapter 723, § 1; 1981, Chapter 62, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-31 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-24 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-31. Penalty for violations.
   Every act or omission designated as a misdemeanor in this chapter, unless
otherwise provided, shall be punishable by any court of competent jurisdiction,
and the offender, upon conviction, is subject to a fine not exceeding one
hundred dollars ($100.00) or confinement in the county jail for not more than
thirty (30) days, or both, in the discretion of the court. If the act or
omission is of a continuing nature and is persisted in, in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation formulated thereunder,
a conviction for one offense shall not be a bar to the conviction for a
continuation of the offense subsequent to the first or any succeeding
conviction. In addition, the Board may enforce this chapter by injunctions or
any other appropriate remedy provided in law or equity.
(Code 1959, § 10A-30; 1969, Chapter 609, § 1; 1974, Chapter 275, § 2; 1979,
Chapter 723, § 1)
Editor’s note:
   Ch. 723 of the 1979 Acts designated the above section as section 10A-30 of
the 1959 county code; however, such section constitutes an amendment and
renumbering of former section 10A-23 of the 1959 Code.
§ 2-13-32. Certain acts repealed; powers of certain state agencies not
restricted; severability.
   (a)   All acts and parts of acts inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter are repealed to the extent of their inconsistency, providing that
nothing herein contained shall be taken as restricting any control which the
state department of health and mental hygiene and the state department of water
resources are empowered to exercise within Frederick County.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter are severable, and it is the intention
to confer the whole or any part of the powers herein provided for, and if any
of the provisions of this chapter shall be held unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared
to be the legislative intent that this chapter would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional provision not been included therein.
(Code 1959, § 10A-33; 1968, Chapter 609, § 1; 1979, Chapter 723, § 1)
§ 2-13-33. Discharges to storm sewers.
   (a)   (1)   In this section, the following words have the meanings
indicated.
      (2)   “Frederick County Storm Sewer System” means a conveyance or system
of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, ditches, gutters, man-made channels, or storm drains, owned or
operated by Frederick County and designed or used for collecting or conveying
storm water.
      (3)   “Illicit discharges” means any discharge into the Frederick County
storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of storm water except:
         (i)   Discharges pursuant to a state or federal permit;
         (ii)   Discharges resulting from fire fighting activities.
   (b)   The county commissioners may adopt an ordinance or regulations to
control illicit discharges into the Frederick County Storm Sewer System.
   (c)   The ordinance or regulations may provide for:
      (1)   The appointment of inspectors to enforce the ordinance or
regulations; and
      (2)   The imposition of penalties for violations of the ordinance or
regulations.
(1995, Chapter 25, § 1)
§ 2-13-34. Solid waste disposal fee or tax.
   (a)   The board, by ordinance, may establish, charge, levy, and collect a
fee or tax for the reasonably anticipated capital costs and operating costs for
the collection and disposal of solid waste.
   (b)   The authority granted to the board in this section applies in all
municipal corporations in the county.
   (c)   A fee or tax levied under this section:
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, shall be collected and
secured in the same manner as general real property taxes; and
      (2)   Is subject to the same penalties, procedure, sale, and lien
priority in case of delinquency that are provided for general real property
taxes.
(2004, Chapter 293, § 1)
§ 2-13-35. Pay-as-you-throw pilot program.
   (A)   The Board by ordinance may establish a pilot program under which a
solid waste hauler charges a residential customer a fee for curbside collection
based on the volume of the solid waste collected.
   (B)   The pilot program may occur in a municipal corporation only on
approval of the governing body of the municipal corporation.
(2010, Chapter 692, § 1)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to 1959 Code
References to Special Acts
References to Maryland Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
References to Bills
REFERENCES TO 1959 CODE
1959 Code Code Section
1959 Code     Code Section
1             2-8-1
1-1           1-1-1,
              2-1-1
1-2           1-1-2,
              2-1-2
1-3           1-1-4,
              2-1-3
1-4           1-1-6,
              2-1-4
1-5           1-1-3,
              2-1-5
1-19-183      1-19-6.320
2-2A          2-2-23
2-3           2-2-16
2-4           2-2-18
2-5           2-2-17
2-6           2-2-20
2-7           2-2-21
2-7A(A)       2-2-66
2-7A(B)       2-2-67
2-7B          2-2-24
2-13          2-2-25
3-1           2-4-1
3-5           2-4-16
3-6           2-4-17
3-7           2-4-18
3-8           2-4-19
3-9           2-4-20
5-9           2-5-16
5-15          2-5-29
5-16          2-5-30
5-17          2-5-31
5-19          2-5-1
6-4           2-3-1
8-4           2-7-2
8-6           2-7-5
8-7           2-7-4
8-9           2-7-3 
8-11          2-7-6
8-12          2-7-101
8-12A         2-7-102
8-13          2-7-103
8-16          2-7-104
8-17          2-7-116
8-19          2-7-8
8-20          2-7-9
8-21          2-7-26
8-22          2-7-27
8-23, 826     2-7-28
8-30          2-7-46 
8-31          2-7-47
8-32          2-7-49
8-33          2-7-48
8-42          2-7-66
8-43          2-7-67
8-44          2-7-68
8-46          2-7-69
8-46A         2-7-70
8-47          2-7-71
8-48          2-7-72
8-49          2-7-7
9-2           2-8-2
9-3           2-8-3
10A-1         2-13-1
10A-2         2-13-2
10A-3         2-13-9,
              2-13-21
10A-5         2-13-12,
              2-13-29
10A-6         2-13-5,
              2-13-21
10A-7         2-13-7,
              2-13-20
10A-8         2-13-8
10A-9         2-13-9,
              2-13-27
10A-10        2-13-11,
              2-13-28
10A-11        2-13-6,
              2-13-12
10A-12        2-13-21,
              2-13-26
10A-13        2-13-20
10A-14        2-13-25
10A-15        2-13-10,
              2-13-27
10A-16        2-13-13,
              2-13-28
10A-17        2-13-6
10A-18        2-13-26
10A-19        2-13-10,
              2-13-18
10A-20        2-13-13,
              2-13-22
10A-21        2-13-14,
              2-13-23
10A-22        2-13-15,
              2-13-24
10A-23        2-13-16,
              2-13-31
10A-24        2-13-17,
              2-13-30
10A-25        2-13-18
10A-26        2-13-19
10A-27        2-13-22
10A-28        2-13-23,
              2-13-25
10A-29        2-13-24
10A-30        2-13-31
10A-31        2-13-30
10A-32        2-13-4
10A-33        2-13-32
10B-1         2-2-2
10-1          2-9-1
11-1          2-10-1
11-2(A)       2-6-1
11-2(B)       2-6-2
12-1A         2-2-27
13-1          2-11-1
13-2          2-11-2
13-3          2-11-3
13-4          2-11-4
13-5          2-11-5
13-6          2-11-6
13-7          2-11-7
13-8          2-11-8
13-12         2-11-9
13-13         2-11-10
13-13A        2-11-11
14-2          2-12-2
14-3          2-12-1
29-28         1-17-76
30-4          1-13-16,
              1-13-17
30-6          1-13-19
30-7          1-13-21
30-8          1-2-1
30-9          1-12-20
30-10         1-12-24
30-11         1-12-21
30-12         1-12-22
30-13         1-12-23
30-14         1-12-25
              1-12-5,
30-15         1-12-26,
              1-12-31
30-18(1)      1-12-46
30-18(5)      1-12-45
30-18(b)      1-12-37
30-18(c)      1-12-34
30-18(e)      1-12-38
30-18(g)      1-12-36
30-18(h)      1-12-41
30-18(j)      1-12-32,
              1-12-42
30-18(m)      1-12-39
30-18(o)      1-12-43,
              1-12-44
30-18(p)      1-12-40
30-18(s)      1-12-33
30-18(t)      1-12-48
30-19         Chapter 1-2, Article VII
30-23         1-2-70, 1-2-711
30-24         1-2-72, 1-2-711
30-25         1-2-73
30-25A        1-2-72
30-36         1-13-1
30-51         1-13-18
30-61         1-13-20
31-1          1-4-1
31-2          1-4-21
31-3          1-4-24
31-4          1-4-23
31-5          1-4-22
31-6          1-4-2
31-7          1-4-3
31-8          1-4-4
31-12         1-4-5
31-13         1-4-6
31-14         1-4-7
33-1          1-8-1
33-5          1-8-2
33-10         1-8-4
33-11         1-8-4
33-14         Chapter 1-8, Articles III and IV
33-15         1-8-5
33-16         1-8-3
34-1          1-9-21
34-2          1-9-22
34-3          1-9-23
34-4          1-9-24
34-6          1-9-26
34-15         1-9-25
35-1          1-11-1
35-2          1-11-2
35-4          1-18-5
35-5          1-11-3
36-2          1-2-17
36-5          1-2-17
36-6          1-17-46
36-7          1-17-46
36-18         1-2-37
36A-61(b)     1-16-163
38A-10        1-16-1
38A-11        1-16-2
38A-21        1-16-5
38A-22        1-16-6
38A-23        1-16-7
38A-24        1-16-8
38A-25        1-16-10
38A-26        1-16-13
38A-27        1-16-11
38A-28        1-16-12
38A-30        1-16-26
38A-31        1-16-28
38A-32        1-16-4
38A-33        1-16-29
38A-34        1-16-32
38A-35        1-16-30
38A-36        1-16-46
38A-37        1-16-31
38A-40(a)     1-16-59
38A-40(b)     1-16-60
38A-41(a)     1-16-71
38A-41(b)     1-16-72
38A-42        1-16-86,
              1-16-90
38A-42(a)     1-16-87
38A-42(b)     1-16-88
38A-42(c)     1-16-89
38A-50        1-16-104
38A-51        1-16-105
38A-52        1-16-106
38A-53        1-16-107
38A-54        1-16-108
38A-55        1-16-109
38A-56        1-16-110
38A-60(a)     1-16-141
38A-61        1-16-161
38A-61(e)     1-16-163
38A-62        1-16-179
38A-63        1-16-126
38A-64        1-16-126
38A-65(a)     1-16-191
38A-65(b)     1-16-192
38A-65(c)     1-16-193
38A-65(d)     1-16-194
38A-65(f)     1-16-195
38A-65(g)     1-16-196
38A-65(h)     1-16-197
38A-65(i)     1-16-198
38A-65(k)     1-16-199
38A-70        1-16-216
38A-71        1-16-217
38A-72        1-16-241
38A-72(a)     1-16-234
38A-72(b)     1-16-235
38A-72(c)     1-16-236
38A-72(d)     1-16-237
38A-72(e)     1-16-238
38A-72(f)     1-16-239
38A-72(g)     1-16-240
38A-73        1-16-218
38A-74        1-16-219
38A-75        1-16-220
38A-76        1-16-221
38A-80        1-16-3
38A-81        1-16-3,
              1-16-27
38-5          2-11-73
38-6          2-11-74
38-7          2-11-75
38-8          2-11-76
38-9          2-11-77
38-10         2-11-78
39-1          1-17-1
39-2          1-17-2
39-3          1-17-3
39-4          1-17-4
39-5          1-17-21
39-7          1-17-47
39-9          1-17-48
39-10         1-17-49
39-11         1-17-51
39-12         1-17-50
39-13         1-17-52
39-14         1-17-22
39-15         1-17-23
39-16         1-17-24
39-17         1-17-25
39-18         1-17-26
39-19         1-17-27
39-20         1-17-28
39-21         1-17-29
39-22         1-17-5
39-23         1-17-71
39-24         1-17-72
39-25         1-17-73
39-26         1-17-74
39-27         1-17-75
39-29         1-17-77
41-1          1-3-1
41-2          1-3-3
41-3          1-3-4
41-4          1-3-5
41-5          1-3-6
41-6          1-3-7
41-7          1-3-8
41-8          1-3-9
41-9          1-3-10
41-10         1-3-11
41-11         1-3-11
41-12         1-3-12
41-13         1-3-2
42-1          1-14-56,
              1-14-57
42-2          1-14-36—
              1-14-38
42-3          1-14-39
42-4          1-14-40
42-5          1-14-19
42-6          1-14-20
42-7          1-14-21
42-8          1-14-22
42-9          1-14-90, 1-14-96
42-9(a)       1-14-94
42-9(b)       1-14-95
42-10         1-14-911
42-11         1-14-91
42-13         1-14-93
42-14         1-14-90
42-16         1-14-1
42-22         1-14-59
42-201        1-14-58
43-1          1-7-37
43-2          1-7-36
43-3          1-7-38
43-4          1-7-39
43-5          1-7-40
43-6          1-7-41
43-8          1-7-61,
              1-7-62
43-10         1-7-64
43-11         1-7-65
43-12         1-7-42
43-13         1-7-43
43-15         1-7-44,
              1-7-45
43-16         1-7-46
43-17         1-7-47
43-19         1-7-48
43A-1         1-7-16,
              1-7-17
43A-2         1-7-17
43A-3         1-7-18
43B-I         1-7-92,
              1-7-102
43B-III       1-7-95
43B-IV(A)-(D) 1-7-93
43B-IV(F)     1-7-94
43B-V         1-7-97
43B-VI        1-7-98
43B-VII       1-7-96,
              1-7-99
43B-VIII      1-7-99,
              1-7-100
43B-X         1-7-81
43B-1         1-7-91
45-1          1-2-49,
              1-2-50
45-2          1-2-51
45-3          1-2-52
              
 
REFERENCES TO SPECIAL ACTS
Year Chapter Code Section
Year Chapter      Code Section
1930 11, § 816   2-7-117
1933 127, § 1    2-7-26
1933 145, § 1    2-5-31
1933 414, § 1    2-3-1
1937 83, § 1     2-7-101
1937 99, § 1     2-7-26
1939 58, § 1     2-7-26
1939 330, § 1    2-7-71
1939 336, § 1    2-7-69
1939 589, § 1    2-11-4
                  2-11-1,
1939 695, § 1    2-11-6,
                  2-11-7
1941 422, § 1    2-12-2
1947 466, § 1    2-7-26
1947 633, § 1    2-11-6
1947 864, § 1    2-11-3
1949 659, § 1    2-9-1
1951 644, § 1    2-11-6
1953 306, § 1    2-11-2
1955 25, § 1     2-7-69,
                  2-7-71
1955 75, § 1     2-11-2
1955 346, § 1    2-11-5
1955 417, § 1    2-2-26
1957 183, § 1    2-2-1
1957 465, § 1    2-2-45, 2-2-48, 2-2-49
1961 222, § 1    2-5-16
1961 416, § 1    2-4-1
1961 570, § 1    2-5-30
1961 687, § 1    2-1-6
1962 § 1         2-2-2
1962 92, § 1     2-7-8
1963 525, § 1    2-7-72
                  2-7-2—
                  2-7-4,
                  2-7-8, 2-7-32,
1963 825, § 14   2-7-46,
                  2-7-47,
                  2-7-48,
                  2-7-49,
                  2-7-116
1965 § 1         2-2-2
1965 31, § 1     2-7-27
1965 79, § 1     2-7-103
1965 142, § 1    2-5-1
1965 221, § 1    2-2-25
1965 222, § 1    2-11-8
1965 223, § 1    2-2-21
1965 225, § 1    2-7-28
1965 244, § 1    2-7-66
1965 423, § 2    2-2-17
1965 567, § 1    2-2-41—2-2-44, 2-2-46—2-2-48
1965 825, § 14   2-7-68
1966 702, § 1    2-7-67
1967 103, § 1    2-2-16
1967 599, § 1    2-5-29
1967 603, § 1    2-2-16
                  2-13-6,
                  2-13-9,
                  2-13-11—
                  2-13-14,
1968 609, § 1    2-13-16,
                  2-13-18,
                  2-13-20—
                  2-13-28,
                  2-13-30—
                  2-13-32
1969 91, § 1     2-7-4
1969 96, § 1     2-7-72
1969 511, § 1    2-2-26
1969 745, § 1    2-7-67
1969 778, § 1    2-7-102
1970 63, § 1     2-7-4
1970 113, § 1    2-13-22
1970 514, § 1    2-7-5
1972 62, § 1     2-1-3, 2-7-32,
                  2-7-46
1972 219, § 1    2-12-1
1972 609, § 1    2-13-18
1972 615, § 1    2-11-73—
                  2-11-78
1973 136, § 1    2-7-5,
                  2-7-6
                  2-1-6,
1974 275, § 2    2-3-1,
                  2-7-9,
                  2-13-31
1974 629, § 1    2-2-23
1976 106, § 1    2-2-66,
                  2-2-67
1976 204, § 2    2-7-103
1976 317, § 1    2-6-1,
                  2-6-2
1977 83, § 2     2-7-46—
                  2-7-49
1977 85, § 1     2-2-24
1977 95, § 1     2-7-1,
                  2-7-4
                  2-13-20,
1977 961          2-13-25, 2-13-326,
                  2-13-28,
                  2-13-30
1977 97, § 1     2-2-27
1977 142, § 1    2-11-11
1978 78, § 1     2-7-70
1978 78, § 2     2-4-16—
                  2-4-20
1979 185, § 1    2-13-13
1979 674, § 2    2-8-1—
                  2-8-3
                  2-13-1,
                  2-13-2,
1979 723, § 1    2-13-2.1,
                  2-13-3—
                  2-13-32
1981 59, § 1     2-1-7
1981 61, § 1     2-2-67(3)
1981 62, § 1     2-13-30
1981 63, § 1     2-11-75
1981 64, § 1     2-7-67
1981 193, § 1    2-8-4
1981 222, § 1    1-14-90(c),
                  Ch. 2-10
1981 475, § 1    1-7-102(a)(4),
                  Ch. 2-6
1981 672, § 1    2-8-2—
                  2-8-3
1982 57, § 1     2-7-1(a),
                  2-7-5
1982 86, § 1     2-2-18
1982 397, § 1    2-2-28
1983 28, § 1     2-11-73
1983 38, § 1     2-13-24
1983 39, § 1     2-8-5
1983 40, § 1     2-11-2
                  2-7-66,
1983 613, § 1    2-7-68,
                  2-7-69,
                  2-7-72
                  2-7-1(b),
1984 428, § 1    2-7-4,
                  2-7-5,
                  2-7-8
                  1-2-69.1,
1984 634, § 1    1-5-53,
                  1-12-49,
                  2-2-29
1984 656, § 1    2-2-21.1
1985 430, § 1    2-2-18
1986 230, § 1    2-8-3
1986 787, § 1    2-2-21.1
1987 93, § 1     2-13-13(e),
                  2-13-23
1988 202, § 1    2-7-70
1988 224, § 1    2-2-68
                  2-7-1(a),
                  2-7-4(a),
1988 400, § 1    2-7-5—
                  2-7-8,
                  2-7-46(a),
                  2-7-46(b)
1988 409, § 1    2-1-117,
                  2-7-103, Rpld 2-7-117
1988 425, § 1    2-13-6
1988 647, § 3    2-13-21A
1988 647, § 7    2-2-30
                  2-13-13(e),
1988 659, § 1    2-13-23,
                  2-13-18(i)
1989 81, § 1     2-2-18
1989 168, § 1    2-8-3,
                  2-8-6
1990 317, § 1    2-2-18
1990 391, § 1    2-2-67(3)
1990 608, § 1    2-11-73.1
                  2-1-2,
1991 19, § 1     2-1-8,
                  2-13-8(a)
                  Ch. 2-13,
                  2-13-1,
                  2-13-3(d)(4), (5),
                  2-13-4,
                  2-13-5,
                  2-13-6(a),
    194, § 1    2-13-9(a),
                  2-13-10,
                  2-13-11(a),
                  2-13-12,
                  2-13-13(a), (b),
                  2-13-14(a),
                  2-13-17,
                  2-13-23(c)
    195, § 1    2-13-20
1992 52, § 1     Rpld 1-14-90(c)
1992 53, § 1     Rpld 1-7-102(a)(4)
1992 57, § 1     Rpld 2-4-1
1993 162, § 1    2-7-1(a)(2)
1993 163, § 1    2-7-1(b),
                  2-7-4(a)
1993 164, § 1    2-8-6(e)(3)
1993 166, § 1    2-8-6(c)(3), (f)
1994 50, § 1     2-2-17
1994 275, § 1    2-11-12
1994 276, § 1    2-11-13
1995 25, § 1     2-13-33
    27, § 1     Rpld 2-2-19
    28, § 1     2-2-3
    180, §§ 1�2-2-5
    181, § 1    Rpld 2-2-41—2-2-49
    613, § 1    2-2-4
1996 27, § 1     2-1-8
                  Rpld
                  2-7-2,
    28, § 1     2-7-3.1,
                  2-7-27—
                  2-7-30
                Rpld 2-7-31, 2-7-32
1997 14           2-7-30
    517, § 1    2-7-125
1999 372, § 1    2-2-69
    374, § 1    2-7-8
2000 649, § 1    2-8-1
                  Rpld
2001 207, § 1    2-7-26,
                  2-7-27,
                  2-7-30
                2-7-28(a), (c)
    250, § 1    2-11-8
    261, § 1    2-7-6
    690, § 1    Added
                  2-7-131
    719, § 1    2-7-125(R)(2)
2003 31, § 1     2-7-103
2003 293, § 1    2-2-68
2004 293, § 1    2-13-34
2004 329, § 1    2-8-4
2004 350, § 1    2-7-10
2004 350, § 1    2-7-11
2005 314, § 1    2-2-18
2005 558, § 1    2-2-68
2006 94, § 1     2-8-6
2006 175, § 1    2-7-125
2006 181, § 1    2-7-131
2006 205, § 1    2-2-19
2006 372, § 7    Rpld 2-5-16
    372, § 13   2-5-1
                  2-2-23,
2007 5, § 1      2-3-1,
                  2-10-1,
                  2-13-15
2007 69, § 1     2-7-131
2008 36, § 1     2-13-13
2009 368, § 1    2-13-23
2009 397, § 1    2-2-18
2009 427, § 1    2-7-201
2010 692, § 1    2-13-35
                  2-7-1,
2012 689, § 1    2-7-4,
                  2-7-11
                 
 
REFERENCES TO MARYLAND CODE
Maryland Code Code Section
Maryland Code                                     Code Section
Art. 2B, § 10-103(B)(9)                          1-2-111
Art. 23A                                          2-13-3
Art. 24, Title 11, Subtitle 5                     2-3-1
Art. 25                                           2-7-125
Art. 25, § 1                                     2-1-8
Art. 25, § 2(B)                                  2-11-13
Art. 25, § 3                                     2-11-73
Art. 25, § 9(J)                                  2-7-131
Art. 31, § 2(C)                                  2-2-5
Art. 31, § 6                                     2-7-125
Art. 31, § 7                                     2-7-125
                                                  2-2-5,
Art. 31, § 9                                     2-7-125,
                                                  2-13-17
                                                  2-2-5,
Art. 31, § 10                                    2-7-125,
                                                  2-13-17
                                                  2-2-5,
Art. 31, § 11                                    2-7-125,
                                                  2-13-17
Art. 43                                           2-13-3
Art. 43, §§ 645 – 678                         2-13-2
Art. 66B                                          1-19-4.110,
                                                  2-13-3
Art. 83B, § 5-503                                1-6-18A,
                                                  1-6-18B
Art. 95, § 22                                    2-7-125
Agric. Art., §§ 2-501 – 2-519                 1-13-33
Agric. Art., § 2-504.1(d)(1)                     1-13-34
Agric. Art., § 2-513(b)                          1-19-8.610
Agric. Art., Subtitle 5                           1-19-8.610
Agric. Art., Title 8                              1-15.2-2.0
Alcoholic Beverages Article                       36-401(c)(2)
Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article § 1-322 1-8-10
Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article § 36-1011-8-10
Bus. Occ. & Prof. Art., Title 6                   1-7-97
Bus. Occ. & Prof. Art., Title 7                   1-21-5
Bus. Occ. & Prof. Art., Title 9                   1-15.2-2.0
Bus. Occ. & Prof. Art., Title 12                  1-14-1
Bus. Occ. & Prof. Art., Title 12, Subtitle 3      2-10-1
Bus. Occ. & Prof. Art., Title 14                  1-15.2-2.0
Bus. Occ. & Prof. Art., Title 15                  1-15.2-2.0,
                                                  1-16-3
Bus. Reg. Art., § 9A-205                         1-6-18B
Com. Law Art., § 8-102                           2-7-125
Com. Law Art., § 12-127                          1-8-453
Com. Law Art., § 12-311                          1-8-453
Com. Law Art., § 12-409.1                        1-8-453
Com. Law Art., § 12-925                          1-8-453
Com. Law Art., § 12-1029                         1-8-453
Criminal Law Art., § 10-402(d-f)                 1-23-12
Education Art., Title 9.5, Subtitle 3             1-8-69
Education Art., Title 9.5, Subtitle 4             1-8-69
Economic Development Art., § 5-301               1-8-201
Economic Development Art., § 5-310               1-8-201
Economic Development Art., § 5-335               1-8-201
Election Law Art., § 13-101 et seq.              1-7.1-3
Envir. Art., § 1-701                             1-19-8.402,
                                                  1-19-8.403
Envir. Art., § 2-611                             1-3-12
Envir. Art., § 3-401                             1-11-6
Envir. Art., § 4-201 et seq.                     Ch. 1-15.2, Art. I
Envir. Art., § 4-201.1(d)                        1-15.2-11.0
Envir. Art., § 4-202.1                           1-15.2-11.1
Envir. Art., § 4-202.1(e)(2)                     1-15.2-11.3
Envir. Art., § 4-202.1(f)(1)                     1-15.2-11.6
Envir. Art., § 4-202.1(h)(3)                     1-15.2-11.2
Envir. Art., § 4-202.1(h)(4)                     1-15.2-11.2
Envir. Art., §§ 5-901 through 5-911             1-21-32
Envir. Art., § 9-206(m)                          1-19-7.300
Envir. Art., § 10-301                            1-4-7
Envir. Art., § 16-301                         1-19-11.100
Envir. Art., Title 2                              Ch. 1-3
Envir. Art., Title 4                              1-21-5
Envir. Art., Title 4, Subtitle 1                  1-10-1
Envir. Art., Title 4, Subtitle 2                  1-15.2-1.0
Envir. Art., Title 5, Subtitle 8                  1-15.2-4.1
Envir. Art., Title 9, Subtitle 6                  2-2-23
Envir. Art., Title 9, Subtitle 9                  2-2-23,
                                                  2-13-15
Envir. Art., Title 15, Subtitle 5 or 6            1-21-7
Envir. Art., Title 15, Subtitle 8                 1-21-7
Family Law Art. Title 4, Subtitle 7               1-2-400
Finance and Procurement Art., § 5-7B-02          1-21-5
General Provisions Art., § 5-607(j)(1)           1-7.1-6
General Provisions Art., Title 5, Subtitle 8      1-7.1-4
Health-Gen. Art., § 18-319(A)(3)                 1-5-35
Health-Gen. Art. § 10-312                        1-2-1000
Health-Gen. Art., Title 3                         1-2-900
Health-Gen. Art., Title 10, Subtitle 3, Part II   1-2-1000
Health-Gen. Art., Title 14, Subtitle 2            1-8-69
Health-Gen. Art., Title 14, Subtitle 3            1-8-69
Health-Gen. Art., Title 21, Subtitle 8            1-9-22
Health Occupations Art., Title 7                  1-19-8.230.1,
                                                  1-19-11.100
Health Services Art., § 10-101                   1-2-73.1
Health Services Art., Title 10                    1-2-70
                                                  1-16-1,
                                                  1-16-3,
                                                  1-16-5,
                                                  1-19-1.110,
Land Use Art.                                     1-19-3.230,
                                                  1-19-11.100,
                                                  1-20-2,
                                                  1-20-5,
                                                  1-23-15
Land Use Art., Div. 1, Title 3                    1-25-1
Land Use Art., Title 2                            1-13-19,
                                                  1-13-20
Land Use Art., Title 4                            Ch. 1-19, Art. I
Land Use Art., Title 5, Subtitle 1                Ch. 1-16, Art. I
Land Use Art., Title 6, Subtitle 1                1-16-235
Land Use Art., Title 7, Subtitle 1                Ch. 1-20, Art. I
Land Use Art., Title 8                            1-23-1,
                                                  1-23-5
Land Use Art., § 2-102                           1-13-18
Land Use Art., § 2-102(D)                        1-13-18
Land Use Art., § 2-105                           1-13-21
Land Use Art., § 3-101                           1-13-17,
                                                  1-13-21
Land Use Art., § 5-201                           1-16-88
Land Use Art., § 5-301                           1-16-32
Land Use Art., § 5-302                           1-16-5
Land Use Article, § 7-302(b)                     1-25-2
Land Use Article, § 8-201                        1-8-468
Land Use Art., § 9-1004                          1-16-5,
                                                  1-16-32
Local Gov. Art.                                   1-1-9,
                                                  Ch. 1-2
Local Gov. Art., § 1-604                         Ch. 1-12, Art. I
Local Gov. Art., § 1-606                         1-12-20,
                                                  1-12-21
Local Gov. Art., § 1-607                         Ch. 1-12, Art. I
Local Gov. Art., § 1-1101                        1-8-451
Local Gov. Art., § 1-1101, et seq.               1-8-452
Local Gov. Art., § 10-202                        1-1-9
Local Gov. Art., § 12-301                        Ch. 1-2, Art. II
Local Gov. Art., § 12-1004                       1-6-18B
Local Gov. Art., § 13-201                        Ch. 1-4, Art. I
Local Gov. Art., § 13-203                        Ch. 1-17, Art. I
Local Gov. Art., § 13-915                        1-14-56,
                                                  Ch. 1-14, Art. V
Local Gov. Art., § 13-916                        1-14-56,
                                                  Ch. 1-14, Art. III, V
Local Gov. Art., § 19-205                        1-13-35
Local Gov. Art., § 19-206                        1-13-35
Local Gov. Art., § 20-113                        1-15.2-11.4
Local Gov. Art., § 20-117                        1-15.2-11.4
                                                  1-2-69.1,
                                                  1-5-53,
                                                  1-6-20,
                                                  1-7-49,
                                                  1-10-48,
                                                  1-11-4,
Local Gov. Art., Title 6                          1-11-5,
                                                  1-11-39,
                                                  1-12-49,
                                                  1-14-98,
                                                  1-15-20,
                                                  1-15.2-10.2,
                                                  1-19-2.210
Local Gov. Art., Title 13, Subtitle I             Ch. 1-5, Art. I
Nat. Res. Art., Subtitle 7-6A                     1-19-10.400.5
Nat. Res. Art., Title 9                           1-19-11.100
Nat. Res. Art., § 4-2A-04                        1-21-5
                                                  1-21-5,
Nat. Res. Art., § 5-103                          1-21-7,
                                                  1-21-8
Nat. Res. Art., § 5-1102(A)                      1-19-11.100
Nat. Res. Art., § 5-1601                         1-21-5
                                                  1-21-5,
Nat. Res. Art., §§ 5-1601 – 5-1612            1-21-8,
                                                  1-21-21,
                                                  1-21-22
Nat. Res. Art., § 5-1603                         1-21-2,
                                                  1-21-3
Nat. Res. Art., § 5-1603(F)                      1-21-7
Nat. Res. Art., § 5-1605                         1-21-5
Nat. Res. Art., § 5-1607                         1-21-32
Nat. Res. Art., § 5-1607(c)(1)                   1-21-32
Nat. Res. Art., § 5-1607(c)(2)                   1-21-32
Nat. Res. Art., § 5-1607(E)                      1-21-5
Nat. Res. Art., §§ 10-2A-01 – 10-2A-09        1-21-40
Nat. Res. Art., § 10-2A-04                       1-21-5
Nat. Res. Art., § 10-2A-06                       1-21-5
Public Safety Art.                                1-6-45
                                                  1-2-800,
Public Safety Art., § 3-201                      1-2-802,
                                                  1-2-806,
                                                  1-2-808
Public Safety Art., § 12-1004                    1-6-18A
Public Safety Art., Title 6                       1-6-34
Public Safety Art., Title 9, Subtitle 1           1-6-44
Public Safety Art., Title 12, Subtitle 8          1-6-34
Public Safety Art., Title 12, Subtitle 9          1-6-34
Pub. Util. Art., 7-204                            1-21-5,
                                                  1-21-7
Pub. Util. Art., 7-205                            1-21-5,
                                                  1-21-7
                                                  1-19-8.800,
Pub. Util. Art., 7-207                            1-21-5,
                                                  1-21-7
                                                  1-19-8.800,
Pub. Util. Art., 7-208                            1-21-5,
                                                  1-21-7
Pub. Util. Art., 7-306.2                          1-19-11.100
Real Prop. Art., Title 11                         1-16-3,
                                                  1-16-179
Real Prop. Code, 8-402                            1-6-67
Real Prop. Code, 8-402.1                          1-6-67
Real Prop. Code, 14-121.1                      1-23-12
Real Prop. Code, 14-132                           1-6-67
Real Prop. Book, Title 3, Subtitle 1, § 3-108    1-16-6
State Gov't. Art., Title 10, Subtitle 6           1-2-20
State Gov’t. Art., Title 20                     1-2-95
State Gov’t. Art., § 20-101                    1-2-93
Tax-Gen. Art., Title 8, Subtitle 2                2-7-125
Real Prop. Art., Title 14, Subtitle 8             1-8-455
                                                  1-8-9,
                                                  1-8-65,
                                                  1-8-303,
Tax-Prop. Art., § 6-202                          1-8-304,
                                                  1-8-411,
                                                  1-8-421,
                                                  1-8-445,
                                                  1-8-466
Tax-Prop. Art., § 7-208                          1-8-68
Tax-Prop. Art., § 7-237                          1-8-9
Tax-Prop. Art., § 7-514                          1-8-9
Tax-Prop. Art., § 8-101(c)(6)                    1-8-9
                                                  1-21-5,
Tax-Prop. Art., § 8-211                          1-21-7,
                                                  1-21-10
                                                  1-8-65,
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-104                          1-8-66,
                                                  1-8-421
                                                  1-8-8,
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-105                          1-8-61,
                                                  1-8-65,
                                                  1-8-67
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-204                          1-8-467
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-205                          1-8-441
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-210                          1-8-64
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-213                          1-8-69
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-215                          1-8-65,
                                                  1-8-66
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-221                          1-8-61
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-229                          1-8-201
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-230                          1-8-432,
                                                  1-8-433
                                                  1-8-301,
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-236                          1-8-303,
                                                  1-8-304
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-245                          1-8-66
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-258                          1-8-67
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-265                          1-8-68
                                                  1-8-3,
Tax-Prop. Art., § 9-312                          1-8-62,
                                                  1-8-63
Tax-Prop. Art. § 9-312(i)                        1-8-461
Tax-Prop. Art., § 10-204                         1-8-421
Tax-Prop. Art., § 10-301                         1-8-4
Tax-Prop. Art., § 14-812                         1-8-5
Tax-Prop. Art., § 14-820                         1-8-6
Tax-Prop. Art., § 14-828                         1-8-6
Transp. Art., § 10-706(c)(1)                     1-15-41
Transp. Art., § 11-176                           1-6-23
Transp. Art., § 13-912                           1-11-29
Transp. Art., § 21-101(G-1)                      1-15-30
Transp. Art., § 21-706.1                         1-15-41
Transp. Art., § 25-102                           1-15-6
Transp. Art., § 25-102(b)(2)                     2-11-13
Transp. Art., § 26-301                           1-15-20
                                                  
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
77-14    9-13-1977   1-2-72
79-3     1-3-1979    Chapter 1-8, Art. II
                     Chapter 1-8, Art. II;
79-37    10-9-1979   1-8-21—
                     1-8-30
20-18    7-28-2020   Charter §
                     508
20-19    7-28-2020   Charter §
                     212
20-20    7-28-2020   Charter §
                     209
20-21    7-28-2020   Charter §
                     408
24-23    7-2-2024    Charter §
                     510
24-24    7-2-2024    Charter §
                     412
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. Date   Code Section
No.  Passed
            1-16-3,
            1-16-5,
            1-16-12,
            1-16-29,
76-  1-12-  1-16-72,
1-61 1976   1-16-88,
            1-16-109,
            1-16-235,
            1-16-239,
            1-16-240,
            1-16-241
            1-7-36—
76-  4-5-   1-7-48,
6-66 1976   1-7-61—
            1-7-66
76-  11-22-
11-  1976   1-8-6
71
76-  9-14-
12-  1976   1-14-94
72
76-  11-15- 1-7-16—
15-  1976   1-7-18
75
            1-19-1.100—
            1-19-1.130,
            1-19-2.100,
            1-19-2.120—
            1-19-2.160,
            1-19-2.200,
            1-19-2.220,
            1-19-2.230,
            1-19-3.110.7,
            1-19-3.110.8,
            1-19-3.200.1—
            1-19-3.230,
            1-19-3.300.1,
            1-19-3.300.3,
            1-19-3.300.4,
            1-19-4.100,
            1-19-4.110,
            1-19-4.200—
            1-19-4.230,
            1-19-4.300,
            1-19-4.300.1,
            1-19-4.400,
            1-19-4.500—
            1-19-4.540,
            1-19-4.600—
            1-19-4.630,
            1-19-5.100—
            1-19-5.120,
            1-19-5.200—
            1-19-5.250,
            1-19-5.300,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.100,
            1-19-6.120—
            1-19-6.170,
            1-19-6.200—
77-  1-24-  1-19-6.230,
1-78 1977   1-19-6.300—
            1-19-6.330,
            1-19-7.100,
            1-19-7.200,
            1-19-7.300,
            1-19-7.510,
            1-19-7.610,
            1-19-8.100,
            1-19-8.110,
            1-19-8.205.3,
            1-19-8.240,
            1-19-8.250.1,
            1-19-8.300,
            1-19-8.320,
            1-19-8.322,
            1-19-8.324,
            1-19-8.327,
            1-19-8.329,
            1-19-8.331—
            1-19-8.334,
            1-19-8.338,
            1-19-8.339,
            1-19-8.341,
            1-19-8.342,
            1-19-8.353—
            1-19-8.355,
            1-19-8.460,
            1-19-8.470.2—
            1-19-8.470.7,
            1-19-8.600,
            1-19-9.300,
            1-19-10.100,
            1-19-10.100.2—
            1-19-10.100.5,
            1-19-10.600.1,
            1-19-10.600.2,
            1-19-11.100
77-  1-31-  1-16-12
2-79 1977
77-  8-22-
10-  1977   1-19-4.210
77
77-         1-19-6.320,
10-  8-22-  1-19-7.300,
87   1977   1-19-7.610,
            1-19-10.600.2
77-         1-7-81,
11-  8-22-  1-7-91—
88   1977   1-7-100,
            1-7-102
            1-12-32—
77-  9-6-   1-12-34,
12-  1977   1-12-36—
89          1-12-46,
            1-12-48
77-  10-17-
17-  1977   Ch. 1-5, Art. I
94
77-  12-19- 1-17-75,
21-  1977   1-17-76
98
78-  1-17-
4-   1978   1-19-4.400
102
78-  2-14-  1-18-1—
6-   1978   1-18-5
104
78-  4-3-   1-16-3,
11-  1978   1-16-7
109
78-  5-29-
12-  1978   1-19-9.300
110
78-  1-4-
28-  1979   1-16-5
126
—  3-20-  1-7-41
     1979
79-  2-6-
2-   1979   1-11-3
128
79-  3-27-
5-   1979   1-19-5.310
131
79-  5-1-   1-13-31—
7-   1979   1-13-33
133
79-  5-8-   1-16-3,
10-  1979   1-16-8,
136         1-16-46
79-  8-7-
18-  1978   1-19-5.120
144
            1-19-3.200.1,
            1-19-3.200.2,
79-  8-7-   1-19-4.210,
19-  1979   1-19-5.310,
145         1-19-8.240,
            1-19-8.300,
            1-19-11.100
79-  8-14-
20-  1979   1-11-5
146
79-  9-5-
21-  1979   1-19-8.300
47
79-  —    Ch. 1-8, Art. II
37
80-  1-29-
2-   1980   1-13-18
154
80-  1-29-
3-   1980   1-19-8.600
155
            1-16-5,
            1-16-12,
            1-16-88, 12-16-106,
            1-16-107,
80-  2-13-  1-16-126,
4-   1980   1-16-198,
156         1-16-219,
            1-16-220,
            1-16-234,
            1-16-235,
            1-16-236
80-  4-8-
10-  1980   1-19-8.610
162
80-  4-22-  1-12-21—
11-  1980   1-12-25
163
80-         1-16-3,
15-  6-10-  1-16-5,
167  1980   1-16-7—
            1-16-13
80-         1-6-16—
21-  7-15-  1-6-19,
173  1980   1-6-21,
            1-6-22
80-  7-22-
22-  1980   1-19-10.300
174
80-         1-19-5.310,
24-  8-26-  1-19-8.240,
176  1980   1-19-8.338,
            1-19-11.100
80-  8-26-
25-  1980   1-19-5.310
177
80-  9-9-   1-11-27—
26-  1980   1-11-38
178
80-  9-9-
27-  1980   1-8-6
179
80-         1-19-2.100,
31-  10-7-  1-19-4.210,
183  1980   1-19-5.310,
            1-19-11.100
80-  6-10-
15-  1980   1-16-46
67
81-  1-27-
2-   1981   1-19-5.310
192
81-  1-27-  1-19-7.300,
3-   1981   1-19-7.500
193
81-  3-3-
8-   1981   1-14-94
198
81-  3-10-  1-11-32,
9-   1981   1-11-34,
199         1-11-35
81-  4-28-  1-6-16,
10-  1981   1-6-18A,
200         1-6-18B
81-         1-7-95,
12-  5-12-  1-7-96,
202  1981   1-7-99,
            1-7-100
81-  5-26-  1-19-7.200,
13-  1981   1-19-7.300,
203         1-19-11.100
81-  8-4-   1-19-8.205,
23-  1981   1-19-8.210
213
81-  9-29-
28-  1981   1-19-8.300
218
81-  9-29-  1-19-5.310,
29-  1981   1-19-11.100
219
81-  11-17- 1-14-1,
40-  1981   1-14-56,
230         1-14-94
            1-16-3,
            1-16-5—
            1-16-7,
            1-16-8,
            1-16-12,
81-  12-22- 1-16-59,
44-  1981   1-16-71,
234         1-16-72,
            1-16-88,
            1-16-89,
            1-16-108,
            1-16-219,
            1-16-235
82-  1-26-
1-   1982   1-7-41
245
82-         1-6-16—
6-   4-13-  1-6-19,
250  1982   1-6-21,
            1-6-22
82-  5-18-
7-   1982   1-7-96
251
82-  6-8-   1-19-4.540,
11-  1982   1-19-10.100.2
255
82-  1-26-  1-7-61,
12-  1982   1-7-64
45
82-  8-24-
17-  1982   1-14-94
261
            1-19-3.210,
            1-19-3.300.1,
            1-19-3.300.3,
            1-19-4.520,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.100,
            1-19-8.327,
82-  9-7-   1-19-8.329,
19-  1982   1-19-8.331,
263         1-19-8.333,
            1-19-8.334,
            1-19-8.338,
            1-19-8.341,
            1-19-8.353—
            1-19-8.355,
            1-19-8.460,
            1-19-11.100
83-  4-5-   1-19-2.100,
9-   1983   1-19-2.210,
276         1-19-2.220
83-  6-7-   1-19-7.510,
14-  1983   1-19-8.352
281
83-  6-7-   1-19-5.310,
15-  1983   1-19-8.341
282
            1-16-3,
            1-16-5—
            1-16-9,
            1-16-11,
83-         1-16-59,
18-  6-14-  1-16-60,
285  1983   1-16-71,
            1-16-72,
            1-16-88,
            1-16-126,
            1-16-220,
            1-16-235
83-  10-11-
23-  1983   1-19-5.310
290
83-  12-20-
29-  1983   1-19-5.310
296
84-  4-3-
5-   1984   1-19-5.310
301
84-  4-3-   1-19-4.540,
6-   1984   1-19-10.100.2
302
84-  8-21-
21-  1984   1-19-8.250.1
318
84-  10-23-
27-  1984   Ch. 1-5, Art. I
324
84-  10-23-
28-  1984   Ch. 1-5, Art. I
325
84-  11-27- 1-19-6.310,
31-  1984   1-19-6.320
328
84-         1-6-16,
32-  12-11- 1-6-18A,
329  1984   1-6-18B,
            1-6-22
84-  12-24-
34-  1984   1-19-5.310
331
84-  12-11-
35-  1984   1-16-90
332
85-  1-8-   1-19-5.310,
6-   1985   1-19-8.355
338
85-  3-26-  1-19-3.300.1,
11-  1985   1-19-3.300.3
343
85-  3-26-  1-7-41,
12-  1985   1-7-45,
344         1-7-64
85-  5-28-
22-  1985   1-19-6.320
354
85-  8-8-   1-19-5.250,
34-  1985   1-19-5.310,
366         1-19-6.100
85-  9-3-   1-14-20,
35-  1985   1-14-56,
367         1-14-57, 1-14-94
85-  9-10-
36-  1985   1-16-88
368
85-         1-7-95,
40-  9-24-  1-7-96,
372  1985   1-7-97,
            1-7-99
85-  11-26- 1-6-18A,
43-  1985   1-6-18B
375
85-  12-3-
44-  1985   1-19-6.150
376
85-  12-3-
45-  1985   1-19-5.310
377
86-  1-7-   1-16-2,
1-   1986   1-16-111
378
86-  4-22-
5-   1986   1-19-5.310
382
86-  5-13-
16-  1986   1-19-5.310
393
86-  5-27-  1-11-4,
27-  1986   1-11-5
404
86-
28-  - -    1-11-39
405
86-  5-27-
29-  1986   1-14-57
406
86-  6-10-
35-  1986   1-19-7.300
412
86-  8-26-  1-19-5.310,
37-  1986   1-19-11.100
414
86-  9-23-  1-19-5.310,
49-  1986   1-19-7.610
426
86-  10-28- 1-19-5.310,
53-  1986   1-19-6.100
430
86-  10-28-
54-  1986   1-19-8.300
431
87-  7-21-
20-  1987   1-7-41
452
87-  8-4-
21-  1987   1-16-46
403
87-  8-4-   1-19-2.130,
22-  1987   1-19-3.300.1,
454         1-19-3.300.3
87-  8-4-   1-6-18A,
23-  1987   1-6-18B, 1-14-94
455
88-  1-5-
1-   1988   1-11-39
478
88-  5-3-
12-  1988   1-19-5.310
489
88-  6-21-
30-  1988   1-14-19
507
88-  8-23-  1-6-31—
34-  1988   1-6-46
511
88-  10-18-
35-  1988   1-11-40
512
89-         1-19-5.310,
1-   1-3-   1-19-8.440.1,
532  1989   1-19-10.400.2,
            1-19-11.100
89-  1-3-   1-19-10.100.2,
2-   1989   1-19-11.100
533
89-  1-17-
4-   1989   1-11-41
535
89-  3-7-
14-  1989   1-19-5.310
545
89-  3-21-  1-6-16—
15-  1989   1-6-18B,
546         1-6-22
89-  3-21-
16-  1989   1-19-7.300
547
89-  3-21-
17-  1989   1-11-40
548
89-  6-6-   1-8-151,
24-  1989   1-8-152
555
89-  6-6-   1-19-2.200,
41-  1989   1-19-11.100
572
89-  6-6-
42-  1989   1-19-11.100
573
89-  8-1-   1-2-91—
48-  1989   1-2-94
579
89-  8-15-
49-  1989   1-2-66
580
            1-19-5.310,
89-  8-15-  1-19-6.220,
51-  1989   1-19-8.250.3,
582         1-19-8.329,
            1-19-11.100
89-  9-5-
52-  1989   1-8-2
583
90-  1-29-
01-  1990   1-12-45
599
90-  3-8-
02-  1990   1-16-8
600
90-  2-6-   1-19-5.310,
03-  1990   1-19-8.320
601
90-  2-6-
05-  1990   1-19-8.440.1
603
90-  2-6-
06-  1990   1-12-49
604
90-  5-15-
18-  1990   1-15.2
616
90-  5-15-
21-  1990   1-19-6.310
619
90-  6-9-
22-  1990   1-11-5
620
90-  6-22-
27-  1990   1-6-50
625
90-  6-19-  1-19-5.310,
30-  1990   1-19-11.100
628
90-  6-19-
32-  1990   1-19-8.110
630
90-  8-31-
34-  1990   1-11-40
632
90-  11-9-
43-  1990   1-16-7
641
90-  11-20- 1-19-5.310,
44-  1990   1-19-11.100
642
90-  11-20-
45-  1990   1-19-6.320
643
90-  11-20- 1-19-5.310,
46-  1990   1-19-8.430,
644         1-19-11.100
91-  1-8-
00-  1991   1-7-41
001
91-  1-8-
01-  1991   1-7-64
001
91-  3-22-
02-  1991   1-19-5.310, 1-19-8.300
002
91-         1-6-16,
06-  4-16-  1-6-18A,
006  1991   1-6-18B,
            1-6-22
91-  5-7-
11-  1991   1-15.2
011
91-  6-4-   1-19-5.310,
13-  1991   1-19-11.100
013
91-  6-18-
16-  1991   1-8-4
016
91-  7-2-
18-  1991   1-8-4
018
91-  8-8-   1-6-18A,
19-  1991   1-6-18B
019
91-  8-8-   1-7-64,
20-  1991   1-7-96
020
91-  8-8-   1-14-1,
21-  1991   1-14-94
021
91-  8-20-
22-  1991   1-16-46
022
91-  8-20-
23-  1991   1-19-2.130
023
91-  10-15-
28-  1991   1-20 Art. I
028
91-  11-12- 1-14-56,
30-  1991   1-14-57,
030         1-14-90
91-  11-19- 1-19-10.200—
31-  1991   1-19-10.200.6
031
91-         1-19-5.301,
32-  11-19- 1-19-8.348,
032  1991   1-19-10.800,
            1-19-11.100
91-  12-3-
33-  1991   1-19-8.321
033
91-  12-3-
34-  1991   1-19-8.630
034
92-  1-21-
02-  1992   1-11-3
037
92-  2-18-  1-19-9.100—
04-  1992   1-19-9.130,
039         1-19-11.100
92-  2-18-  1-11-40,
05-  1992   1-11-41
040
92-  6-9-
10-  1992   1-19-10.300
045
92-  7-7-
13-  1992   1-19-9.110
048
            1-16-3,
            1-16-72,
            1-16-88,
92-         1-16-90,
14-  7-7-   1-16-109,
049  1992   1-16-219,
            1-16-234,
            1-16-237,
            1-16-240,
            1-16-241
92-  7-21-  1-2-74—
15-  1992   1-2-80
050
92-  8-18-  1-19-8.240,
19-  1992   1-19-11.100
054
92-  9-22-  1-2-101—
21-  1992   1-2-113
056
92-  10-6-  1-19-5.301,
22-  1992   1-19-8.330,
057         1-19-11.100
92-  10-6-  1-19-5.310,
23-  1992   1-19-6.220,
058         1-19-11.100
92-  10-20-
26-  1992   1-19-6.310
061
93-  1-19-  1-2-101—
02-  1993   1-2-113
066
93-  1-19-
04-  1993   Ch. 1-5, Art. I
068
93-  2-2-   1-16-3,
05-  1993   1-16-12
069
93-  3-2-
06-  1993   1-19-2.220
070
93-  5-4-
10-  1993   Ch. 1-22, Art. I
074
93-  6-1-
13-  1993   1-19-9.110
077
93-  7-20-  1-2-67 -
15-  1993   1-2-69
079
93-  9-7-   1-6-42,
18-  1993   1-6-43
082
93-  9-13-  1-19-5.310,
19-  1993   1-19-11.100
083
93-  10-19-
23-  1983   1-19-6.100
087
93-  11-9-
28-  1993   1-19-5.310
092
94-  4-5-
02-  1994   1-13-34
097
94-  4-19-
03-  1994   1-2-69.1
098
94-  5-31-  1-19-3.300.1,
06-  1994   1-19-3.300.3
101
            1-16-3,
            1-16-12,
            1-16-27,
94-  6-21-  1-16-89,
11-  1994   1-16-107,
106         1-16-109,
            1-16-110,
            1-16-126,
            1-16-236
94-  8-2-
17-  1994   1-19-8.400
112
94-  10-14-
19-  1994   1-19-7.300
114
            1-14-1,
94-         1-14-57,
20-  10-18- 1-14-90,
115  1994   1-14-91.1,
            1-14-95,
            1-14-96
            1-7-39,
            1-7-41,
            1-7-61,
94-         1-7-65,
23-  11-15- 1-7-91—
118  1994   1-7-94,
            1-7-97,
            1-7-99,
            1-7-100,
            1-7-102
94-  11-15- Ch. 1-5, Art. I;
24-  1994   1-6-16
119
94-  12-8-  1-19-8.240,
28-  1994   1-19-11.100
123
            1-19-5.210,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.100,
            1-19-7.200,
            1-19-8.327,
95-  3-2-   1-19-8.329,
02-  1995   1-19-8.331—
126         1-19-8.334,
            1-19-8.338—
            1-19-8.341,
            1-19-8.350,
            1-19-8.354,
            1-19-8.355
95-  5-16-  Ch. 1-20, Art. I;
06-  1995   1-20-12
130
95-  6-20-
10-  1995   1-8-101
134
95-  6-20-
11-  1995   1-8-152
135
95-  7-24-  1-6-16,
13-  1995   1-6-18A,
137         1-6-18B
            1-16-5,
            1-16-8,
            1-16-30,
95-  8-1-   1-16-71,
15-  1995   1-16-72,
139         1-16-88,
            1-16-161,
            1-16-219,
            1-16-242
95-  9-26-
16-  1995   1-11-42
140
95-  12-5-
27-  1995   1-16-71
151
95-  12-5-  1-19-5.310,
28-  1995   1-19-8.240,
152         1-19-8.346
96-  2-6-   1-19-9.200—
02-  1996   1-19-9.220
154
96-  2-20-
04-  1996   1-8-102
156
96-  2-20-
05-  1996   1-8-103 
157
96-  3-12-  1-16-109,
06-  1996   1-16-219,
158         1-19-4.520
96-  4-2-
08-  1996   1-8-104
160
96-  7-1-
14-  1996   1-7-41
166
            1-16-3,
            1-16-8,
96-         1-16-72,
17-  8-6-   1-16-88,
169  1996   1-19-3.300.1,
            1-19-3.300.3,
            1-19-9.300,
            1-19-11.100
96-  11-12- 1-6-61—
23-  1996   1-6-65
175
96-  12-17-
26-  1996   1-19-5.310, 1-19-8.341
178
97-         Ch. 1-15,
01-  1-21-  1-15-1—
179  1997   1-15-8,
            1-15-20
97-  1-21-
02-  1997   1-16-109
180
97-  1-21-
03-  1997   1-19-8.300
181
97-  3-18-
05-  1997   1-19-8.240
183
97-  5-6-
06-  1997   1-19-6.200
184
97-  5-22-
08-  1997   1-19-8.350
186
97-  8-7-
13-  1997   1-8-21
191
            1-23-1—
97-         1-23-6,
16-  12-2-  1-23-7,
194  1997   1-23-10,
            1-23-14—
            1-23-19
97-  12-2-
17-  1997   1-19-5.310, 1-19-8.345
195
97-  12-16-
20-  1997   1-19-7.610
198
98-  2-3-
02-  1998   1-19-8.240
204
            Ch. 1-20, Art. I;
98-  3-17-  1-20-1—
03-  1998   1-20-8,
205         1-20-10—
            1-20-12
98-  4-7-
04-  1998   1-15.2
206
98-  4-21-  1-8-6,
05-  1998   1-8-7
207
98-  4-21-
08-  1998   1-19-5.310
210
98-  5-19-
12-  1998   Ch. 1-22, Art. I
214
98-  6-24-
16-  1998   1-16-90
218
98-         1-19-3.100—
23-  11-10- 1-19-3.100.3,
225  1999   1-19-3.110.2—
            1-19-3.110.7
99-  2-16-
01-  1999   1-19-3.100.3
228
99-  3-16-  1-19-5.310,
02-  1999   1-19-11.100
229
99-  5-18-
06-  1999   1-19-5.310
233
99-  5-18-
07-  1999   Ch. 1-22, Art. I
234
99-         1-6-16,
10-  6-29-  1-6-18A,
237  1999   1-6-18B,
            1-6-20
99-  7-29-  1-14-56,
11-  1999   1-14-57,
238         1-14-91.1
            1-19-5.310,
99-         1-19-8.205.2,
14-  11-23- 1-19-8.332,
241  1999   1-19-8.420.1,
            1-19-8.420.2,
            1-19-11.100
00-  4-4-
04-  2000   1-19-5.310
246
00-  5-23-
06-  2000   1-8-51
248
00-  5-30-
10-  2000   1-8-151
252
00-  5-30-
12-  2000   1-8-152
254
00-  7-11-  1-20-8,
19-  2000   1-20-10
261
00-         1-16-8,
20-  7-18-  1-16-30,
262  2000   1-16-32,
            1-16-71
            1-19-3.300.1,
            1-19-3.300.3,
00-  7-18-  1-19-7.200,
21-  2000   1-19-7.300,
263         1-19-10.100.5,
            1-19-10.200.5,
            1-19-10.300
00-  7-27-
24-  2000   1-16-106 
266
00-  8-1-
25-  2000   1-19-8.600
267
            1-19-3.200.1,
            1-19-3.200.2,
00-  9-7-   1-19-3.210,
28-  2000   1-19-4.110,
270         1-19-5.310,
            1-19-8.339,
            1-19-11.100
00-  9-14-  1-19-8.500—
29-  2000   1-19-8.500.16
271
00-  12-21- 1-22-1—
30-  2000   1-22-8
272
00-  12-21- 1-22-11,
31-  2000   1-22-12,
273         1-22-14
00-  12-21- 1-22-21,
32-  2000   1-22-22
274
01-  2-20-
02-  2001   1-16-12
276
01-  3-6-
03-  2001   1-19-5.310
277
01-  4-17-
06-  2001   1-12-21
280
01-  5-22-  1-8-151,
08-  2001   1-8-152
282
01-  6-5-   1-15.2, 1-15.2-1—1-15.2-12, 1-15.2-16—1-15.2-19, 1-15.2-27—1-15.2-28,
10-  2001   1-15.2-42—1-15.2-43, 1-15.2-50—1-15.2-52, 1-15.2-60—1-15.2-63
284
01-         1-14-1,
16-  7-12-  1-14-36—
290  2001   1-14-40,
            1-14-91.1
01-  10-16-
19-  2001   1-7-99
293
            1-21-1—
01-         1-21-9,
20-  9-25-  1-21-20—
294  2001   1-21-34,
            1-21-40—
            1-21-52
01-  12-18- 1-8-71—
22-  2001   1-8-81
296
02-  1-15-
01-  2002   1-13-35
297
02-  3-5-
03-  2002   1-13-1
299
02-  4-4-   1-6-16—
06-  2002   1-6-18B
302
02-  4-4-   1-7-41,
07-  2002   1-7-49
303
02-  4-4-   1-14-56,
08-  2002   1-14-57
304
02-  4-23-
09-  2002   1-8-201
305
02-  5-30-
11-  2002   1-2-69.2
307
02-  6-14-
13-  2002   1-19-2.150
309
02-  8-6-   1-2-70—
18-  2002   1-2-73.1
314
02-  10-15-
20-  2002   1-13-35
316
02-         1-19-3.200.1,
21-  10-15- 1-19-3.200.2,
317  2002   1-19-3.300.1,
            1-19-3.300.3
02-  11-12-
23-  2002   1-19-2.150
319
02-  11-12- 1-8-62,
24-  2002   1-8-63
320
02-  11-21- 1-6A-3—
25-  2002   1-6A-13
321
            1-19-4.520,
            1-19-5.230,
            1-19-6.100,
02-  11-21- 1-19-8.470.2,
26-  2002   1-19-8.620.1—
322         1-19-8.620.6,
            1-19-10.100.1,
            1-19-10.200.1,
            1-19-10.600.2
02-  11-19-
27-  2002   1-8-1
323
03-  3-4-
03-  2003   1-19-11.100
326
03-  4-21-
04-  2003   1-19-6.320
327
03-  5-20-  1-8-151,
06-  2003   1-8-152
329
03-  11-21- 1-19-8.620.5,
09-  2002   1-19-11.100
322
03-  6-3-   1-19-5.310,
09-  2003   1-19-6.100
332
03-  6-17-  1-8-301,
10-  2003   1-8-302
333
03-  7-15-  1-8-74,
12-  2003   1-8-76
335
03-  9-2-   1-20-5,
13-  2003   1-20-8
336
03-  9-25-  1-8-161—
14-  2003   1-8-165
337
03-  10-7-  1-2-105—
15-  2003   1-2-108,
338         1-2-110
03-  11-18- 1-22-12,
16-  2003   1-22-22
339
03-  12-16-
20-  2003   1-2-95
343
04-  2-17-
01-  2004   1-8-62
345
04-  4-20-
04-  2004   1-15.1
348
04-  5-25-
06-  2004   1-8-104
350
04-  7-15-  1-8-161—
11-  2004   1-8-168
355
04-  8-17-  1-5-1,
13-  2004   1-5-22,
357         1-5-50
04-  10-19-
14-  2004   1-8-411
358
04-  12-21-
17-  2004   1-15-30 
361
05-  1-18-
01-  2005   1-2-69.1
362
05-  2-15-
03-  2005   1-8-303
364
05-  3-29-
04-  2005   1-8-421
365
05-  4-26-
05-  2005   1-8-303
366
05-  5-12-
06-  2005   1-8-65
367
05-  5-17-
08-  2005   1-8-104
369
05-  5-17-
10-  2005   1-8-152
371
05-  6-23-
15-  2005   1-8-8
376
05-  6-23-  1-5-33—
16-  2005   1-5-35
377
05-  9-27-  1-19-5.310,
25-  2005   1-19-11.100
386
05-  10-11-
26-  2005   1-2-92
387
            1-16-8,
            1-16-30,
            1-16-71,
            1-19-3.200.1,
05-         1-19-3.200.2,
27-  10-25- 1-19-3.230,
388  2005   1-19-3.300.1,
            1-19-3.300.3,
            1-19-7.200,
            1-19-7.300,
            1-19-8.500.5,
            1-19-10.100.5
05-  10-25- 1-19-5.310,
29-  2005   1-19-11.100
390
05-  11-15-
30-  2005   1-19-4.230
391
05-  11-29- 1-6-16,
31-  2005   1-6-18A,
392         1-6-18B
05-  11-29-
32-  2005   1-7-41
393
05-  11-29- 1-14-56,
33-  2005   1-14-57
394
05-  12-1-
34-  2005   1-14-2
395
            1-12-1—
05-         1-12-7,
35-  10-25- 1-12-20—
396  2005   1-12-27,
            1-12-30—
            1-12-49
06-  1-17-
03-  2006   1-11-43
399
            1-20-5,
06-         1-20-31,
04-  1-17-  1-20-41,
400  2006   1-20-51,
            1-20-60,
            1-20-61
06-  1-26-
05-  2006   1-11-44
401
06-  3-7-   1-2-121—
06-  2006   1-2-127
402
06-  3-21-
07-  2006   1-8-51
403
06-  4-4-
08-  2006   1-20-10
404
06-  5-15-
13-  2006   1-8-151
409
06-  5-16-
14-  2006   1-8-104
410
06-  5-16-
16-  2006   1-19-6.310
412
06-  6-6-   1-22-12,
19-  2006   1-22-22
415
06-  6-20-
23-  2006   1-13-34
419
06-  6-20-  1-19-4.300.1, 1-19-8.250.1,
24-  2006   1-19-11.100
420
06-  7-20-
26-  2006   1-2-69.1
422
06-  8-15-
27-  2006   1-8-161
423
06-  9-26-
28-  2006   1-2-69.1
424
06-  9-26-
32-  2006   1-13-35
428
06-  11-30- 1-19-5.310,
42-  2006   1-19-11.100
438
07-  1-16-  1-8-72,
02-  2007   1-8-77,
442         1-8-78
07-  2-20-
04-  2007   1-20-7
444
07-  3-20-
07-  2007   1-19-6.130
447
07-         1-16-31,
08-  4-3-   1-19-3.100.2,
448  2007   1-20-23,
            1-21-22
07-  4-12-
09-  2007   1-8-4
449
07-  4-17-  1-19-6.200,
11-  2007   1-19-6.210
451
07-  4-24-
13-  2007   1-8-51
453
07-  5-15-
15-  2007   1-8-104
455
            1-6-50,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-7.100,
07-  5-15-  1-19-8.324,
16-  2007   1-19-8.331,
456         1-19-8.334,
            1-19-8.348,
            1-19-8.352,
            1-19-11.100
07-         1-19-10.500, 1-19-10.700.2,
21-  6-12-  1-19-11.100,
461  2007   1-20-5,
            1-20-7
            1-12-1 -
07-         1-12-7,
23-  6-26-  1-12-20 -
463  2007   1-12-27,
            1-12-30 -
            1-12-49
07-  7-10-  1-19-9.400,
24-  2007   1-19-11.100
464
            1-21-2,
            1-21-5 -
            1-21-7,
            1-21-10,
            1-21-20,
07-         1-21-22,
25-  7-19-  1-21-25,
465  2007   1-21-28,
            1-21-29,
            1-21-30,
            1-21-41 -
            1-21-44,
            1-21-51,
            1-21-52
07-  8-7-   1-20-5,
26-  2007   1-20-7
466
            1-19-3.300.2,
            1-19-5.240,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.100,
07-         1-19-6.240,
27-  6-19-  1-19-7.500,
467  2007   1-19-8.324,
            1-19-8.460,
            1-19-8.470.1,
            1-19-8.470.4,
            1-19-8.470.5,
            1-19-11.100
            1-19-2.200,
            1-19-9.100—
            1-19-9.130,
07-  9-4-   1-19-9.200—
29-  2007   1-19-9.220,
469         1-19-9.400,
            1-19-10.100.3,
            1-19-10.200.3,
            1-19-11.100
07-  9-25-  1-2-126,
30-  2007   1-2-127
470
07-         1-19-5.310,
31-  10-15- 1-19-6.100,
471  2007   1-19-8.450,
            1-19-11.100
07-  7-17-  1-19-8.338,
32-  2007   1-19-11.100
472
07-  11-15- 1-25-1 –
33-  2007   1-25-14
473
07-  11-6-  1-19-8.220,
34-  2007   1-19-11.100
474
07-  11-27-
35-  2007   1-13-35
475
07-  12-18-
36-  2007   1-16-5
476
08-  1-8-
01-  2008   1-16-8
477
08-  1-8-
02-  2008   1-20-7
478
08-  1-8-   1-20-12,
03-  2008   1-20-31
479
08-  2-14-
04-  2008   1-8-9
480
08-  2-5-
05-  2008   1-19-6.100
481
08-  4-10-
07-  2008   1-19-5.310
483
08-  5-20-
13-  2008   1-11-44
489
08-  6-3-
14-  2008   1-20-61
490
08-  6-12-  1-22-12,
15-  2008   1-22-22
491
08-  6-17-  1-14-56,
16-  2008   1-14-57
492
08-  6-17-
17-  2008   1-7-41
493
08-  6-17-  1-6-16,
18-  2008   1-6-18A,
494         1-6-18B
08-  5-20-  1-19-6.100,
19-  2008   1-19-7.200
495
08-  7-17-  1-20-5,
20-  2008   1-20-7
496
08-  8-5-   1-19-9.110,
21-  2008   1-19-9.400,
497         1-19-11.100
08-  8-6-   1-21-6,
22-  2008   1-21-30,
498         1-21-34
08-  9-23-
24-  2008   1-5-26
500
            1-16-3,
            1-19-1.100—
            1-19-1.130,
            1-19-2.100—
            1-19-2.160,
            1-19-2.200—
            1-19-2.230,
            1-19-3.100—
            1-19-3.100.3,
            1-19-3.110.2—
            1-19-3.110.8,
            1-19-3.200.1—
            1-19-3.230,
            1-19-3.300.1—
            1-19-3.300.4,
            1-19-4.100,
            1-19-4.110,
            1-19-4.200—
            1-19-4.230,
            1-19-4.300,
            1-19-4.300.1,
            1-19-4.400,
            1-19-4.500—
            1-19-4.540,
            1-19-4.600—
            1-19-4.630,
            1-19-5.100—
            1-19-5.120,
            1-19-5.200—
            1-19-5.250,
            1-19-5.300,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.100—
            1-19-6.170,
            1-19-6.200—
            1-19-6.240,
            1-19-6.300—
            1-19-6.330,
            1-19-7.100,
            1-19-7.200,
            1-19-7.300,
            1-19-7.400,
            1-19-7.500,
            1-19-7.510,
            1-19-7.600—
            1-19-7.620,
08-  10-14- 1-19-8.100,
26-  2008   1-19-8.110,
502         1-19-8.205.1—
            1-19-8.205.3,
            1-19-8.220,
            1-19-8.240,
            1-19-8.250.1,
            1-19-8.250.3,
            1-19-8.300—
            1-19-8.322,
            1-19-8.324,
            1-19-8.327,
            1-19-8.329—
            1-19-8.334,
            1-19-8.338—
            1-19-8.342,
            1-19-8.345,
            1-19-8.346,
            1-19-8.348,
            1-19-8.350,
            1-19-8.352—
            1-19-8.355,
            1-19-8.400—
            1-19-8.470.7,
            1-19-8.500—
            1-19-8.500.16,
            1-19-8.600—
            1-19-8.630,
            1-19-8.700,
            1-19-9.100—
            1-19-9.130,
            1-19-9.200—
            1-19-9.220,
            1-19-9.300,
            1-19-9.400,
            1-19-10.100—
            1-19-10.100.5,
            1-19-10.200—
            1-19-10.200.6,
            1-19-10.300,
            1-19-10.600—
            1-19-10.600.2,
            1-19-10.800,
            1-19-11.100,
            1-20-5,
            1-20-7,
            1-21-5,
            1-21-31,
            1-21-40
            1-7-39—
08-         1-7-39.2,
28-  11-25- 1-14-19—
504  2008   1-14-22,
            1-14-37,
            1-14-39
09-  12-2-
03-  2008   1-12-45
507
09-  2-17-  1-19-2.160,
05-  2009   1-19-11.100
509
09-  4-21-
09-  2009   1-2-93
513
09-  4-28-
10-  2009   1-11-44
514
09-  4-28-  1-19-8.205.4 -
11-  2009   1-19-8.205.6,
515         1-19-11.100
09-  5-19-  1-8-401,
13-  2009   1-8-404,
517         1-8-405
09-  7-7-   1-20-5,
19-  2009   1-20-8,
523         1-20-61
            1-20-4—
            1-20-8,
            1-20-10,
09-  7-7-   1-20-12,
20-  2009   1-20-20,
524         1-20-21,
            1-20-23,
            1-20-30,
            1-20-31
            1-19-3.210,
            1-19-4.110,
            1-19-4.300,
            1-19-4.300.1,
            1-19-5.210,
            1-19-5.260,
            1-19-5.300,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.100,
            1-19-6.220,
            1-19-6.320,
            1-19-7.510,
            1-19-7.600,
            1-19-8.200,
            1-19-8.205—
            1-19-8.205.3,
            1-19-8.211,
09-         1-19-8.220—
21-  6-4-   1-19-8.240,
525  2009   1-19-8.327,
            1-19-8.329,
            1-19-8.331,
            1-19-8.333,
            1-19-8.334,
            1-19-8.338,
            1-19-8.340,
            1-19-8.341,
            1-19-8.346,
            1-19-8.347,
            1-19-8.350,
            1-19-8.354—
            1-19-8.355,
            1-19-8.410,
            1-19-8.480,
            1-19-8.490,
            1-19-10.900,
            1-19-10.1000,
            1-19-11.100
            1-19-2.110,
            1-19-2.160,
            1-19-3.300,
            1-19-3.300.1,
            1-19-3.300.3,
            1-19-3.300.4,
09-         1-19-4.110,
22-  7-14-  1-19-5.300,
526  2009   1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.400,
            1-19-6.500,
            1-19-8.250.1,
            1-19-8.300,
            1-19-8.620.1,
            1-19-10.900,
            1-19-10.1000
09-  7-16-
24-  2009   1-16-236
528
            1-21-7,
09-         1-21-24,
26-  9-29-  1-21-32,
530  2009   1-21-40,
            1-21-41,
            1-21-45
            1-19-2.110,
            1-19-2.150,
            1-19-2.200,
            1-19-2.210,
            1-19-3.100.1—
            1-19-3.100.3,
            1-19-3.110.1—
09-         1-19-3.110.5,
27-  11-3-  1-19-3.110.7,
531  2009   1-19-3.110.8,
            1-19-3.200—
            1-19-3.230,
            1-19-4.200,
            1-19-4.220,
            1-19-4.230,
            1-19-8.480,
            1-19-8.500.5,
            1-19-11.100
09-  11-16-
28-  2009   1-20-3
532
            1-2-16,
09-         1-2-17,
29-  12-15- 1-2-22,
533  2009   1-2-24,
            1-2-36,
            1-2-37
            1-19-6.200—
            1-19-6.220,
            1-19-6.320,
10-         1-19-6.400,
01-  1-19-  1-19-6.500,
536  2010   1-19-7.500,
            1-19-7.510,
            1-19-7.600,
            1-19-7.610,
            1-19-11.100
10-  2-23-
02-  2010   1-8-303
537
10-  3-11-  1-19-5.310,
04-  2010   1-19-8.230.3,
539         1-19-8.323
            1-15.2-1.0,
            1-15.2-2.0,
            1-15.2-3.1—
            1-15.2-3.6,
            1-15.2-4.1,
            1-15.2-4.2,
            1-15.2-5.1,
10-         1-15.2-5.2,
09-  5-20-  1-15.2-6.1—
544  2010   1-15.2-6.3,
            1-15.2-7.1,
            1-15.2-7.2,
            1-15.2-8.1,
            1-15.2-8.2,
            1-15.2-9.1—
            1-15.2-9.3,
            1-15.2-10.1—
            1-15.2-10.3
10-  6-1-   1-22-12,
12-  2010   1-22-22
547
10-  6-8-   1-6-16—
13-  2010   1-6-22
548
            1-7-17,
            1-7-37,
            1-7-42,
            1-7-45—
            1-7-47,
10-         1-7-49,
14-  6-8-   1-7-61,
549  2010   1-7-62,
            1-7-65,
            1-7-81,
            1-7-92,
            1-7-95,
            1-7-97,
            1-7-102
            1-14-1—
            1-14-5,
            1-14-39—
10-         1-14-41,
15-  6-8-   1-14-56,
550  2010   1-14-57,
            1-14-90—
            1-14-91.1,
            1-14-95—
            1-14-99
10-  6-15-
17-  2010   1-19-8.205.2
552
10-  5-4-   1-19-5.260,
18-  2010   1-19-5.310,
533         1-19-8.480
10-  7-13-  1-23-3,
19-  2010   1-23-7
554
10-  8-24-  1-19-5.310,
20-  2010   1-19-11.100
555
            1-16-2—
            1-16-12,
            1-16-26—
            1-16-31,
            1-16-46,
            1-16-59,
            1-16-60,
            1-16-71,
            1-16-72,
            1-16-86—
            1-16-93,
            1-16-104,
            1-16-106—
10-         1-16-110,
23-  10-19- 1-16-126,
558  2010   1-16-141,
            1-16-161,
            1-16-163,
            1-16-179,
            1-16-191,
            1-16-192,
            1-16-195,
            1-16-196,
            1-16-198,
            1-16-216,
            1-16-219—
            1-16-221,
            1-16-234—
            1-16-237,
            1-16-240
10-  11-16-
25-  2010   1-22-7
560
            1-6A-5,
            1-6A-10,
            1-16-141,
            1-16-142,
            1-19-2.130,
            1-19-4.520,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.200,
            1-19-6.220,
            1-19-6.500,
            1-19-7.620,
            1-19-8.420.2,
            1-19-8.620.2,
10-         1-19-8.620.3,
26-  11-9-  1-19-10.500—
561  2010   1-19-10.500.11,
            1-20-5,
            1-20-7,
            1-20-8,
            1-20-10—
            1-20-12,
            1-20-20,
            1-20-41,
            1-20-51,
            1-20-61,
            1-21-5,
            1-21-30,
            1-21-31,
            1-21-33,
            1-21-42
            1-19-5.260,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.220,
10-  12-21- 1-19-8.480,
31-  2010   1-19-9.100,
566         1-19-9.110,
            1-19-9.300,
            1-19-10.900,
            1-19-11.100
11-  3-1-
02-  2011   1-20-3
568
11-  3-1-
04-  2011   1-15.2-5.1
570
11-  3-15-  1-14-90,
05-  2011   1-14-90.1
571
            1-19-3.300.1,
            1-19-3.300.2,
            1-19-4.530,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.320,
11-         1-19-6.340,
06-  5-17-  1-19-7.500,
572  2011   1-19-7.610,
            1-19-8.205.7,
            1-19-8.441,
            1-19-8.620.5,
            1-19-10.300,
            1-19-10.1000,
            1-19-11.100
11-  5-19-
07-  2011   1-8-104
573
11-         1-11-30,
13-  6-7-   1-11-36,
579  2011   1-11-39—
            1-11-42
11-  6-16-  1-8-431—
14-  2011   1-8-436
580
11-  6-16-
15-  2011   1-8-303
581
11-  7-19-  1-20-5,
17-  2011   1-20-7
583
11-  7-19-  1-20-5,
18-  2011   1-20-11,
584         1-20-62
            1-21-24,
            1-21-25,
11-         1-21-29—
19-  7-28-  1-21-31,
585  2011   1-21-40—
            1-21-42,
            1-21-44,
            1-21-51
11-  9-6-   1-6A-5,
20-  2011   1-6A-5.1
586
            1-20-4,
11-         1-20-5,
21-  9-6-   1-20-8,
587  2011   1-20-12,
            1-20-30,
            1-20-31
11-  9-29-  1-14-1,
22-  2011   1-14-57
588
11-  11-1-
23-  2011   1-8-73
589
11-  11-3-
24-  2011   1-8-51
590
            1-6A-5,
            1-16-141,
            1-16-142,
            1-19-2.130,
            1-19-4.520,
            1-19-5.240,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.100,
            1-19-6.220,
            1-19-6.320,
            1-19-6.500,
            1-19-7.510,
            1-19-7.600,
            1-19-7.610,
            1-19-8.211—
            1-19-8.213,
            1-19-8.300,
            1-19-8.321,
            1-19-8.338,
            1-19-8.405,
            1-19-8.406,
11-         1-19-8.420.2,
25-  10-27- 1-19-8.430,
591  2011   1-19-8.620.2,
            1-19-8.620.3,
            1-19-10.500.1,
            1-19-10.500.2,
            1-19-10.500.5—
            1-19-10.500.8,
            1-19-10.500.10,
            1-19-10.1000,
            1-19-11.100,
            1-20-5,
            1-20-7,
            1-20-8,
            1-20-10—
            1-20-12,
            1-20-20,
            1-20-41,
            1-20-51,
            1-20-61,
            1-21-5,
            1-21-30,
            1-21-31,
            1-21-33,
            1-21-42
11-  11-17- 1-7.1-1—
26-  2011   1-7.1-10
592
            1-6A-5,
            1-19-5.240,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.100,
11-  11-22- 1-19-7.520,
28-  2011   1-19-8.212,
594         1-19-8.321,
            1-19-8.405,
            1-19-8.620.2,
            1-19-8.620.3,
            1-19-8.620.5
12-  1-3-
01-  2012   1-8-66
596
12-  2-7-
02-  2012   1-15-41
597
12-  2-21-  1-19-10.500.4,
04-  2012   1-20-20,
599         1-25-4
            1-6A-5,
            1-19-3.110.2,
            1-19-4.300.1,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.220,
            1-19-6.310,
            1-19-6.320,
            1-19-8.230.1,
12-         1-19-8.240,
08-  4-17-  1-19-8.320,
603  2012   1-19-8.325,
            1-19-8.326,
            1-19-8.407,
            1-19-8.410,
            1-19-8.620.2,
            1-19-8.620.3,
            1-19-8.620.5,
            1-19-10.400.1—
            1-19-10.400.8,
            1-19-11.100
            1-6-16,
12-  6-14-  1-6-17,
11-  2012   1-6-18A,
606         1-6-18B,
            1-6-20
12-         1-14-1,
12-  6-14-  1-14-56,
607  2012   1-14-57,
            1-14-90.1
12-         1-7-37,
13-  6-14-  1-7-41,
608  2012   1-7-61,
            1-7-102
12-  6-19-
14-  2012   1-20-62
609
12-  6-19-
16-  2012   1-17-72
611
12-  6-21-  1-19-8.420.1,
17-  2012   1-19-8.420.2
612
12-  8-2-
19-  2012   1-8-61
614
12-  9-13-
21-  2012   1-8-304
616
            1-19-5.310,
12-  9-6-   1-19-6.100,
23-  2012   1-19-8.337,
618         1-19-8.339,
            1-19-11.100
            1-16-3,
            1-16-5 -
            1-16-8,
            1-16-12,
            1-16-60,
            1-16-72,
12-         1-16-87 -
25-  9-27-  1-16-89,
620  2012   1-16-93,
            1-16-108,
            1-16-161,
            1-16-162,
            1-16-179,
            1-16-219,
            1-16-234,
            1-16-236
            1-10-1 -
            1-10-6,
            1-10-16 -
12-         1-10-19,
27-  11-8-  1-10-26 -
622  2012   1-10-32,
            1-10-36,
            1-10-37,
            1-10-46 -
            1-10-48
12-  12-4-  1-11-40,
30-  2012   1-11-41
625
13-  1-8-   1-2-60 -
01-  2013   1-2-69.2
629
13-  2-28-
02-  2013   1-24
630
13-  5-9-
04-  2013   1-8-104
632
13-  5-30-  1-15.2-11.0 -
06-  2013   1-15.2-11.6
634
13-  6-20-  1-8-151,
11-  2013   1-8-152
639
13-  6-20-
12-  2013   1-8-411
640
13-  6-25-
13-  2013   1-11-21
641
            1-25-1 -
             1-25-3,
13-  8-8-   1-25-5,
16-  2013   1-25-7 -
644         1-25-9,
            1-25-11,
            1-25-14
13-  9-12-  1-2-106,
17-  2013   1-2-109
645
13-  9-26-  1-21-5,
18-  2013   1-21-7
646
13-  10-24-
21-  2013   1-15-30
649
13-  10-31-
23-  2013   1-19-9.400
651
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.310,
            1-19-6.400,
            1-19-6.500,
            1-19-8.230.4,
13-  10-31- 1-19-8.322.1,
25-  2013   1-19-8.322.2,
653         1-19-8.344,
            1-19-8.620.1,
            1-19-8.620.5,
            1-19-10.500.9,
            1-19-10.900,
            1-19-11.100
13-         1-7.1-3,
27-  12-5-  1-7.1-4,
655  2013   1-7.1-6,
            1-7.1-7
14-  4-29-
02-  2014   1-8-66
657
14-  5-22-
05-  2014   1-19-8.240
660
14-  6-17-
06-  2014   1-8-51
661
            1-22-1  -
            1-22-8 ,
14-  6-17-  1-22-11 ,
07-  2014   1-22-12 ,
662         1-22-14 ,
            1-22-21 ,
            1-22-22
14-  6-19-
08-  2014   1-8-161
663
14-  9-4-   1-2-106,
14-  2014   1-2-108
669
14-  9-23-
15-  2014   1-20-62
670
14-  9-25-
19-  2014   1-22-7
674
            1-1-1 -
            1-1-8,
            1-2-1,
            1-2-16,
            1-2-17,
            1-2-22,
            1-2-24,
            1-2-36,
            1-2-37,
            1-2-49 -
            1-2-52,
            1-2-60 -
            1-2-69.2,
            1-2-70 -
            1-2-73.1,
            1-2-74 -
            1-2-80,
            1-2-91 -
            1-2-95,
            1-2-101 -
            1-2-113,
            1-2-121 -
            1-2-127,
            1-3-1 -
            1-3-12,
            1-4-1 -
            1-4-7,
            1-4-21 -
            1-4-24,
            1-5-1 -
            1-5-9,
            1-5-22 -
            1-5-26,
            1-5-33 -
            1-5-37,
            1-5-49 -
            1-5-53,
            1-6-16 -
            1-6-22,
            1-6-31 -
            1-6-46,
            1-6-50,
            1-6-61 -
            1-6-66,
            1-6A-3 -
            1-6A-13,
            1-7-16 -
            1-7-18,
            1-7-36 -
            1-7-49,
            1-7-61 -
            1-7-66,
            1-7-81,
            1-7-91 -
            1-7-100,
            1-7-102,
            1-7.1-1 -
            1-7.1-10,
            1-8-1 -
            1-8-9,
            1-8-21 -
            1-8-30,
            1-8-51,
            1-8-61 -
            1-8-66,
            1-8-71 -
            1-8-81,
            1-8-101 -
            1-8-104,
            1-8-151,
            1-8-152,
            1-8-161 -
            1-8-168,
            1-8-201,
            1-8-301 -
            1-8-304,
            1-8-401 -
            1-8-405,
            1-8-411,
            1-8-421,
            1-8-431 -
            1-8-436,
            1-9-21 -
            1-9-26,
            1-10-1 -
            1-10-6,
            1-10-16 -
            1-10-19,
            1-10-26 -
            1-10-32,
            1-10-36,
            1-10-37,
            1-10-46 -
            1-10-48,
            1-11-1 -
            1-11-5,
            1-11-21,
            1-11-27 -
            1-11-44,
            1-12-1 -
            1-12-7,
            1-12-20 -
            1-12-27,
            1-12-30 -
            1-12-49,
            1-13-1,
            1-13-16 -
            1-13-21,
            1-13-31 -
            1-13-35,
            1-14-1 -
            1-14-5,
            1-14-19 -
            1-14-22,
            1-14-36 -
            1-14-41,
            1-14-56 -
            1-14-59,
            1-14-90 -
            1-14-91.1,
            1-14-93 -
            1-14-99,
            1-15-1 -
            1-15-8,
            1-15-20,
            1-15-30,
            1-15-41,
            1-15.2-1.0,
            1-15.2-2.0,
            1-15.2-3.1 -
            1-15.2-3.6,
            1-15.2-4.1,
            1-15.2-4.2,
            1-15.2-5.1,
            1-15.2-5.2,
            1-15.2-6.1 -
            1-15.2-6.3,
            1-15.2-7.1,
            1-15.2-7.2,
            1-15.2-8.1,
            1-15.2-8.2,
            1-15.2-9.1 -
            1-15.2-9.3,
            1-15.2-10.1 -
            1-15.2-10.3,
            1-15.2-11.0 -
            1-15.2-11.6,
            1-16-1 -
14-         1-16-13,
23-  11-13- 1-16-26 -
678  2014   1-16-32,
            1-16-46,
            1-16-59,
            1-16-60,
            1-16-71,
            1-16-72,
            1-16-86 -
            1-16-93,
            1-16-104 -
            1-16-111,
            1-16-126,
            1-16-141,
            1-16-142,
            1-16-161 -
            1-16-163,
            1-16-179,
            1-16-191 -
            1-16-199,
            1-16-216 -
            1-16-221,
            1-16-234 -
            1-16-242,
            1-17-1 -
            1-17-5,
            1-17-21 -
            1-17-29,
            1-17-46 -
            1-17-52,
            1-17-71 -
            1-17-77,
            1-18-1 -
            1-18-5,
            1-19-1.100 -
            1-19-1.130,
            1-19-2.100 -
            1-19-2.160,
            1-19-2.200 -
            1-19-2.230,
            1-19-3.100 -
            1-19-3.110.8,
            1-19-3.200 -
            1-19-3.230,
            1-19-3.300 -
            1-19-3.300.4,
            1-19-4.100,
            1-19-4.110,
            1-19-4.200 -
            1-19-4.230,
            1-19-4.300,
            1-19-4.300.1,
            1-19-4.400,
            1-19-4.500 -
            1-19-4.540,
            1-19-4.600 -
            1-19-4.630,
            1-19-5.100 -
            1-19-5.120,
            1-19-5.200 -
            1-19-5.260,
            1-19-5.300,
            1-19-5.310,
            1-19-6.100 -
            1-19-6.170,
            1-19-6.200 -
            1-19-6.240,
            1-19-6.300 -
            1-19-6.340,
            1-19-6.400,
            1-19-6.500,
            1-19-7.100,
            1-19-7.200,
            1-19-7.300,
            1-19-7.400,
            1-19-7.500 -
            1-19-7.520,
            1-19-7.600 -
            1-19-7.620,
            1-19-8.100,
            1-19-8.110,
            1-19-8.200 -
            1-19-8.250.3,
            1-19-8.300 -
            1-19-8.355,
            1-19-8.400 -
            1-19-8.490,
            1-19-8.500 -
            1-19-8.500.16,
            1-19-8.600 -
            1-19-8.630,
            1-19-8.700,
            1-19-9.100 -
            1-19-9.130,
            1-19-9.200 -
            1-19-9.220,
            1-19-9.300,
            1-19-9.400,
            1-19-10.100 -
            1-19-10.100.5,
            1-19-10.200 -
            1-19-10.200.6,
            1-19-10.300,
            1-19-10.400 -
            1-19-10.400.8,
            1-19-10.500 -
            1-19-10.500.11,
            1-19-10.600 -
            1-19-10.600.2,
            1-19-10.800,
            1-19-10.900,
            1-19-10.1000,
            1-19-11.100,
            1-20-1 -
            1-20-8,
            1-20-10 -
            1-20-12,
            1-20-20 -
            1-20-24,
            1-20-30,
            1-20-31,
            1-20-40,
            1-20-41,
            1-20-50,
            1-20-51,
            1-20-60 -
            1-20-62,
            1-21-1 -
            1-21-10,
            1-21-20 -
            1-21-29,
            1-21-30 -
            1-21-34,
            1-21-40 -
            1-21-45,
            1-21-50 -
            1-21-52,
            1-22-1 -
            1-22-8,
            1-22-11,
            1-22-12,
            1-22-14,
            1-22-21,
            1-22-22,
            1-23-1 -
            1-23-6,
            1-23-7,
            1-23-10,
            1-23-14 -
            1-23-19,
            1-25-1 -
            1-25-14
14-  11-20- 1-19-8.214,
26-  2014   1-19-11.100
681
14-  11-18-
30-  2014   1-19-7.300
685
           
 
REFERENCES TO BILLS
Bill No. Date Passed Code Section
Bill No.       Date Passed Code Section
15-02          4-30-2015   1-8-104
                           1-6-16,
15-03          6-16-2015   1-6-18A,
                           1-6-18B
15-04          6-16-2015   1-7-41
15-05          7-7-2015    1-14-56,
                           1-14-57
                           1-6A-3,
15-06          7-7-2015    1-6A-5.2,
                           1-6A-9
15-07          8-18-2015   1-2-16
15-09          9-1-2015    1-8-441 -
                           1-8-445
15-10          10-6-2015   1-18-6
15-12          12-1-2015   1-19-9.400
16-01          3-1-2016    1-7.1-1 -
                           1-7.1-11
                           1-22-11 -
16-04          4-5-2016    1-22-13,
                           1-22-21 -
                           1-22-23
16-05          4-5-2016    1-20-62
16-06          3-8-2016    1-2-126
16-07          8-15-2016   1-19-7.300
16-08          8-15-2016   1-6A-5,
                           1-6A-5.1
16-09          8-30-2016   1-20-11,
                           1-20-62
                           1-19-10.500.4,
16-10          9-6-2016    1-20-20,
                           1-25-4
16-11          8-30-2016   1-19-3.110.7
16-13          8-30-2016   1-8-162
16-14          9-20-2016   1-2-60 -
                           1-2-69
16-15          11-1-2016   1-11-6,
                           1-11-7
16-16          10-4-2016   1-1-9
16-17          11-15-2016  1-8-451 -
                           1-8-456
16-18          2-21-2017   1-8-461 -
                           1-8-466
17-02          3-21-2017   1-8-51
                           1-19-5.310,
17-04          5-2-2017    1-19-8.431,
                           1-19-11.100
17-06          5-2-2017    1-7.1-3,
                           1-7.1-4
                           1-19-5.310,
                           1-19-6.100,
                           1-19-8.205.4,
17-07          5-16-2017   1-19-8.205.5,
                           1-19-8.401,
                           1-19-10.900,
                           1-19-11.100
17-08          6-13-2017   1-19-3.110.2
17-09          5-16-2017   1-5-26
17-10          6-13-2017   1-6A-5,
                           1-6A-5.1
17-11          7-18-2017   1-19-5.310
                           1-21-5,
                           1-21-6,
                           1-21-10,
                           1-21-20,
17-17          2-28-2018   1-21-24,
                           1-21-29,
                           1-21-31,
                           1-21-33,
                           1-21-40,
                           1-21-44
18-01          4-3-2018    2-7-1,
                           2-7-11
18-03          5-1-2018    1-8-67
18-07          5-15-2018   1-8-66
18-10          5-1-2018    1-19-5.310,
                           1-19-11.100
18-11          5-1-2018    1-2-200 -
                           1-2-209
18-12          4-17-2018   1-2-131 -
                           1-2-138
                           1-7.1-3,
18-14          6-5-2018    1-7.1-5 -
                           1-7.1-8,
                           1-7.1-10
18-15          6-19-2018   1-2-141 -
                           1-2-147
                           1-19-5.310,
18-16          8-21-2018   1-19-8.212,
                           1-19-8.321,
                           1-19-11.100
18-17          8-21-2018   1-22-15
18-18          9-4-2018    1-8-67
                           1-19-5.310,
18-22          10-16-2018  1-19-8.408,
                           1-19-11.100
18-23          10-16-2018  1-2-70 -
                           1-2-73
18-24          10-16-2018  1-19-11.100
18-25          10-30-2018  1-13-22
18-27          10-23-2018  1-19-11.100
18-28          10-23-2018  1-6-67
18-29          10-23-2018  1-6-68
                           1-25-1,
                           1-25-3,
                           1-25-4,
19-05          5-21-2019   1-25-7,
                           1-25-9,
                           1-25-12,
                           1-25-14
                           1-22-12,
19-06          4-16-2019   1-22-13,
                           1-22-22,
                           1-22-23
19-07          6-18-2019   1-2-93
19-08          6-18-2019   2-2-68
19-09          8-20-2019   1-19-5.310,
                           1-19-11.100
19-10          7-16-2019   1-19-10.500.6
19-11          7-16-2019   1-8-166
19-12          9-3-2019    1-8-51
                           1-15.2-2.0,
19-14          11-5-2019   1-15.2-12.1 -
                           1-15.2-12.4
                           1-19-8.251,
19-16          12-17-2019  1-19-10.400.6,
                           1-19-11.100
19-17          1-21-2020   1-2-300 -
                           1-2-307
19-18          12-17-2019  1-11-8
19-20          1-21-2020   1-7-41
                           1-6-16,
19-21          1-21-2020   1-6-18A,
                           1-6-18B
19-22          1-21-2020   1-14-56,
                           1-14-57
                           1-2-121 -
20-01          2-18-2020   1-2-124,
                           1-2-126,
                           1-2-128
20-02          3-3-2020    1-8-104
20-03          3-17-2020   1-8-51
                           1-19-3.110.4,
20-07          8-4-2020    1-19-10.500 -
                           1-19-10.500.7,
                           1-19-11.100
                           1-21-5,
20-08          7-21-2020   1-21-40,
                           1-21-42
20-09          7-21-2020   1-2-400 -
                           1-2-406
                           1-19-8.212,
20-10          7-21-2020   1-19-8.321,
                           1-19-11.100
20-13          9-1-2020    1-22-7
20-14          9-15-2020   1-19-9.400
                           1-19-8.210,
20-15          9-29-2020   1-19-8.700,
                           1-19-11.100
20-16          12-15-2020  1-20-62
20-18          2-2-2021    1-2-500 -
                           1-2-507
20-19          1-19-2021   1-19-10.500.9
21-01          3-2-2021    1-19-3.220,
                           1-19-4.220
21-02          2-16-2021   1-2-69.1
21-03          5-18-2021   1-20-62
21-06          6-15-2021   1-2-600 -
                           1-2-605
21-07          5-25-2021   1-8-68
21-08          6-20-2021   1-2-67,
                           1-2-69
21-09          11-16-2021  1-15-31
21-10          10-19-2021  1-2-700 -
                           1-2-709
21-11          11-16-2021  1-8-61
                           1-22-2 -
                           1-22-5,
21-12          12-21-2021  1-22-7,
                           1-22-14,
                           1-22-16
21-13          1-18-2022   1-8-67
22-01          3-15-2022   1-6-23
                           1-7-91 -
                           1-7-95,
22-02          3-1-2022    1-7-97,
                           1-7-99,
                           1-7-100,
                           1-7-102
22-03          3-1-2022    1-19-11.100
22-04          3-1-2022    1-6-18A,
                           1-6-18B
                           1-19-2.170,
                           1-19-5.310,
                           1-19-6.100,
22-05          3-15-2022   1-19-7.600,
                           1-19-8.402,
                           1-19-8.403,
                           1-19- 11.100
22-06          3-15-2022   1-19-3.110.3,
                           1-19-3.110.7
22-09          4-26-2022   1-2-800 -
                           1-2-808
22-11          6-21-2022   2-7-1,
                           2-7-11
                           1-19-5.310,
22-12          7-26-2022   1-19-8.356,
                           1-19-8.600,
                           1-19-11.100
22-13          9-6-2022    1-16-106
                           1-7.1-3,
22-14          9-6-2022    1-7.1-5 -
                           1-7.1-7,
                           1-7.1-11
                           1-20-5,
                           1-20-7,
                           1-20-8,
                           1-20-10,
22-17          10-25-2022  1-20-12,
                           1-20-20,
                           1-20-21,
                           1-20-23,
                           1-20-30,
                           1-20-31
22-18          10-25-2022  1-16-109
22-20          10-25-2022  1-2-16 -
                           1-2-37
                           1-8-3,
                           1-8-51,
                           1-8-67,
                           1-8-68,
                           1-8-303,
22-21          10-25-2022  1-11-21,
                           2-7-66 -
                           2-7-72,
                           2-7-103,
                           2-13-13 -
                           2-13-18
                           1-19-5.310,
22-24          10-25-2022  1-19-6.100,
                           1-19-8.432,
                           1-19-11.100
22-26          10-25-2022  1-22-3
22-27          10-18-2022  1-6A-3 -
                           1-6A-9
                           1-19-8.620.1,
                           1-19-8.620.3,
22-28          10-18-2022  1-19-8.620.5,
                           1-19-8.620.6,
                           1-19-10.500.6,
                           1-19-11.100
22-29          10-18-2022  1-22-7
23-01          2-7-2023    1-23-7
23-02          3-21-2023   1-8-68
23-03   5-2-5-2-2023    1-8-66
23-04          5-2-2023    1-8-67
                           1-14-56 -
23-05          3-21-2023   1-14-58,
                           1-14-93
23-06          4-18-2023   1-2-900 -
                           1-2-905
23-07          4-18-2023   1-2-1000 -
                           1-2-1005
                           1-19-9.100,
23-08          5-23-2023   1-19-9.110,
                           1-19-11.100
23-09          6-6-2023    1-8-451 -
                           1-8-456
23-10          6-6-2023    1-2-1006 -
                           1-2-1011
23-11          6-6-2023    1-15-30
23-13          6-6-2023    1-8-411
23-14          8-8-2023    1-19-5.310
                           1-19-5.310,
23-15          8-8-2023    1-19-8.441,
                           1-19-11.100
23-18          11-7-2023   1-15-51 -
                           1-15-57
                           1-19-5.310,
23-19          10-17-2023  1-19-6.130,
                           1-19-8.250.3
                           1-19-5.310,
23-20          11-21-2023  1-19-8.442,
                           1-19-11.100
                           1-19-5.310,
                           1-19-8.240,
23-21          11-21-2023  1-19-8.404.1 -
                           1-19-8.404.5,
                           1-19-11.100
23-22          1-2-2024    1-8-69
23-25          1-23-2024   1-13-18
23-26          1-23-2024   1-19-2.150
24-01          4-16-2024   1-23-1 -
                           1-23-19
24-02          4-2-2024    1-2-301,
                           1-2-302
24-03          4-16-2024   1-8-104
                           1-6-16,
                           1-6-18A,
24-04          5-21-2024   1-6-18B,
                           1-6-20,
                           1-6-23
24-05          5-21-2024   1-7-41
24-06          5-21-2024   1-14-56,
                           1-14-57
                           1-19-5.310,
24-07          6-18-2024   1-19-8.491,
                           1-19-11.100
24-08          6-18-2024   1-8-10
24-10          7-16-2024   1-19-5.310,
                           1-19-8.800
24-11          9-17-2024   1-8-467 -
                           1-8-470
                           1-6-62,
24-15          10-15-2024  1-10-2,
                           1-16-3,
                           1-19-11.100 
24-17          11-19-2024  1-19-11.100
24-19          12-3-2024   1-13-34
25-01          2-18-2025   1-23-8,
                           1-23-9
25-02          3-18-2025   1-8-68
25-03          4-1-2025    1-2-135
25-04          4-1-2025    1-2-201 -
                           1-2-203
                           1-19-6.100,
25-05          5-20-2025   1-19-8.402,
                           1-19-8.403
25-07          5-20-2025   1-2-1200 -
                           1-2-1205
                           1-2-802 -
25-08          6-17-2025   1-2-804,
                           1-2-806
                           1-19-5.310,
25-09          9-2-2025    1-19-8.402,
                           1-19-8.403,
                           1-19-10.1100
                          
 
 
